CGER-I015-’94 
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
IPCC 
Technical Guidelines 
for Assessing Climate Change 
Impacts and Adaptations 
PART OF THE IPCC SPECIAL REPORT 
TO THE FIRST SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES 
TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL 
4 
LES, 
ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
~*~ 
@ 
00) 
WMO 
World Meteorological Organization/United Nations Environment Programme 
UNEP

This report has been published by the Department of Geography, 
University College London (London, United Kingdom) and the 
Center for Global Environmental Research, National Institute for 
Environmental Studies (Tsukuba, Japan), with the assistance of 
the UK Department of the Environment and the Environment 
Agency of Japan. 
Further copies can be obtained from: 
Department of Geography, 
University College London, 
26 Bedford Way, 
London, WC1iH OAP 
United Kingdom. 
Center for Global Environmental Research 
National Institute for Environmental Studies 
16-2 Onogawa, 
Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki 305, 
Japan. 
© University College London and 
Center for Global Environmental Research, 1994. 
ISBN 0 904813 11 8 
Printed in the United Kingdom and Japan 
This publication is printed on recycled paper. 
Designed and illustrated by Words and Publications, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

IPCC Technical Guidelines 
for Assessing Climate Change 
Impacts and Adaptations 
T. R. Carter 
M. L. Parry 
H. Harasawa 
S. Nishioka 
PART OF THE IPCC SPECIAL REPORT 
TO THE FIRST SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE PARTIES 
TO THE UN FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
The other parts are: 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change; 
Evaluation of the IPCC 1892 Emission Scenarios; and the 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
Department of Geography, 
University College London, UK 
and 
CGER 
UCL 
Center for Global Environmental Research 
National Institute for Environmental Studies, Japan 
WORKING GROUP II OF THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
PREFACE 
When the Intergovemmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) completed its 
first Impacts Assessment in 1990 
it 
became clear that much more work 
was needed if a credible global picture 
was to be drawn of the potential effects 
of climate change. In particular, the 
Assessment revealed how difficult 
it 
was to compare impacts in different 
regions and economic sectors that. had 
been assessed using different methods. 
A compatible set of methods was 
necded to yield comparable regional 
and sectoral impact assessments. 
Working Group II of the [PCC there- 
fore established an expert group to 
develop some guidelines for the assess- 
ment of impacts of climate change. 
The work of this group resulted in the 
publication in 1992 of an initial report 
entitled Preliminary Guidelines for 
Assessing Impacts of Climate Change 
(Carter et al., 1992). 
The major objective in producing and 
distributing that report was to solicit 
comments and suggestions for an 
improved set of guidelines that could 
be cabled and reviewed as part of the 
IPCC Second Assessment. The pre- 
sent report is the product of that pro- 
cess. 
It should be considered as 
a set 
of technical guidelines for the scien- 
tist, which does not seek to prescribe 
a single preferred method but a range 
of methods, some of which may be 
more suitable than others to the task 
in hand, but which can yield broadly 
comparable 
results. 
The 
United 
Nations Environnient Programme 
is 
currently 
developing 
a 
set 
of 
Workbooks, designed to translate the 
technical procedures outlined here 
into practical methods of impact and 
adaptation assessment at the country 
and sectoral level. 
The authors acknowledge the help of 
the 
IPG@ 
Expert 
Group 
on 
Guidelines, 
the 
Lead 
Authors 
involved in the IPCC WGII Second 
Assessment, the reviewers and the 
governments of the United Kingdom 
and Japan 
in the preparation and 
printing of this report. Technical sup- 
port was provided by 
I. Higashi, 
M. I. McDonnell and C. J. Parry. 
T. Ry Garter 
Finnish Meteorological Institute 
Box 503, FIN-00101, Helsinki 
Finland 
M. L. Parry 
Department of Geography 
University College London 
26 Bedford Way, London 
WC1H OAP 
United Kingdom 
H. Harasawa and S. Nishioka 
Center for Global Environmental 
Research 
National Institute for Environmental 
Studies 
162 Onogawa, Tsukuba 
Ibaraki 305, Japan 
THE IPCC 
EXPERT 
GROUP ON 
GUIDELINES 
Experts 
Dr A. J. Al-Saan, Saudi Arabia 
Dr L. Amadore, Philippines 
Dr R. Andressen, Venezuela 
Dr M. Bemston, Switzerland 
De L. Bijlsma, Netherlands 
Dr 1. Burton, Canada 
Dr O. 
F. Canziam, Argenuna 
Mr F. Chege, Kenya 
Dr L. Chun-zhen, China 
Dr S. Cohen, Canada 
Professor B. R. D6és, Austria 
Dr J. Everett, USA 
Dr 
J. Fouts, USA 
Dr l. M. Goklany, USA 
Dr D. Greene, USA 
Dr R. Klein, Netherlands 
Ms H. Kolb. Austna 
Dr S. Kotagama, Sn Lanka 
Dr R. Leemans, Netherlands 
Dr C. Magadza, Zimbabwe 
Mr A. Magunia Lopez, Peru 
Mr G. Mailu, Kenya 
Dr B. Micremet, USA 
Professor We. Mooniaw, USA 
Co-chairmen 
Dr Shuzo Nishioka, Japan 
Professor Martin Parry, United Kingdom 
Lead Authors 
Dr Timothy Carter, Finland 
Professor Martin Parry, Uniced Kingdom 
Dr Hideo Harasawa, Japan 
Dr Shuzo Nishioka, Japan 
Assisting Lead Authors 
Dr R. Chnst, UNEP 
Dr P. Epstein, USA 
Dy N. S. Jodha, Nepal 
Dr E. Stakhiv, USA 
Dr J. Scheraga, USA 
Dr R.. A. Moreno, Cuba 
Dr T. Morita, Japan 
DrR. Moss, IPCC 
Dr R. Munn, Canada 
Dr H. Muturt, Kenya 
Dr I. Noble, Australia 
Dr R. Odongo, Kenya 
Dr G. M. E. Penllo, Argentina 
Dr W. Piver, USA 
Professor S. Prasith-rathsint, Thailand 
Dr N. Rosenberg, USA 
Dr C. Rosenzweig, USA 
Dr M. Rounsevell, UK 
Mr M. Sanwal, India 
Dr 
J. Schefter, USA 
Dr C. Scoppa, Argentina 
Dr M. Scott, USA 
Professor J. Skea, UK 
Professor B. Snut, Canada 
Dr W. Sombroek, FAO 
DrR. B. Street, Canada 
Dr G. Tegart, Australia 
Dr N. Thi Loc, Vietnam 
Dr A. Yakovlev, Russian Federation 
LIST OF REVIEWERS 
N. Amell, UK 
E. B. Barbier, UK 
M. Boer, Spain 
F. Bultot, Belgaum 
G. Dedieu, France 
T.E. Downing, UK 
K. Frohberg, Gennany 
R. de Groot, Netherlands 
K. Hanaki, Japan 
A. Henderson--Sellers, Australia 
M, Huline, UIE 
N. Mimura, Japan 
H. Monsugi, Japan 
D. Nore, UK 
T. Okun, Japan 
E. P. Olaguer, USA 
T. O'Riordan, UK 
ID. Pearce, UK 
B. Pittock, Australia 
J. R. Porter, Denmark 
J. Reilly, USA 
W.E. Ruebsame, USA 
M. B. de Rozan, Indonesia 
J. B. Snuth, USA 
N. Sundararaman, [PCC 
M. M. Yoshino, Japan

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
CONTENTS 
SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES 
Introduction 
Origins of this Report 
General Objectives of Climate Impact Assessment 
Scope of the Report 
APPROACHES TO THE ASSESSMENT OF 
IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
Purpose of Assessment 
Definitions of Some Important Terms 
Approaches 
2.3.1 
Impaét approach 
2.3.2 
Interaction approach 
2.3.3 
Integrated approach 
A Seven Step Framework for Assessment 
DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM 
Goals of the Assessment 
Exposure Unit to be Studied 
Study Area 
Time Frame 
Data Needs 
Wider Context of the Work 
SELECTION OF THE METHOD 
Experimentation 
Impact Projections 
4.2.1 
Biophysical models 
4.2.2 Economic models 
4.2.3 
Integrated systems models 
Empirical Analogue Studies 
4.3.1 
Historical event analogies 
4.3.2 
Historical trend analogies 
4.3.3 
Regional analogies of present climate 
4.3.4 Regional analogies of future climate 
Expert Judgement 
TESTING THE METHOD 
Feasibility Studies 
5.1.1 
Evaluation of available information 
5.1.2 
Qualitative screening analysis 
5.1.3. 
Preliminary scenarios 
5.1.4 
Geographical zoning 
5.1.5 
Microcosm case studies 
no 
e_ 
—>_ 
eS 
NDT 
KT 
HD 
HD 
DD 
11 
12 
13 
5.2 
5.3 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6.7 
. 
¢ . 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
75 
7.6 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
5.1.6 
Response surfaces 
5.1.7 
Analogue Studies 
Data Acquisition and Compilation 
Model Testing 
SELECTING THE SCENARIOS 
Establishing the Present Situation 
6.1.1 
Climatological baseline 
6.1.2 Environmental baseline 
6.1.3 
Socio-economic baseline 
Time Frame of Projections 
6.2.1 
Limits of predictability 
6.2.2 
Compatibility of projections 
6.2.3 
Point in time or continuous assessment 
Projecting Environmental Trends in the Absence 
of Climate Change 
Projecting Socio-Economic Trends in the Absence 
of Climate Change 
Projecting Future Climate 
6.5.1 
Synthetic scenarios 
6.5.2 Analogue scenarios 
6.5.3. 
Scenarios from general circulation models 
Projecting Environmental Trends with 
Climate Change 
Projecting Socio-Economic Trends with 
Climate Change 
ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS 
Qualitative Description 
Indicators of Change 
Compliance to Standards 
Costs and Benefits 
Geographical Analysis 
Dealing with Uncertainty 
7.6.1 
Uncertainty analysis 
7.6.2 
Risk analysis 
ASSESSMENT OF AUTONOMOUS 
ADJUSTMENTS AND EVALUATION OF 
ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
Mitigation and Adaptation 
Assessment of Autonomous Adjustments 
8.2.1 
In-built adjustments 
8.2.2 
Routine adjustments 
8.2.3 
Socio-economic baseline 
Steps in Evaluation of an Adaptation Strategy 
8.3.1 
Defining the objectives 
8.3.2 
Specifying the climatic impacts of importance 
8.3.3 
Identifying the adaptation options 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
18 
20 
24 
25 
27 
29 
29 
29 
30 
31 
32 
32 
33

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
CONTENTS 
8.3.4 
Examining the constraints 
8.3.5 
Quantifying the measures and formulating alternative 
strategies 
8.3.6 
Weighting objectives and evaluating trade-offs 
8.3.7 Recommending adaptation measures 
8.4 
Points to Consider in Developing an Adaptation 
Strategy 
38 
8.4.1 
Institutional requirements 
8.4.2 
Data requirements 
8.4.3. 
Analytical tools 
8.4.4 
Cast 
8.4.5 
Policy exercises 
8.4.6 
Sensitization seminars 
9. 
ORGANIZATION OF RESEARCH AND 
COMMUNICATION OF RESULTS 
9.1 
The Framework in Practice 
41 
9.1.1 
The Seven Step Framework 
9.1.2 
A four stage method for conducting assessments 
9.2 
Organization of Research 
42 
9.2.1 
Coordination 
9.2.2 
Collaboration 
9.2.3. 
Communication of results 
9.3. 
Communication of Results 
43 
9.3.1 
Communication among researchers 
9.3.2 Communication with policy makers 
9.3.3 
Communication with private enterprise 
9.3.4 
Communication with the public 
REFERENCES 
45 
A1. APPENDIX 1: APPROACHES FOR 
52 
DEVELOPING CLIMATIC SCENARIOS 
FROM GCM INFORMATION 
A2. APPENDIX 2: 
A SELECTION OF CLIMATE 
56 
IMPACT ASSESSMENTS, SHOWING THE 
STUDY REGION, SECTORS CONSIDERED, 
CLIMATIC SCENARIOS ADOPTED AND 
ANALYTICAL METHODS EMPLOYED 
A3. APPENDIX 3: ABBREVIATIONS, 
57 
ACRONYMS AND CHEMICAL FORMULAE 
—- 
A4. APPENDIX 4: SOME INTERNATIONAL 
58 
DATA SOURCES OF INTEREST IN 
CLIMATE IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDIES 
a

SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS 
SUMMARY FOR POLICY MAKERS 
Working Group II of IPCC has prepared Guidelines to assess 
the impacts of potential climate change and to evaluate appro- 
priate adaptations. They reflect current knowledge and will be 
updated as improved methodologies are developed. The 
Guidelines outline a study framework which will allow compa- 
rable assessments to be made of impacts and adaptations in dif 
ferent regions/geographical areas, economic sectors and coun- 
tries. The Guidelines are intended to help contracting parties 
meet, in part, their commitments under Article 4 of the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
Impact and adaptation assessments involve several steps: 
Definition of the problem. 
Selection of the methods. 
Testing the method. 
Selection of scenarios. 
Assessment of biophysical and socio-economic impacts. 
Assessment of autonomous adjustments. 
Evaluation of adaptation strategies. 
Definition of the problem includes identifying the specific 
goals of the assessment, the ecosystem(s), economic sector(s) and 
geopraphical area(s) of interest, the tume horizon(s) of the study, 
the data needs and the wider context of the work. 
The selection of analytical method(s) depends upon the 
availability of resources, models and data. Impact assessment 
analyses can range from the qualitative and descriptive to the 
quantitative and prognostic. 
Testing the method(s), including model validation and sen- 
sitivity studies, before undertaking the full assessment is neces- 
sary to ensure credibility. 
Development of the scenarios requires, firstly, the projec- 
tion of conditions expected to exist over the study period in the 
absence of climate change and, secondly, the projection of con- 
ditions associated with possible future changes in climate. 
Assessment of potential impacts on the sector(s) or area(s) of 
interest involves estimating the differences in environmental and 
socio-economic conditions projected to occur with and with- 
out climate change. 
Assessment of autonomous adjustments implies the analysis 
of responses to climate change that generally occur in an auto- 
matic or unconscious manner. 
Evaluation of adaptation strategies involves the analysis of 
different means of reducing damage costs. The methodologies 
outlined in the Guidelines for analysing adaptation strategies 
are meant as 
a tool only to compare alternative adaptation 
strategies and thereby identify the most suitable strategies for 
minimizing the effects of climate change were they to occur. 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
1 Objectives 
These Guidelines, which are a further development of those 
previously published (Carter ef al. 1992) provide 
a means for 
assessing the impacts of potential climate change and of evaluat- 
ing appropriate adaptations. They reflect current knowledge and 
will be updated as improved methodologies are developed. 
They do not aim to prescribe a single preferred method, but 
provide an analytical outline that comprises a number of steps. 
A range of methods 
is identified at each step. Where possible, 
the merits and drawbacks of different methods are briefly dis- 
cussed, with some suggestions on their selection and use. 
The ultimate purpose of the Guidelines is to enable estima- 
tions of impacts and adaptations which will allow comparable 
assessments to be made for different regions/geographical areas, 
sectors and countries. The Guidelines are intended to help con- 
tracting parties meet, in part, commitments under Article 4 of 
the UN Framework on Climate Change. 
2. Approaches 
A general framework for conducting a climate impacts and 
adaptations assessment contains seven steps: 
Definition of the problem. 
Selection of the method. 
Testing the method. 
y 
Selection of scenarios. 
Assessment of biophysical and socio-economic impacts. 
Assessment of autonomous adjustments. 
Evaluation of adaptation strategies. 
At each step, a range of study methods is available. These are 
described and evaluated in the following sections. For reasons of 
brevity, however, only the essence of each method is intro- 
duced, along with references to sources of further information. 
3. Step One—Definition of the Problem 
This involves identifying the goals of the assessment, the expo- 
sure unit of interest, the spatial and temporal scope of the study, 
the data needs, and the wider context of the work. 
3.4 
Goals of the Assessment 
It is important to be precise about the specific objectives of a study, 
as these will affect the conduct of the investigation. For example, 
an assessment of the hydrological impacts of future climatic change 
in a river catchment would have quite different requirements for 
data and expertise if the goal is to estimate the capacity for power 
generation than if it is to predict changes in agricultural income as 
a result of changes in the availability of water for irrigation. 
3.2 Exposure Unit to be Studied 
The exposure unit (i.e. the impacted object} to be assessed deter- 
mines, to a large degree, the type of researchers who will conduct 
the assessment, the methods to be employed and the data 
required. Studies can focus on a single sector or activity (e.g., agri- 
culture, forestry, energy production or water resources), several 
sectors in parallel but separately, or several sectors interactively. 
3.3 Study Area 
The selection of a study area is guided by the goals of the study 
and by the constraints on available data. Some options are rea- 
sonably well-defined, including governmental units, geographi- 
cal units, ecological zones, and climatic zones. Other options

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
requiring more subjective selection criteria include sensitive 
regions and representative units. 
3.4 Time Frame 
The selection of a time horizon for study is also influenced by the 
goals of the assessment. For example, in studies of industrial 
impacts the planning horizons may be 5-10 years, while investiga- 
tions of tree growth may require 
a 100-year perspective. 
However, as the time horizon increases, the ability to accurately 
project future trends declines rapidly. Most climate projections 
and scenarios rely on general circulation models (GCMs) which 
are subject to uncertainties. Projections of socio-economic factors 
such as population, economic development and technological 
change need to be made for periods exceeding 15-20 years. 
3.5 Data Needs 
The availability of data is probably the major limitation in most 
impact and adaptation assessment studies. The collection of new 
data 
is an important element of some studies, particularly for 
monitoring purposes regarding expected climate changes, but 
most rely on existing sources. Thus, before embarking on a 
detailed assessment, it is important to identify the main features 
of the data requirements, namely the variables for which data are 
needed, the time period, spatial coverage and resolution of the 
required data, the sources and format of the data and their quan~ 
tity and quality, and the data availability, cost and delivery time. 
3.6 Wider context of the work 
In order to assist policy makers in evaluating the wider signifi- 
cance of an assessment, it is important to place it in the context 
of similar studies and of the political, economic and social sys- 
tem of the region. 
4. 
Step Two-Selection of the Method 
A vanity of analytical methods can be adopted ranging from qualita- 
tive descriptive studies, through more diagnostic and semi-quantita- 
tive assessments, to quantitative and prognostic analyses. Any single 
impact assessment may contain elements of one or more of these 
types. Four general methods can be identified: experimentation, 
impact projections, empirical analogue studies and expert judgement. 
4.1 Experimentation 
In the physical sciences, a standard method of testing hypotheses 
or of evaluating processes of cause and effect is through direct 
experimentation. In the context of climate impact and adaptation 
assessment, however, experimentation has only a limited applica- 
tion. Clearly it is not possible physically to simulate large-scale 
systems such as the global climate. Only where the scale of 
impact is manageable, the exposure unit measurable, and the 
environment controllable, can experiments be usefully conducted 
(for example, gas enrichment experiments with plants). 
4.2 Impact Projections 
One of the major goals of climate impact assessment, especially 
concerning aspects of future climatic change, is the prediction of 
future impacts. A main focus of much recent work has been on 
impact projections, using an array of mathematical models to 
extrapolate into the future. First-order effects of climate are usu- 
ally assessed using biophysical models, second- and higher-order 
effects using a range of biophysical, economic and qualitative 
models. Finally, attempts have also been made at comprehensive 
assessments using integrated systems models. 
vi 
4.2.1 
Biophysical Models 
Biophysical models may be used to evaluate the physical interac- 
tions between climate and an exposure unit. There are two 
main types: empirical-statistical models and process-based mod- 
els. Empirical-statistical models are based on the statistical rela- 
tionships between climate and the exposure unit. Process-based 
models make use of established physical laws and theories to 
express the dynamics of the interactions between climate and an 
exposure unit. 
4,2,2 Economic Models 
Economic models of several types can be employed to evaluate 
the implications of first-order impacts for local and regional 
economies. The main types of models are firm-level (which 
depict 
a single firm or enterprise), sectoral (which simulate 
behaviour within a specific economic sector) and macro-eco- 
nomic (which simulate entire economies). 
4.2.3 Integrated Systems Models 
Integrated systems models represent an attempt to combine ele- 
ments of the modelling approaches described above into a com- 
prehensive model of a given regionally- or sectorally- bounded 
system, Two main approaches to integration can be identified: 
the aggregate cost-benefit approach, which is more economi- 
cally orientated, and the regionalized process-based approach, 
which focuses more on biophysical effects. 
4.3 Empirical Analogue Studies 
Observations of the interactions of climate and society in a region 
can be of value in anticipating future mnpacts. The most common 
method employed involves the transfer of information from a dif- 
ferent time or place to an area of interest to serve as an analogy. 
Four types of analogy can be identified: historical event analogies, 
historical trend analogies, regional analogies of present climate and 
regional analogies of future climate. 
4.4 Expert Judgement 
A useful method of obtaining a rapid assessment of the state of 
knowledge concerning the effects of climate on given exposure 
units is to solicit the judgement and opinions of experts in the 
field. Literature is reviewed, comparable studies identified, and 
experience and judgement used in applying all available infor- 
mation to the current problem. 
5. 
Step Three—Testing the Method 
Following the selection of the assessment methods, it is impor- 
tant that these are tested in preparation for the main evaluation 
tasks. Three types of activity may be useful in evaluating the 
methods: feasibility studies, data acquisition and compilation, 
and model testing, 
5.1 Feasibility Studies 
These usually focus on a subset of the study region or sector to 
be assessed. Such case studies can provide information on the 
effectiveness of alternative approaches, of models, of data acqui- 
sition and monitoring, and of research collaboration. 
5.2 Data Acquisition and Compilation 
Data must be acquired both to describe the temporal and spatial 
patterns of climate change and their impacts and to develop, test 
and calibrate predictive models. Data collection may rely on 
existing information obtained and compiled from different

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
sources, or require the acquisition of primary data, through sur- 
vey methods, direct measurement or monitoring. 
5.3 Model Testing 
The testing of predictive models is, arguably, the most critical stage 
of an impact assessment. Most studies rely almost exclusively on the 
use of models to estimate future impacts. Thus, it is crucial for the 
credibility of the research that model performance is tested rigor- 
ously. Standard procedures should be used to evaluate models, but 
these may need to be modified to accommodate climate change. 
Two main procedures are recommended: validation and sensitivity 
analysis. Validation involves the comparison of model predictions 
with real world observations to test model performance. Sensitivity 
analysis evaluates the effects on model performance of altering its 
structure, parameter values, or values of its input variables. 
6. 
Step Four—Selection of the Scenarios 
Impacts are estimated as the differences between two states: 
environmental and socio-economic conditions expected to exist 
over the period of analysis in the absence of climate change and 
those expected to exist with climate change. 
6.1 Establishing the Present Situation 
In order to provide reference points with which to compare 
future projections, three types of ‘baseline’ conditions need to 
be specified: the climatological, environmental and socio-eco- 
nomic baselines. 
6.1.1 
Climatological baseline 
The climatological baseline is usually selected according to the 
following criteria: 
@ 
Representativeness of the present-day or recent average cli- 
mate in the study region. 
@ 
Of sufficient duration to encompass a range of climatic vari- 
ations. 
@ 
Covering a period for which data on all climatological vari- 
ables are abundant, adequately distributed and readily available. 
@ 
Including data of sufficient quality for use in evaluating 
impacts. 
It is recommended that the current standard WMO normal 
period (1961-90) be adopted in assessments where appropriate. 
6.1.2 Environmental baseline 
The environmental baseline refers to the present state of other, 
non-climatic environmental factors, that affect the exposure 
unit. Examples include: groundwater levels, soil pH, extent of 
wetlands, etc. 
6.1.3 Socio-economic baseline 
The socio-economic baseline describes the present state of all 
the non-environmental factors that influence the exposure unit. 
The factors may be geographical (e.g., land use), technological 
(e.g., pollution control), managerial (e.g., forest rotation), leg- 
islative (e.g., air quality standards), economic (e.g., commodity 
prices), social (e.g., population), or political (e.g., land tenure). 
All of these are liable to change in the future, so it is important 
that baseline conditions of the most relevant factors are noted. 
6.2 Time Frame of Projections 
A critical consideration for conducting impact experiments is 
the time horizon over which estimates are to be made. Three 
elernents influence the time horizon selected: the limits of pre- 
dictability, the compatibility of projections and whether the 
assessment is continuous or considers discrete points in time. 
6.2.1 Limits of predictability 
The time horizon selected depends primarily on the goals of the 
assessment. However, there are obvious limits on the ability to 
project into the future. Climate projections, since they are a key 
element of climate impact studies, define one possible outer 
limit on impact projections. GCM estimates seldom extend 
beyond about 100 years, due to the uncertainties attached to 
such long-term projections and to constraints on computational 
resources. ‘This fixes an outer horizon at about 2100. In many 
economic assessments on the other hand, projections may not 
be reliable for more than a few years ahead. 
6.2.2 
Compatibility of projections 
It is important to ensure that future climate, environment and 
socio-economic projections are mutually consistent over space 
and time. It is important to be clear about (i) the relative timing 
of increases in greenhouse gas concentrations and climate 
change and (ii) the relative timing of a 2 x CO, compared to a 
2x CO, ‘equivalent’ atmosphere!. With regard to the former, 
there is a lag time of several decades in the response of the cli- 
mate system to increases in greenhouse gas concentrations. With 
regard to the latter, 
a 
2 x CO, ‘equivalent’ atmosphere occurs 
carlier than a 2 x CO, atmosphere because gases such as CH,, 
N,O, and troposphere O, also contribute to radiative forcing. 
6.2.3 
Point in time or continuous assessment 
A distinction can be drawn between considering impacts at dis- 
crete points in time in the future and examining continuous or 
time-dependent impacts. The former are characteristic of many 
climate impact assessments based on doubled-CO, equivalent sce- 
narios, In contrast, transient climatic scenarios allow time-depen- 
dent phenomena and dynamic feedback mechanisms to be exam- 
ined and socio-economic adjustments to be considered. 
6.3 Projecting Environmental Trends in the Absence of Climate 
Change 
The development of a baseline describing conditions without cli- 
mate change is crucial, for it is this baseline against which all pro- 
jected impacts are measured. It is highly probable that future 
changes in other environmental factors will occur even in the 
absence of climate change, which may be of importance for an 
exposure unit. Examples, as appropnate, include changes in land- 
use, changes in groundwater level and changes in air, water and 
soil pollution. Most factors are related to, and projections should 
be consistent with trends in socio-economic factors. Greenhouse 
gas concentrations may also change, but these would usually be 
linked to climate (which is assumed unchanged here). 
6.4 Projecting Socio-Economic Trends in the Absence of Climate 
Change 
Global climate change is projected to occur over time periods 
that are relatively long in socio-economic terms. Over that 
period it is certain that the economy and society will change, 
even in the absence of climate change. Official projections exist 
1A 2x CO, ‘equivalent’ atmosphere is one where the radiative forcing due 
to changes in all greenhouse gases (CO,, CH,, N,O, O,, halocarbons) is the 
same as that of an atmosphere where the concentration of CO, has doubled 
with the concentration of other greenhouse gases remaining unchanged.

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
for some of these changes, as they are required for planning pur- 
poses. These vary in their time horizon from several years (e.g., 
economic growth, unemployment), through decades (e.g., 
urbanisation, industrial development, agricultural production), 
to a century or longer (e.g., population). 
6.5 Projecting Future Climate 
In order to conduct experiments to assess the unpacts of climate 
change, it is first necessary to obtain a quantitative representation of 
the changes in climate themselves. No method yet exists of provid- 
ing confident predictions of future climate. Instead, it is customary 
to specify a number of plausible future climates. These are referred 
to as ‘climatic scenarios’, and they are selected to provide climatic 
data that are spatially compatible, mutually consistent, freely avail- 
able or easily derivable, and suitable as inputs to impact models. 
There are three basic types of scenario of future climate: 
synthetic scenarios, analogue scenarios and scenarios from gen- 
eral circulation models. 
6.5.1 
Synthetic scenarios 
A simple method of specifying a future climate is to adjust the 
baseline climate in 
a systematic, though essentially arbitrary 
manner. Adjustments might include, for example, changes in 
mean annual temperature of 
+1, 2,3 °C ..., etc. or changes in 
annual precipitation of + 5, 10, 15% ... etc. relative to the base- 
line climate. Adjustments can be made independently or in 
combination. In this way information can be obtained on: 
@ 
Thresholds or discontinuities of response that might occur 
under a given magnitude or rate of change. These may rep- 
resent levels of change above which the nature of the 
response alters (e.g., warming may promote plant growth, 
but very high temperatures cause heat stress). 
Tolerable climate change, which refers to the magnitude or rate 
of climate change that a modelled system can tolerate with- 
out major disruptive effects (sometimes termed the ‘critical 
load’). This type of measure is potentially of value for policy, 
as it can assist in defining specific goals or targets for limiting 
future climate change. 
One of the main drawbacks of the approach is that adjust- 
ments to combinations of variables may not to be physically 
plausible or internally consistent. 
6.5.2 Analogue scenarios 
Analogue scenarios are constructed by identifying recorded 
climatic regimes which may serve as analogues for the future cli- 
mate of a given region. These records can be obtained either 
from the past (temporal analogues), or from another region at 
the present (spatial analogues). 
Temporal analogues are of two types: those based on past 
instrumental observations (usually within the last century) and 
those based on proxy data, using palaeoclimatic indicators such as 
plant or animal remains and sedimentary deposits (from the more 
distant past geological records), The main problem with this tech- 
nique concerns the physical mechanism and boundary conditions 
that would almost certainly be different between a warmer cli- 
mate in the past and a future greenhouse-gas induced warming. 
Spatial Analogues require the identification of regions today 
having a climate analogous to the study region in the future. 
This approach is severely restricted, however, by frequent lack 
of correspondence between other non-climatic features of two 
regions that may be important for a given impact sector (e.g. 
daylength, terrain, soils or economic development. 
Vili 
6.5.3 
Scenarios from general circulation models 
Three dimensional numerical models of the global climate sys- 
tem (including atmosphere, oceans, biosphere and cryosphere) 
are the only credible tool currently available for simulating the 
physical processes that determine global climate. Although sim- 
pler models have also been used to simulate the radiative effects 
of increasing greenhouse gas concentrations, only general circu- 
lation models (GCMs), possibly in conjunction with nested 
regional models, offer the possibility to provide estimates of 
regional climate change, which are required in impact analysis. 
GCMs produce estimates of climatic variables for a regular 
network of grid points across the globe. Results from about 20 
GCMs have been reported to date (e.g., see IPCC, 1990 and 
1992). However, these estimates are highly uncertain because 
of some important weaknesses of GCMs. These include: 
1) 
poor model representation of cloud processes, 2) a coarse spatial 
resolution (at best employing grid cells of some 250 km hori- 
zontal dimension), 
3) generalized topography, disregarding 
some locally important features and 4) 
a simplified representa- 
tion of land-atmosphere and ocean-atmosphere interactions. As 
a result, GCMs are currently unable accurately to reproduce 
even the seasonal pattern of present-day climate at a regional 
scale. Thus, GCM outputs represent, at best, broad-scale sets of 
possible future climatic conditions and should not be regarded 
as predictions. 
GCMs have been used to conduct two types of experiment 
for estimating future climate: equilibrium-response and 
transient-forcing experiments. The majority of experiments have 
been conducted to evaluate the equilibrium response of the 
global climate to an abrupt increase (commonly, a doubling) of 
atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide. A measure that is 
widely used in the intercomparison of various GCMs, is the cli- 
mate sensitivity parameter. This is defined as the global mean 
equilibrium surface air temperature change that occurs in 
response to an increase in radiative forcing due to a doubling of 
atmospheric CO, concentration (or equivalent increases in other 
greenhouse gases). Values of the parameter obtained from cli- 
mate model simulations generally fall in the range 1.5-4.5°C 
(IPCC, 1992). Knowledge of the climate sensitivity can be use- 
ful in constructing climate change scenarios from GCMs. 
Recent work has focused on fashioning more realistic exper- 
iments with GCMs, specifically, simulations of the response of 
climate to 
a transient forcing. These simulations offer several 
advantages over equilibrium-response experiments. First, the 
specifications of the atmospheric perturbation are more realistic, 
involving a continuous (transient) change over time in GHG 
concentrations. Second, the representation of the oceans is more 
realistic, the most recent simulations coupling atmospheric mod- 
els to dynamical ocean models. Finally, transient simulations 
provide information on the rate as well as the magnitude of cli- 
mate change, which is of considerable value for impact studies. 
The following types of information are currently available 
from GCMs for constructing scenarios: 
@ 
Outputs from a ‘control’ simulation, which assumes fixed 
GHG concentrations, and an ‘experiment’ which assumes 
future concentrations. In the case of equilibrium-response 
experiments, these are values from multiple-year model sim- 
ulations for the control and 2 x CO, (or equivalent increases 
in other greenhouse gases) equilibrium conditions. 
‘Transient~response experiments provide values for the con- 
trol equilibrium conditions and for each year of the transient 
model run (e.g., 1990 to 2100).

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
® 
Values of surface or near-surface climatic variables for model 
grid boxes characteristically spaced at intervals of several 
hundred kilometres around the globe. 
@ 
Values of air temperature, precipitation (mean daily rate) and 
cloud cover, which are commonly supplied for use 
in 
impact studies. Data on radiation, windspeed, vapour pres- 
sure and other variables are also available from some models. 
@ 
Data averaged over a monthly ume period. However, daily 
or hourly values of certain climatic vanables, from which the 
monthly statistics were derived, may also be stored for 
a 
number of years within the full simulation periods. 
6.6 Projecting Environmental Trends with Climate Change 
Changes 
in environmental conditions not due 
to climatic 
factors should already have been incorporated in the devel- 
opment of the environmental trends 
in the absence of cli- 
mate changes, che only changes in these trends to be incor- 
porated here 
are those due solely 
to climate change. The 
two factors most commonly required 
in assessments are 
greenhouse gas concentrations and sea level 
rise. Future 
changes in these are still under discussion, but the estimates 
reported by the IPCC may serve 
as 
a useful basis for con- 
structing scenarios (IPCC, 
1990). Other factors that are 
directly affected by climate (such as river flows, runoff, ero- 
sion) would probably require full impact assessments of their 
own, although some might be incorporated 
as ‘automatic 
adjustments’ in projections. 
6.7 Projecting Socio-Economic Trends with Climate Change 
The changes in environmental conditions that are atenbutable 
solely to climate change serve as inputs to economic models that 
project the changes in socio-economic conditions due to cli- 
mate change both within the study area and, where relevant and 
appropnate, outside it, over the study pernod. All other changes 
In socio-economic conditions over the period of analysis are 
attributable to non-climatic factors and should have been 
included 
in the estimation of socio-economic changes in the 
absence of climate change. 
7. 
Step Five—Assessment of Impacts 
Impacts are estimated 
as the differences over the study period 
between the environmental and socio-economic conditions pro- 
jected to exist without climate change and those that are pro- 
jected with climate change. Assessments may include: 
7.1 
Qualitative description 
The success of this method rests on the experience and interpre- 
uve skills of the analyst, especially the analyst’s ability to con- 
sider all factors of importance and their interrelationships. 
Formal methods of organizing qualitative informanon also exist 
(for example, cross impact analysis). 
7.2 Indicators of change 
These are particular regions, activities or organisms that are 
intrinsically sensitive to climate, and which can provide an early 
or accurate indication of effects due to climate change. 
7.3 Compliance to standards 
This may provide a reference or an objective against which to 
measure the impacts of climate change. For example, the effect 
on water quality could be gauged by reference to current water 
quality scandards. 
7.4 
Costs and benefits 
These should be estimated quantitatively to the extent possible 
and expressed in economic terms. This approach makes explicit 
the expectation that 
a change in resources and resource alloca- 
tion due to climate change 
is likely to yield benefits as well as 
costs. 
It can also examine the costs or benefits of doing nothing 
to mitigate potential climate change. 
7.5 Geographical analysts 
Impacts vary over space, and this pattern of variation is of con- 
cern to policy makers operating at regional, national or interna- 
tional scales because these spatial differences may have conse- 
quent policy and planning implications. The geographical depic- 
tion of the effects of climate change using geographical informa- 
tion systems (GIS) is one method of describing impacts. 
7.6 Dealing with uncertainty 
Uncertainties pervade 
all levels of a climate impact assessment, 
including the projection of future GHG emissions, atmospheric 
GHG concentrations, changes in climate, their potential impacts 
and the evaluation of adjustments. There are two methods 
which attempt 
cto account for these uncertainties: uncertainty 
analysis and nsk analysis. 
7.6.1 
Uncertainty analysis 
Uncertainty analysis compnises a set of techniques for anticipat- 
ing and preparing for the impacts of uncertain future events. Ic is 
used here to describe an analysis of the range of uncertainties 
encountered in an assessment study. 
7.6.2 
Risk analysis 
Risk analysis deals with uncertainty in terms of the risk of 
impact. Rusk 
is defined as the product of che probability of an 
event and its effect on an exposure unit. Since 
it 
is extreme 
events that produce the most significant impacts, there 
is value 
in focusing on the changing probability of climatic extremes and 
of their impacts. Another formn of nsk analysis, decision analysis, 
is used to evaluate response strategies to chmate change. 
It can 
be used 
to assign likelihoods 
to different climatic scenarios, 
identifying those response strategies that would provide the flex- 
ibility, at least cost, (minimizing expected annual damages), chat 
best ameliorates the anticipated range of impact. 
8 Steps Six and Seven—Assessment of Autonomous 
Adjustments and Evaluation of Adaptation Strategies 
Impact experiments are usually conducted to evaluate the effects 
of climate change on an exposure unit in the absence of any 
responses which might modify these effects and are not already 
automatic or buslt into future projections. Two broad cypes of 
response can be identified: mitigation and adaptation. 
8.1 Mitigation and adaptation 
Mitigation or ‘amutation’ attempts to deal with the causes of climate 
change. 
Ic achieves chis through actions that prevent or retard the 
increase of atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations, by 
limiting current and future emission from sources of GHGs and 
enhancing potential sinks for GHGs. The evaluation of minganon 
policies is outside the scope of these Guidelines. 
Adaptation 
1s concemed with responses to both the adverse 
and positive effects of climate change. 
It refers to any adjust- 
ment, whether passive, reactive or anticipatory, that can respond 
to anticipated or actual consequences associated with climate

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
change. It thus implicitly recognizes that future climate changes 
will occur and must be accommodated in policy. 
8.2 Steps in evaluation of an adaptation strategy 
A broad framework for the evaluation of adaptation strategies to 
cope with climate change can be identified. This comprises the 
following stcps: 
Define the objectives. 
Specify the climatic impacts of importance. 
Identify the adaptation options. 
Examine the constraints. 
Quantify measures and formulate alternative strategies. 
Weight objectives and evaluate trade-offs. 
Recommend adaptation measures. 
8.2.1 Defining the objectives 
Any analysis of adaptation must be guided by some agreed over- 
all goals and evaluation principles. Two examples of general 
goals commonly propounded are: 
(i) the promotion of sustain- 
able development, and (ii) the reduction of vulnerability. These 
are Open to various interpretations, however, so specific objec- 
tives meed to be defined that complement the goals. Objectives 
are usually derived either from public involvement, from stated 
public preferences, by Icgislation, through an interpretation of 
goals such as those stated above, or any combination of these. 
8.2.2 Specifying the climatic impacts of importance 
This step involves an assessment, following the methods outlined 
elsewhere above, of the possible impacts of climate variability or 
change on the exposure unit. Where climatic events are expected 
that will cause damage, these nced to be specified in detail so that 
the most appropriate adaptation options can be identified. 
8.2.3 Identifying the adaptation options 
The main task of assessment involves the compilation of a 
detailed list of possible adaptive responses that might be 
employed to cope with the effects of climate. The list can be 
compiled by field survey and by interviews with relevant 
experts, and should consider all practices currently or previously 
used, as well as possible alternative strategies that have not been 
used, and newly created or invented strategies. 
Six types of strategy for adapting to the effects of climate 
have been identified: 
@ 
Prevention of loss, involving anticipatory actions to reduce the 
susceptibility of an exposure unit to the impacts of climate. 
@ 
Tolerating loss, where adverse impacts are accepted in the 
' 
short term because they can be absorbed by the exposure 
unit without long term damage. 
@ 
Spreading or sharing loss, where actions distribute the burden 
of impact over a larger region or population beyond those 
directly affected by the climatic event. 
@ 
Changing use or activity, involving a switch of activity or 
resource use to adjust to the adverse as well as the positive 
consequences of climate change. 
@ 
Changing location, where preservation of an activity is consid- 
ered more important than its location, and migration occurs to 
areas that are more suitable under the changed climate. 
@ 
Restoration, which aims to restore a system to its original 
condition following damage or modification due to climate. 
Numerous options exist for classifying adaptive measures, 
but generally, regardless of the resources of interest (e.g., 
forestry, wetlands, agriculture, water) the prospective list may 
include among other management measures: 
@ 
Legal 
Financial 
Economic 
Technological 
Public education 
Research and training 
8.2.4 Examining the constraints 
Many of the adaptation options identified in the previous step 
are likely to be subject to legislation or be influenced by prevail- 
ing social norms, which may encourage, restrict or totally pro- 
hibit their use. Thus, it is important to examine closely, possibly 
in a separate study, what these constraints are and how they 
might affect the range of feasible choices available. 
8.2.5 Quantifying the measures and formulating alternative strategies 
The next step is to assess the performance of each adaptation mea- 
sure with respect to the stated objectives. 
It may be possible, if 
appropriate data and analytical tools exist, to use simulation models 
to test the effectiveness of different measurcs under different climatic 
scenarios. Historical and documentary evidence, survey material or 
expert judgement are some other alternative sources of this infor- 
mation. Uncertainty analysis and risk assessment are also considered 
at this stage. This step is a prelude to developing strategies which 
maximize the level of achievement of some objectives while main- 
taining baseline levels of progress cowards the remaining objectives. 
8.2.6 Weighting objectives and evaluating trade-offs 
This 
is the key evaluation step, where objectives must be 
weighted according to assigned preferences and then compar- 
isons made between the effectiveness of different strategies in 
meeting these objectives. Standard impact accounting systems 
can be used in the evaluation. For example, a four-category sys- 
tem might consider: 
(i) national economic development; 
(ii) environmental quality; (iui) regional economic development; 
and (iv) other social effects. Selection of preferred strategies then 
requires the determination of trade-offs between the categories. 
8.2.7 Recommending adaptation measures 
The results of the evaluation process should be compiled in a form 
that provides policy advisers and decision makers with information 
on the best available adaptation strategies. ‘This should include 
some indication of the assumptions and uncertainties involved in 
the evaluation procedure, and the rationale used (e.g., decision 
rules, key evaluation principles, national and international support, 
institutional feasibility, technical feasibility) to narrow the choices. 
9 References 
Carter, T.R., Parry, M.L., Nishioka, S., and Harawasa, H. 
(1992). Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of Climate 
Change, Environmental Change Unit, Oxford and Center for 
Global Environmental Research, Tsukuba, 28 pp. 
IPCC (1990). Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
Houghton, J.T., Jenkins, GJ. and Ephraums, J.J. (eds). Report 
of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, Cambridge University Press, 364 pp. 
IPCC (1992). Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report to the 
IPCC Scientific Assessment. Houghton, J.T., Callander, B.A. and 
Vamey, S.K. (eds). Cambridge University Press, 200 pp.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES 
BACKGROUND 
AND OBJECTIVES 
i 
1.1 Introduction 
Variations in seasonal weather patterns are as much a feature of 
the modern world as they were in historical times and the effects 
of such variability are manifest across a range of natural systems 
and human activities. Until recently, these variations have been 
assumed to represent natural fluctuations about an essentially sta- 
ble average climate. However, the observation that concentra- 
tions of certain trace gases in the atmosphere have been increas- 
ing rapidly, primarily as a result of human activities, has led to 
the realisation that changes in atmospheric composition are capa- 
ble of affecting the surface climate of the earth. 
The trace gases, especially carbon dioxide, methane, chlo- 
rofluorocarbons (CFCs) and nitrous oxide, have the property 
of permitting the fairly free passage of short wavclength solar 
radiation from the sun through to the earth’s surface, but 
absorbing the re-radiated radiation (at lower temperatures and 
longer wavelengths) from the carth. With the exception of 
CFCs, which are human-made, the natural occurrence of these 
gases in the atmosphere (along with water vapour, another 
strong absorber of terrestrial radiation) has maintained the 
earth’s surface at an average temperature some 33°C higher 
than would be the case in their absence. Analogous to the 
effect of glass in 
a grecnhouse, this mechanism has become 
known as the ‘greenhouse effect’, and the gases as greenhouse 
gases (GHGs). 
Observed increases in GHG concentrations are thought to 
be altering the radiation balance of the earth, warming the sur- 
face and affecting the atmospheric circulation. 
It is this antici- 
pated global warming of climate, the “enhanced greenhouse 
effect’, that has recently become the subject of great concern 
both locally and internationally. At a global scale, the rate and 
magnitude of predicted changes in climate are unprecedented in 
historical times, thus raising the question of their likely effects 
on physical processes, natural ecosystems and human activities 
and what, if any, measures there are for preventing or mitigating 
the more serious impacts. 
1.2 Origins of this Report 
In an attempt to clarify the issues and to identify the possible 
policy implications of the enhanced greenhouse effect at inter- 
national level, the United Nations Environment Programme 
(ONEP) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) 
established the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) in 1988. The IPCC was charged with assessing the sci- 
entific information relating to three aspects of the climate 
change issue: 
@ 
Changes in climate arising from increasing greenhouse gas 
concentrations in the atmosphere. 
® 
The environmental and socio-economic consequences of 
climate change. 
@ 
The formulation of response strategies. 
These three tasks were assigned respectively to three 
Working Groups: J, If and III. 
The IPCC published its First Assessment Report in 1990. 
One component of this, The IPCC Impacts Assessment, was 
contributed by Working Group 
I] (IPCC, 1990b). The IPCC 
agreed to continue its work within a long term framework, and 
entered a new phase, using the First Assessment Report as the 
starting point. 
In August 1991, Working Group IJ, in its Fourth Plenary, 
agreed to establish an expert group to develop some guidelines 
for the assessment of impacts of climate change. A summary of 
those deliberations forms part of the Working Group II contri- 
bution to the IPCC 1992 Supplement (IPCC 1992b). The full 
version of the guidelines document was published in 1992 as 
Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of Climate Change 
(Carter et al., 1992). 
As part of its Second Assessment Report, IPCC Working 
Group II agreed to expand and revise the guidelines. This report 
is the product of that work. 
1.3 General Objectives of Climate Impact Assessment 
Climate impact assessment is 
a sequential set of activities 
designed to identify, analyse and evaluate the impacts of climate 
variability and climate change on natural systems, human activi- 
ties and human health and well-being, to estimate the uncer- 
tainties surrounding these impacts, and to examune the possible 
adaptive responses for reducing adverse effects or exploiting new 
opportunities. 
Climate impact assessment has two general objectives: 
@® 
‘To assess climate change impacts and adaptations in a scien- 
tific manner. 
@ 
‘To provide a mode of analysis that will enable policy makers 
and decision makers to choose among a 
set of adaptation 
options and develop a suitable mixed strategy of response 
that combines adaptation and mitigation measures, as appro- 
priate. 
The general responsibility of science is to expand the knowl- 
edge base for the common benefit. This should be achieved by 
developing the research methodology for assessment, collecting 
information on trends in the environment and in society, devel- 
oping predictive tools for evaluating impacts, forging scientific 
links across disciplinary, institutional and political boundaries 
and communicating results objectively to other scientists, deci- 
sion makers and the public. 
Policy makers require climate impact assessments to provide 
them with the necessary scientific information for policy deci- 
sions. These decisions include considering the options for miti- 
gating climatic change and/or those for adapting to it, either by 
coping with, mitigating or exploiting its projected impacts. 
Assessments are required for different time and space scales, 
reflecting the time horizons and areas to which planning and 
decision-making apply. They could also provide 
a basis for 
negotiating global and transnational protocols for addressing cli- 
matic change issues, which lie outside the jurisdiction of indi- 
vidual policy makers. 
Climate impact assessment must address an inherently global 
phenomenon affecting all nations, so it is desirable that assess- 
ments be conducted in a transparent manner, with comparable 
assumptions and internally consistent procedures. Comparability 
among assessments is of great importance in appraising the range 
of appropriate response actions at the international, national and 
regional levels. Decision makers must have confidence that, at a 
minimum, the basic assumptions are uniform (e.g., use of a

[PCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
common set of scenarios), that the various models and analytical 
tools are used correctly, and that the evaluation of impacts prop- 
erly takes into account future impacts due to socio-economic 
and technological changes that would occur even in the absence 
of climate change. 
1.4 Purpose and Scope of the Report 
This report provides a review of the methods of climate impact 
and adaptation assessment. It is primarily oriented to the techni- 
cal analyst responsible for organizing and undertaking a complex 
series of interrelated tasks. However, the methodology it adopts 
is itself designed to provide information for policy makers that is 
scientifically credible and useful for assisting in decision-making 
under uncertainty. 
The term ‘climate impact assessment’ is used hereafter to 
refer to assessments both of the impacts of climatic vanability and 
change and of possible adaptations to these. The report outlines a 
basic framework for the study of climate-environment-society 
interactions, with a particular emphasis on assessing the impacts 
of possible future changes in climate due to the enhanced green- 
house effect. Experience with assessing the social and economic 
impacts of climatic change is at present limited, while generalized 
methods for evaluating adaptation strategies for changing climate 
do not yet exist. Thus, these guidelines represent an early effort 
at formalizing some of these methods into workable procedures, 
and are amenable to refinement and development in future years. 
The report does not aim to prescribe 
a single preferred 
method, but provides an analytical framework that comprises 
seven steps. A range of methods ts identified at each step. Where 
possible the merits and drawbacks of different methods are dis- 
cussed briefly, with some suggestions on their selection and use. 
Guidance is also offered on the organization of research and the 
communication of results.

APPROACHES TO THE ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
APPROACHES TO THE ASSESSMENT OF 
IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
2.1 Purpose of Assessment 
There are several different reasons for conducting 
a climate 
impact assessment. First, there is 
a need to evaluate how climate 
affects human activities and well-being and natural systems along 
with estimates of the uncertainties surrounding these effects. 
The effects may be physical (e.g., on water availability), biolog- 
cal (e.g., on plane growth), economic (e.g., on industrial prof- 
itabshty), social (e.g., on regional employment) or 
a combina- 
tion of these. Second, 
it may assist in evaluating sensitivities, 
vulnerabilities or thresholds to likely scenarios of climate change 
and in evaluating potentia! environmenral standards. Third, 
it 
can identify and/or evaluate the range of possible options for 
adapting to and, where possible, exploiung the effects of clirnate 
change. Fourth, 
it can help with the assessment of the costs of 
impacts of chimate change so that these can then be compared 
with the costs associated with adaptation and mitigation mea- 
sures in order to assist with the formulation of balanced policy 
responses. Fifth, 
it can identify impacts of limitation or adapta- 
tion options, Sixth, 
it can assist in pinpointing gaps in climate 
research that require attention because of their importance 
in 
assessing impacts. Finally, 
it can alert public awareness to issues 
of common concem (for example, to educate people about the 
need for improving the efficiency of resource use) and establish 
a basis for political decisions. 
2.2 Definitions of Some Important Terms 
A number of the terms used in chis report can have various con- 
notations. To reduce the nsk of misinterpretation, some sirnple 
definitions are given below. Definitions of other terms are pro- 
vided elsewhere in the text. 
@ 
An exposure unit 
is the activity, group, region or resource 
exposed to significant climatic variations. 
@ 
An effect 
is directly produced by 
a process or agent (e.g., 
climate) acting on an exposure unit. 
@ 
An impact 
is an effect on the exposure unit having some 
assigned relanve value or importance. 
@ 
Assessment refers to the scientific appraisal of effects. 
@ 
Evaluation 
is the assignment of significance or importance 
to effects or to alternative strategies. 
@ 
Adaptation 
is concemed with responses to the effects or 
impacts of chmate change. 
@ 
A 
scenario is a coherent, internally consistent and plausible 
description of a possible fucure state of the world. 
@ 
Sensitivity (in 
its general sense) refers to the degree of 
responsiveness of an exposure unit to climate, whether ben- 
eficial or detnmental. 
@ 
Vulnerability 
is the degree to which an exposure umit 
1s 
disrupted or adversely affected as a result of climatic effects. 
Figure 1. Schema of the impact approach (after Kates, 1985) 
Both socio-economic and physical factors are important in 
determining vulnerability. 
2.3 Approaches 
Climate impact assessments may be conducted according to one 
of three general methodological approaches (Kates, 1985): 
Impact, interacnon and integrated approaches. 
2.3.1 
Impact approach 
The simplest approach follows 
a straightforward ‘cause and 
effecc’ pathway whereby a climatic event acting on an exposure 
unit has an impact (Figure 
1). 
In Jayperson’s cerms 
it can be 
thought of as an ‘If-Then-What’ approach: if the climate were 
to alter Jike this then what would be its impacts? In adopting the 
approach it 1s assumed that the effect of other non-climatic fac- 
tors on the exposure unit can be held constanct. Where this 
assumption is justified, (for example, in biological studies of pris- 
tine environments not subject to any non-climatic changes), the 
approach can be informative. However, the narrow focus on the 
effects of climate alone on human activities is also a major weak- 
ness of the approach. Another problem is that the whole assess~ 
ment is reliant on the initial choice of a climatic event, which 
is 
not always selected according to criteria that are relevant co the 
climate-sensitivity of the exposure unic. Finally, 
a major draw- 
back of this approach 1s an inability to assign a likelihood to the 
assumed changes in climance factors. 
The impact approach 
is usually adopted for studies of indi- 
vidual activicies or organisms in order to establish ‘dose- 
tesponse’ functions, but 
it 
is also applied to sectoral studies 
where impacts may propagate through 
a hierarchy of levels. 
Thus, direct impacts represent the direct biophysical effects of 
climate on organisms or activities (e.g., on plants, animals, heac- 
ing demand, water). The direct effects lead, in turn, to indirect 
umpacts (e.g., changes in grass growth leading to changes in live- 
stock productivity). The chain of impacts may then extend to 
higher-order economic and social impacts (e.g., changes in farm 
income, changes in national agncultural production, changes in 
farm employment). 
In order to follow this hierarchical approach assumptions are 
required 
at each level of analysis. Inevitably, accompanying 
these assumptions are uncertainties, which may themselves 
propagate through the system. Given the large uncertainties, the 
exclusion of other influencing factors and the lack of considera- 
tion of possible feedback effects, 
ic 
is rare that such 
a formal 
methodology can be followed successfully in impact assessment. 
More commonly an integrated or partially integrated approach 
must be adopted (see 2.3.3). 
CLIMATIC CHANGE 
. EXPOSURE UNIT 
(e.g. activity) 
IMPACT 

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
Figure 2. Schema of the interaction approach (after Parry and Carter, 1988) 
CLIMATIC CHANGE 
INTERACTION 
(including response to 
extemal factors) 
OTHER FACTORS 
(environmental and 
non-environmental) 
2.3.2 Interaction approach 
The interaction approach recognizes that climate is only one of 
a set of faccors that influence or are influenced by the exposure 
unit (Figure 2). For instance, the effects of an equivalenc short- 
fall of rainfall may be felt quite differently 3n differenc parts of 
the world, some expenencing hunger or malnutrition due to 
underlying faccors such as poverty, war or social marginalization, 
others profiting from increased food prices at a time of general 
shortage. Only if these other factors are fully accounted for will 
an accurate evaluation of the effects be achieved. 
The interaction approach also allows for feedbacks that may 
regulate or enhance an effect. To illustrate a simple feedback ac a 
global level: a change in climate may lead co a shift in natural veg- 
etation zones. However, this shift in zones may itself influence che 
climate through changes in fluxes of gases to and from the atmo- 
sphere, and through changes im surface reflecavicy. 
A study mechod chat fits closely into the structure of the inter- 
action approach 
is the adjoint method (Parry and Carter, 1988; 
Parry, 1990). 
In simple terms this can be thought of as 
a 
“What-Then-If approach: What points of a system are sensitive 
to what types of climatic change and then what might the impacts 
be if those changes in climate were to occur? 
It differs from the 
impact approach, descnbed above, 
in that the climate event 
1s 
selected according to the climate-sensinvity of the exposure unit. 
2.3.3 
Integrated approach 
An integrated approach 
is the most comprehensive treatment of 
the interactions of climate and society. 
It seeks to encompass the 
hierarchies of interactions that occur within sectors, interactions 
between sectors, and feedbacks, including adaptation, which serves 
to modify impacts and scenarios alike (Figure 3). In practice, since 
the knowledge base 
is insufBcient co envisage conducting fully 
incegrated assessments, only partially integrated assessments are fea- 
sible. These can be achieved by linking together parallel studies for 
different sectors in the same region (usually 
a nation or large 
administrative unit). This approach 
is being implemented in an 
Figure 3. An integrated approach to climate impact and adaptation assessment (Modified from Parry and Carter, 1988) 
SCENARIOS 
Me ee 
ee ee ee ee ee ene 
INTEGRATED 
BIOPHYSICAL 
ASSESSMENTS 
Model 
1 
(e.g. land biomass) 
(e.g. ocean biomass) 
Model 3 
! 
(e.g. water resources) 
v 
‘Madel 2 
Zz 
v 
u 
Y 
0 
Primary sector 
Secondary sector 
Tertiary sector 
Ke 
INTEGRATED 
a 
a 
Pe 
b 
ENTERPRISE- 
Farm 
| 
Farm 2 
4 
Industry 
| 
Industry 2 
< 
Service 
| 
Service 2 
le 
4 
~<¢ 
LEVEL 
j 
> 
l 
} 
> 
| 
\ 
Lp) O 
ASSESSMENTS 
| 
| 
| 
<@ 
a 
7 
» 
7 
Farm 3° 
Industry 3 
Service 3 
pelted 
Regional/national 
Regional/national 
< 
Regional/national 
le 
4 
ASSESSMENTS 
agncultural assessments 
| 
industnal assessments 
| 
service assessments 
INTEGRATED NATIONAL ASSESSMENT 
nae 
AGRICULTURAL 
IMPACT 
ASSESSMENTS 
INDUSTRIAL 
IMPACT 
IMPACT 
ASSESSMENTS OF 
ASSESSMENTS 
SERVICE SECTOR 

APPROACHES TO THE ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
Integrated Regional Impact Assessment (IRIA) in the MacKenzie 
Basin, Canada (Cohen, 1993; Yin and Cohen, 1994), perhaps the 
most ambicious regional level assessment to have been undertaken 
to date. A sinvlar approach was also adopted in the MINK study 
on the US Corn Belt (Rosenberg, 1993—see Box J3), at national 
scale in Egypt (Strzepek et al., in press) and, though less detailed, in 
south-east Asia (Parry ef al., 1992). Other approaches focus on dif- 
ferent sectors in a wide variety of regions to examine impacts on, 
for example, food supply or water resources (see, for example, 
Strzepek and Smith, in press). 
A major shortcoming of most climate impact assessments to 
date has been their lack of an in-depth treatment of adapcation, 
due in part to its complexity and in part to the lack of a suitable 
methodological framework. While 
it 
is represented in a simple 
form in Figure 
3, various aspects of adaptation are implied, 
including adjuscments that are endogenous to 
a system, and chus 
cannot be separated from the assessment of impacts, as well 
as 
exogenous adaptation, which is imposed extemmally on a system. 
2.4 
A Seven Step Framework for Assessment 
A general framework for conducting a climate impact assessment is 
shown in Figure 4. It consists of seven main steps of analysis. The 
first five steps can be regarded as common to most assessments. 
Steps 6 and 7 are included in fewer studies. The steps are consecu- 
uve (open arrows in Figure 4), but the framework also allows for 
the redefinition and repetition of some steps (thin bold arrows). At 
each step, 
a range of study methods 
is available. These are 
described and evaluated in the following sections. For reasons of 
brevicy, however, only the essence of each method 
is introduced, 
along with references to sources of further information. 
Each of the seven general steps includes more detailed proce- 
dures, sometimes themselves arranged in a comparable multi-step 
framework. For example, Section 8.3 describes seven equivalent 
Figure 4. Seven steps of climate impact assessmment 
| 
DEFINE PROBLEM 
A 
es 
ASSESS SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACTS 
6 || ASSESS AUTONOMOUS ADJUSTMENTS 
v 
7 
EVALUATE ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
2 
SELECT METHOD 
3 
TEST METHOD/SENSITIVITY 
> 
4 
SELECT SCENARIOS 
: 
5 
ASSESS BIOPHYSICAL IMPACTS 
steps in evaluating adaptacon strategies. Those steps fit directly 
into Step 7 of the overall assessment framework, but they also 
parallel al] the general assessment steps, because the information 
required for evaluating adapuation is derived from, and depends 
on, many of the other steps, such as sensitivity analysis, impact 
assessment and reliance on specific models. 
Vv 

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
STEP 1: DEFINITION OF 
THE PROBLEM 
A necessary first step in undertaking a climate impact assessment 
is to define precisely the nature and scope of the problem to be 
investigated. This usually involves identifying the goals of the 
assessment, the exposure unit of interest, the spatial and tempo~ 
ral scope of the study, the data needs, and the wider context of 
the work. 
3.1 Goals of the Assessment 
Some general reasons for conducting an assessment were out- 
lined in Section 2.1. Once the general objectives are defined, 
the specific goals of the study may be addressed, 
as these will 
affect the conduct of the investigation. To illustrate, an assess— 
ment of the future hydrological impacts of climatic change in a 
river catchment has quite different requirements for data and 
expertise if the goal is to estimate the capacity for power genera- 
tion, than if it is to predict changes in agricultural income as a 
result of changes in the availability of water for irrigation. 
3.2 Exposure Unit to be Studied 
The exposure unit to be assessed is likely to determine, to 
a 
large degree, the type of researchers who will conduct the 
assessment, the methods that can be employed and the data 
required. The choice of exposure unit should reflect the goal of 
the assessment and the region, group or activity at risk. Studies 
can focus on 
a single sector of activity (e.g., agriculture, 
forestry, energy production or water resources), several sectors 
in parallel but separately, or several sectors interactively. 
Alternatively, the exposure unit may be non-sectoral in charac- 
ter (e.g., an ecosystem, a distinct regional unit such as an island, 
or a specific population cohort). 
3.3 Study Area 
The selection of a study area is likely to be guided by the goals 
of the study and by the constraints on available data. Options 
include: 
@ 
Administrative units (e.g., district, town, province, nation), 
for which most economic and social data are available and at 
which level most policy decisions are made. 
@ 
Geographical units (e.g., river catchment, plain, mountain 
range, lake region), which are useful integrating units for 
considering multi-sectoral impacts of climate change. 
@ 
Ecological zones (e.g., moorland, savannah, forest, wetland), 
which are often selected for considering issues of conserva- 
tion or land resource evaluation. 
@® 
Climatic zones 
(e.g., desert, monsoon zone, rain shadow 
area), which are sometimes selected because of the unique 
features and activities associated with the climatic regime. 
@® 
Sensitive regions (e.g., ecotones, tree lines, coastal zones, 
ecological niches, marginal communities), where changes in 
climate are likely to be felt first and with the greatest effect. 
@ 
Representative units, which may be chosen according to any 
of the above criteria, but in addition are selected to be rep- 
resentative of that regional type and thus amenable to gener- 
alization. For instance, a single river catchment may serve as 
a useful integrating unit for considering impacts of climate 
on water resources, agriculture, forestry; fisheries, recreation, 
natural vegetation, soil erosion and hydroelectric power 
generation. Information from this type of study may then be 
applicable to other similar catchments in a region. 
3.4 Time Frame 
The selection of a time horizon for study is also governed, in the 
main, by the goals of the assessment. For example, in studies of 
industrial impacts the planning horizons may be 5-10 years, 
investigations of tree growth may require a 100—year perspective, 
while considerations of nuclear waste disposal must accommodate 
time spans of well over 1000 years. However, as the time horizon 
increases, so the ability to project future trends declines rapidly. 
Many climate projections rely on general circulation models, and 
are subject to uncertainties over all projection periods. The only 
prediction horizon of proven reliability is that provided by 
weather forecast models extending for days or, at most, 
a few 
weeks into the future (Lorenz, 1968). In general, few accurate 
projections of rates of change in socio-economic factors such as 
population, economic development and technological change can 
be made for periods beyond 15—20 years into the future. 
3.5 Data Needs 
The availability of data 
is a limitation in many impact studies. 
The collection of new data is an important element of some 
studies, but most rely on existing sources (an important source 
of bias in some studies). Thus, before embarking on a detailed 
assessment, 1t is important to identify the main features of the 
data requirements, namely: 
Types of data required. 
Time period, spatial coverage and resolution. 
Sources and format of the data. 
Quantity and quality of the data. 
Availability, cost and delivery time of the data. 
Licensing and copyright restrictions on data distribution. 
There 
is of course, 
a close interdependency between the 
identification of data needs and the selection of methods of anal- 
ysis. In practice the two procedures operate simultaneously, but 
they are treated consecutively here for ease of presentation. 
3.6 Wider Context of the Work 
Although the goals of the reseatch may be quite specific, it is 
still important to place the study in context, with respect to: 
@ 
Similar or parallel studies that have been completed or are in 
progress. 
@ 
The political, economic and social system of the study 
region. 
@ 
Other social, economic and environmental changes occur- 
ring in the study region. 
@ 
Issues of scale, where studies conducted at one scale should 
recognize and take advantage of related information or stud- 
ies at a larger scale. 
@ 
Miultiple effects of changes in other sectors, in markets or in 
population. 
@ 
The study’s policy context. 
Consideration of these aspects may assist policy makers in evalu- 
ating the wider significance of individual studies.

SELECTION OF THE METHOD 
STEP 2: SELECTION 
OF THE METHOD 
A variety of analytical methods can be adopted in climate 
impact assessment. These range from qualitative descriptive 
studies, through more diagnostic and semi-quantitative assess— 
ments to quantitative and prognostic analyses. Any single impact 
assessment may contain elements of one or more of these types, 
but whatever methods are selected, these should be clearly set 
out and explained. Transparency in the description of the meth- 
ods, models and assumptions 
is essential both to evaluate the 
credibility of the different approaches and to compare between 
different assessments. Four general methods can be identified: 
experimentation, impact projections, empirical analogue studies 
and expert judgement. 
4.1 Experimentation 
In the physical sciences, a standard method of testing hypotheses 
or of evaluating processes of cause and effect is through direct 
experimentation. In the context of climate impact assessment, 
however, experimentation has only a limited application. 
Clearly it is not possible physically to simulate large-scale sys- 
tems such as the global climate, nor is it feasible to conduct con- 
trolled experiments to observe interactions involving climate 
and human-related activities. Only where the scale of impact is 
manageable, the exposure unit measurable, and the environment 
controllable, can experiments be usefully conducted. 
Up to now most attention in this area has been on observing 
the behaviour of plant species under controlled conditions of 
climate and atmospheric composition (e.g., see Strain and Cure, 
1985; van de Geijn et al., 1993). In the field such experiments 
have mainly comprised gas enrichment studies, employing gas 
releases in the open ait, or in open or closed chambers including 
greenhouses. The former experiments are more realistic, but are 
less amenable to control. The chamber experiments allow for 
climatic as well as gas control, but the chambers may introduce a 
new set of limiting conditions which would not occur in reality. 
The greatest level of control is achievable in the laboratory, 
where processes can be studied in more detail and can employ 
more sophisticated analyses. 
The primary gases studied have been carbon dioxide, sulphur 
dioxide and ozone, all of which are expected to play an interac- 
tive role with climate in future plant growth and productivity. 
Both temperature and water relations have also been regulated, to 
simulate possible future climatic conditions. To date, there have 
been experiments with agricultural plants (both annual and peren- 
nial crops), crop pests and diseases (often in conjunction with host 
plants), trees (usually saplings, but also some mature species), and 
natural vegetation species and communities (where aspects of 
competition can be studied). Controlled experiments have also 
been reported on freshwater ecosystems (to study effects on water 
quality and the food chain) and soils (examining decomposition 
rates, nutrient leaching and microbial activity). 
There are ather sectors in which experimentation may yield 
useful information for assessing impacts of climatic change. For 
instance, building materials and design are continually being 
refined and tested to account for environmental influences and 
for energy-saving. Information from these tests may provide 
clues as to the performance of such materials, assuming they were 
widely employed in the future, under altered climatic conditions. 
\ 
The information obtained from experiments, while useful in 
its own right, is also invaluable for calibrating models which are 
to be used in projecting impacts of climatic change (see below). 
4.2 Impact Projections 
One of the major goals of climate impact assessment, especially 
concerning aspects of future climatic change, is the prediction of 
future impacts. A growing number of model projections have 
become available on how global climate may change in the 
future as 
a result of increases in GHG concentrations (e.g., see 
IPCC, 1990a; 1992a). These results, along with scientific and 
public concerns about their possible implications, have mobi- 
lized policy makers to demand qualitative assessments of the 
likely impacts within the time horizons and regional constraints 
of their jurisdiction. 
Thus, a main focus of much recent work has been on impact 
projections, using an array of mathematical models to extrapolate 
into the future. In order to distinguish them from ‘climate mod- 
els’, which are used to project future climate, the term ‘impact 
model’ has now received wide currency. 
At the start of any climate impact assessment, researchers are 
commonly confronted with an important choice with regard to 
impact models—either to adopt existing models or to develop 
new models. Bearing in mind that most assessments have severe 
time and resource constraints, the most sensible strategy for 
model selection is first, to conduct a rigorous survey of existing 
models that are applicable to the issue being investigated. This 
exercise is best conducted by experienced modellers, but some 
information for non-specialists can also be provided by interna- 
tional organizations, who can advise on suitable models or even 
supply them directly. Examples of these can be found in the fol- 
lowing sections. 
The second important step 
is to examine 
a model’s data 
needs, Without suitable input data, even the most perfect of 
models cannot be used. If there are suitable data, the models can 
be tested according to the procedures described in Section 5.3. 
If input data are not available, or inadequate, then for some 
applications it may be necessary or desirable to collect the 
appropriate information (cf. Section 5.2). 
Finally, if suitable models cannot be identified, then it may 
become necessary to develop new models. In some regions with 
appropriate data it may be possible, in quite 
a short time, to 
construct simple statistically-based models which are robust 
enough to be applicable to climate change problems. This has 
often been the practice in many less developed countries, where 
access to more sophisticated models 
is sometimes limited, and 
the development of such models may be constrained by poor 
data quality and lack of modelling expertise. Even in developed 
countries, however, in the context of an impact assessment 
study, construction of these models from first principles is likely 
to be too time and resource intensive and is rarely undertaken. 
It is more common for model development to involve refine- 
ments of existing models which take account of altered condi- 
tions under a changing climate. For example, many crop growth 
models developed for yield prediction under present-day condi- 
tions, have been modified for climate impact studies to account 
for the effects of increasing CO, on carbon uptake and water

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
use (assumed constant in conventional applications). 
Some of the specific procedures for projecting future 
impacts are described in Section 6. Here, the major classes of 
predictive models and approaches are described. 
It is conve- 
nient, in categorizing impact models, to follow the hierarchical 
structure of interactions that was introduced in Section 2.3.1. 
Direct effects of climate are usually assessed using biophysical 
models, while indirect or secondary effects are generally assessed 
using a range of biophysical, economic and qualitative models. 
Finally, attempts have also been made at comprchensive assess- 
ments using integrated systems models. 
4.2.1 Biophysical models 
Biophysical modcls are used to evaluate the physical interactions 
between climate and an exposure unit. There are two main 
types: empirical-statistical models and process-based models. 
The use of these in evaluating future impacts is probably best 
documented for the agricultural sector (e.g., see WMO, 1985), 
the hydrological aspects of water resources (c.g., WMO, 1988) 
and ecosystems (e.g., Bonan, 1993), but the principles can read- 
ily be extended to other sectors. 
Empirical-statistical models are based on the statistical relation- 
ships between climate and the exposure unit. They range from 
simple indices of suitability or potential (e.g., identifying the 
temperature thresholds defining the ice-free period on impor- 
tant shipping routes), through univariate regression models used 
for prediction (e.g., using air temperature to predict energy 
demand) to complex multivariate models, which attempt to 
provide a 
statistical explanation of observed phenomena by 
accounting for the most important factors (e.g., predicting crop 
yields on the basis of temperature, rainfall, sowing date and fer- 
tilizer application). 
Empirical-statistical models are usually developed on the 
basis of present-day climatic variations. Thus, one of their major 
weaknesses in considering future climate change is their limited 
ability to predict effects of climatic events that lie outside the 
range of present-day variability. They may also be criticized for 
being based on statistical relationships between factors rather 
than on an understanding of the important causal mechanisms. 
However, where models are founded on a good knowledge of 
the determining proccsses and where there are good grounds for 
extrapolation, they can still be useful predictive tools in climate 
impact assessment. Empirical-statistical models are often simple 
to apply, and less demanding of input data than process-based 
models (see below). 
Pyocess-based models make use of established physical laws and 
theories to express the interactions between climate and an expo- 
sure unit. In this sense, they attempt to represent processes that 
can be applied universally to similar systems in different circum- 
stances. For example, there are well-established methods of mod- 
elling leaf photosynthesis which are applicable to 
a range of 
plants and environments. Usually some kind of model calibration 
is required to account for features of the local environment that 
are not modelled explicitly, and this is generally based on empini- 
cal data. Nevertheless, there are often firmer grounds for con- 
ducting predictive studies with these process-based models than 
with empirical-statistical models. The major problem with most 
process-based models is that they generally have demanding 
requirements for input data, both for model testing and for sumu- 
lating future impacts. This tends to restrict the use of such mod- 
els to only a few points in geographical space where the relevant 
data are available. In addition, theoretically-based models are sel- 
dom able to predict system responses successfully without consid- 
erable efforts to calibrate them for actual conditions. Thus, for 
example, crop yields may be overestimated by process-based 
yield models because the models fail to account for all of the lim- 
itations on crops in the field at farm level. 
During the past twenty years, or so, there has been an enor- 
mous proliferation of process-based models, which have devel- 
oped to describe many different kinds of system. Many of these 
have been applied in climate impact assessment, but the docu- 
mentation of these models is often poor or difficult to obtain, 
computer code may not be readily available, and the selection of 
appropriate models for a particular problem or region can be very 
difficult. Recently, efforts have been made to organize model 
intercomparison cxcrcises, (e.g., for computation of evapotranspi- 
ration; Smith, 1992), to coordinate the standardization of model 
structure (e.g., within the Intcrnational Benchmark Sites 
Network for Agrotechnology Transfer, IBSNAT), and to make 
generic or alternative models available to users in a single package 
(c.g., CROPWAT, a computcr program for irrigation planning 
and management available from FAO along with a climate data 
base of 3261 stations in 144 countries; FAO, 1992a; and the agn- 
cultural decision support system for a range of crops supplied by 
IBSNAT; IBSNAT, 1989). 
New techniques are also being developed to simplify the 
results of process-based simulation models using statistical tech- 
niques (Buck et al., in press). The idea of this approach is to fit 
|. 
statistical response surfaces to numerous outputs dezived from 
simulation models. Applied with care, this method can provide a 
rapid means of exploring the sensitivity of the more detailed sim- 
ulation models without having to run the models themselves. 
4.2.2 Economic models 
Economic models of many kinds can be employed to evaluate 
the implications of climate change for local and regional 
economies. To simplify their classification, it is useful to distin- 
guish between three types of economic model, according to the 
approach used to construct them, and three scales of economic 
activity that different model types can represent. 
4.2.2.1 
Types of economic model 
Three broad classes of economic model can be identified: pro- 
gramming, econometric and input-output models. 
Programming models have an objective function and con- 
straints. The objective function represents the behaviour of the 
producer (e.g., profit maximizing or cost minimizing). If the 
objective function and constraints are linear, the model is 
known as a Linear Programming (LP) model. If the objective 
function is quadratic and the constraints linear, the model is a 
Quadratic Programming (QP) model. 
If either the objective 
function or the constraints are nonlinear, the resulting model is 
a Nonlinear Programming model. However, LP models can 
also incorporate nonlinear relations (for example, technical 
relations) in a piecewise manner. Programming models can also 
be of the partial equilibrium type, 1.e., they determine produc- 
tion (supply) and demand simultaneously. They are usually cah- 
brated to 
a set of data in a given year. In this sense they are 
empirically based. Programming models can be static or 
dynamic. An example of the application of LP models to assess- 
ing impacts of climate change is the study by Adams 
et al. 
(1989) on USS. agriculture. 
Econometric models consist of supply and/or demand functions 
which use as independent variables prices and a number of ‘tech-

SELECTION OF THE METHOD 
nical’ variables, and usually include time to represent those parts of 
the cconomy that undergo steady change. Like programming 
models, these models also have their parameters numerically quan- 
tified, but econometric models differ substantially in their structure 
from programming models. Conventionally, econometric models 
do not state any decision rules. However, in the last decade a new 
set of econometrically specified models has emerged: the so-called 
dual models. These assume decision rules such as profit maximiz- 
ing or cost minimizing of producers and utility maximizing or 
expenditure minimizing of the consumer. In these cases, data fit- 
ting is usually done by statistical methods (regression analysis) or a 
simple calibration procedure is used. The bulk of econometric 
models are static (including those that embed a time trend), whilst 
among the few examples of dynamic models are the so-called 
adaptive models. 
Input-output (IO) models are developed to study the interdc- 
pendence of production activities. The outputs of some activi- 
ties become the inputs for others, and vice versa (Lovell and 
Smith, 1985). These input-output relationships are gencrally 
assumed to be constant, which is a weakness of the approach, 
sirice re-organization of production or feedback effects (such as 
between demand and prices) may change the relationships 
between activities. This is of particular concem when projecting 
production activities beyond a few years into the future. More 
recently, dynamic versions of IO models have been developed, 
but these stil] lack many of the dynamic aspects of economic 
behaviour. Nonetheless, the approach 
is relatively simple to 
apply and the data inputs are not demanding. Moreover, thesc 
models are already in common usage 
as planning tools, 
Examples of their application in climate impact assessment 
include studies of possible impacts of climate change on the 
economy of Saskatchewan (Williams 
et al., 1988—see Box 12 
on page 37) and on economic activity in the states of Missouri, 
Iowa, Nebraska and Kansas {the MINK study) in the USA 
(Rosenberg, 1993—sce Box 13, on page 38). 
4.2.2.2 
Scales of model application 
Three scales of economic activity are commonly represented by 
economic models: firm-level, sector-level and economy-wide. 
Firm-level models depict a single firm or enterprise 
(i.c., 
a 
decision unit for production). These are often programming 
models but are rarely of the econometric type, due to con- 
straints on available information about firms. Typical examples 
include farm level simulation models, which attempt to mirror 
the decision processes facing farmers who must choose between 
different methods of production and allocate adequate resources 
of cash, machines, buildings and labour to maximize returns 
(e.g., Williams et al., 1988). Such models may also require data 
on productivity, and it is this which constitutes the entry point 
for potential linkages with the outputs from biophysical models. 
Model outputs include farm-level estimates, for example, of 
income, cash flow and resource costs for obtaining selected pro- 
duction plans. These models are sometimes referred to 
as 
microsimulation models. 
Sector-level models encompass an entire sector or industry. 
They can be programming models or of the econometric type, 
to depict praduction. For climate change studies, these models 
should be of a partial equilibrium type, to include demand so 
that price changes are generated as well. It is quite common for 
such models to consider a firm as representative of the average 
of the entire sector under study. Such models are then similar to 
firm-level models, but require aggregation and assumptions 
about average technical relations. Some sector-level models are 
also of the IO type, and have supply and demand included. 
These models usually have no or very few links to devclopments 
in the rest of the economy. 
Economy-wide models, sometimes referred to as macrocco- 
nomic models (which are actually 
a large subsct of this class), 
link changes im one sector to changes in the broader cconomy, 
dealing with all cconomic activities of a spatial entity like 
a 
country, 
a region within 
a country or a group of countries. 
Typical cconomy-wide models for climate impact assessment 
include all types of general equilibrium (GE) models and IO 
models. Most GE models belong to the group of dual econo- 
metric models, but there are also programming models among 
them. The distinctive feature of GE models is that they deter- 
mine endogenously (equilibrium) prices which clear the market 
in the same way as partial equilibrium models. However, unlike 
partial equilibrium models, GE models encompass all economic 
activities of the region. The static form of the GE model is the 
computable gencral equilibrium (CGE) model. Some of the 
studies of climate impacts conducted to date with CGE models 
have used as inputs the results of studies of sectoral impacts. For 
example, the results of an agricultural impacts study by Adams et 
al. (1989), along with results from studies on coasts (related to 
sea level rise) and clectricity demand, were used as inputs to a 
general equilibrium model of the US economy to assess the 
wider implications in all sectors of the economy (Scheraga et al., 
1993). There are also dynamic GE models, which can treat the 
evolution of an economy through time, ensuring at each time 
step that the markets are in equilibrium. For example, a (recw- 
sively) dynamic GE model of global food trade, the Basic 
Linked System, has been used to study the potential effects of 
climatic change on global food supply, using information on 
potential yicld changes of major crops taken from crop mod- 
elling 
studies conducted 
at 
112 
sites 
in 
18 
countries 
(Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994). 
Economic models are the only credible tools for deriving 
meaningful estimates of likely effects of climate change on mea- 
surable economic quantities such as income, GDP, employment 
and savings. However, great care is required in interpreting the 
results. Specifically, caution must be exercised in using any of 
the measures of cconomic activity as indicators of social wel- 
farc. Potentially more serious, however, 
is the failure of most 
models (exceptions include the models of Cline (1992) and 
Fankhauser (1993)) to account for non-market effects of cli- 
mate change. For example, many inputs to production are 
directly affected by climate change (e.g., land and water) but 
are not contained in most macroeconomic models. Economic 
models are also widely used to consider the relative cost-effec- 
tiveness of mitigation and adaptation options that are proposed 
to ameliorate the adverse impacts of climate change, along with 
associated economic, social and environmental impacts of these 
options. Some of these points are further addressed below in 
relation to integrated models. 
4.2.3 Integrated systems models 
The issue of greenhouse gas-induced climate change now 
assumes a high profile in national and international policy mak- 
ing, In order to inform policy, however, it is necessary to iden- 
tify and address all of the different components of the problem. 
This has been the motive force behind recent efforts to integrate 
the causes, impacts, feedbacks and policy implications of the 
‘greenhouse problem’ within 
a modelling framework. Two

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX 1 
AN APPLICATION OF IMAGE 2.0 
A GLOBALLY INTEGRATED SYSTEMS MODEL 
Background: IMAGE 2.0 
is 
a global model designed to pro- 
vide 
a science-based overview of climate change issues 
to 
support the national and international evaluation of policies 
(Alcamo, 1994). 
Model: IMAGE 2.0 consists of three fully linked components: 
energy-industry, terrestrial environment and atmosphere- 
ocean (see figure). Dynamic calculations are performed for a 
one hundred year time horizon and the model is embedded in 
a geographical information system. 
increased water use efficiency, temperature responses of plant 
photosynthesis and respiration, temperature and soil water 
responses of decomposition processes and climate-induced 
changes in vegetation and agricultural patterns and consequent 
changes in land cover. A unique feature of the model is its abil- 
ity to relate changes in land cover to the demand for agricultural 
land. This component is driven by regional population and eco- 
nomic activity. The agricultural demands are combined with 
regional potential crop producavity and distribution to deter- 
mune the amount of agricultural land required. 
If this exceeds 
the current amount, simple rules are applied to determine the 
expansion of agncultural land into areas currently under other 
land cover types (e.g., using the nearest areas with the highest 
potential productivity first). 
ENERGY-INDUSTRY SYSTEM 
Input 
Industnal 
Emissions 
Data: 
| 
® Economic 
r 
ATMOSPHERE-OCEAN SYSTEM 
Energy 
Economy 
TERRESTRIAL ENVIRONMENT SYSTEM 
Emissions 
| 
Zonal 
E. 
4 
Atmosphenc 
B 
Av arenhente 
= 
= 
Composition 
Chroate 
| 
Atmosp. Conc 
aes 
| 
® Greenhouse Gases 
| 
a 
i 
>! 
© Ozone-related 
| 
¥ 
v 
| 
gases 
| 
Ocean 
FF 
“| 
; 
Ocean 
| Changed Climate 
 —-> 
Biosphere 
bh 
Climate 
L_ 
~ 
and Chemistry 
a 
Emissions 
. 
| 
@ Greenh 
New Land Use 
Pattern 
;> 
= 
= 
Agncultural 
| 
Impacts 
| 
Ecosystem and 
| 
| Other Risks 
| 
The energy-industry set of models are used to compute the 
emissions of greenhouse gases in each region as a function of 
energy consumption and industrial production. The terrestrial 
environment component simulates land use and land cover 
dynamically through time over a 0.5° x 0.5° latitude longitude 
grid, employing these changes to determine greenhouse gas 
emissions from the terrestrial biosphere to the atmosphere. The 
atmosphere-ocean set of models computes the build-up of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and the resulting change in 
climate. Emissions from the energy-industry and terrestrial 
environment components are combined and used to determine 
the uptake of carbon by the oceans and the atmospheric gas and 
aerosol composition. The climatic response to atmospheric 
forcing is determined with an atmospheric energy balance 
model, which 
is used in conjunction with information from 
GCMs to provide regional climate change scenarios. 
Application: determining feedback processes 
in the 
response of the terrestrial carbon cycle to climate change. 
Methods; the terrestrial environment component of 
IMAGE 2.0 was used to compute the carbon fluxes between 
the terrestrial biosphere and the aunosphere. The model can 
simulate the effects of feedback processes occurnng under 
increased atmospheric CO, concentrations and a changing cli- 
mate: the enhancement of plant growth (CO, fertilization) and 
Scenarios: the projection horizon 
ts 1970 to 2050. The 
IPCC ‘Best Estimate scenario’ (IS92a) 
is used to define the 
socio-economic projections: 
a world population increase of 
93 per cent and GNP increase of 134 per cent by 2050. The 
climatic scenario is based on the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics 
Laboratory (GFDL) 
2 
x CO, equilibrium experiment 
(Manabe and Wetherald, 1987), assumed to be concurrent 
with an equivalent-CO, concentration of 686 ppm by 2050 
(570 ppm for CO, alone) relative to 1970. 
Impacts: changes in climate and in water use efficiency 
induce shifts in vegetation patterns relative to 
1970. CO, fer- 
tilization decreases net carbon emissions co the atmosphere 
while changed decomposition rates increase emissions, 
though regionally there are large differences. Changes in the 
global balance between photosynthesis and respiration make 
little net difference. Neglecting land use changes, the terres- 
trial biosphere acts as 
a net carbon sink (negative feedback) 
relative 
to the current situation. However, with increasing 
population, the demand for new agricultural land is large, and 
land cover changes with associated carbon emissions are likely 
completely co counteract the negative feedbacks described 
above. 
Source: Vloedbeld and Leemans (1993) 
10 

SELECTION OF THE METHOD 
main approaches to integration can be identified: the aggregate 
cost-benefit approach and the regionalized process-based 
approach. 
The aggregate cost-benefit approach seeks to estimate the likely 
monetary costs and benefits of GHG-induced climate change in 
order to evaluate the possible policy options for mitigating or 
adapting to climate change. This is 
a macroeconomic modelling 
approach (see above), and has been applied to certain aspects of the 
greenhouse problem for many years. In particular, the methods 
have been used to compute the development paths for emissions 
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere 
(the driving force for climate change). 
The approach commonly combines a set of economic mod- 
els with a climate model and a darnage assessment model. The 
economic models provide global projections (sometimes disag- 
gregated into major regional groupings of countries) of likely 
future paths of supply and demand in commodities that can 
affect greenhouse gas emissions, on the basis of future world 
population and economic development. The models use price 
to determine the relative competitiveness of different technolo- 
gies of energy production, while accounting for the long-term 
depletion of fossil fuels, allowing for the development of more 
efficient technologies and accommodating likely policies of 
emissions abatement. The time horizon considered can range 
from a few decades to several centuries. 
Climate models refer to a suite of functions that are needed: 
first, to convert GHG emissions into atmospheric concentra- 
tions; second, to estimate radiative forcing of the climate; and 
third, to compute the climate sensitivity of the forcing (global 
mean temperature response to radiative forcing equivalent to a 
doubling of CO,). They usually comprise simplified representa- 
tions of the gas cycles, empirical methods of determining radia- 
tive forcing, and highly simplified equations for computing tem- 
perature response. 
Damage assessment models are functions that provide an 
estimate of the likely impacts (costs) of climate change, usually as 
a percentage of GNP. They commonly provide 
a global esti- 
mate of ‘damage’ 
as 
a function of global mean temperature 
change. To date, such functions have been selected subjectively, 
on the basis of expert opinion or using the few quantitative esti- 
mates that are available of the possible sectoral impacts of cli- 
mate change at the global scale. Great caution must be exer- 
cised, however, since simulation outcomes with these models 
can be very sensitive to assumptions, such as those concerning 
future discount rates and the estimated damage response. A fur- 
ther major difficulty is the assignment of value to intangible 
non-market ‘goods’ such as human well-being, a pollution-free 
environment, and biological diversity. 
Recent examples of models exhibiting this type of three- 
component framework include DICE (Nordhaus, 1992); CETA 
(Peck and Teisberg, 1992); and MERGE (Manne et al., 1993). 
The regionalized process-based approach attempts to model the 
sequence of cause and effect processes originating from scenarios 
of future GHG emissions, through atmospheric GHG concen- 
trations, radiative forcing, global temperature change, regional 
climate change, possible regional impacts of climate change and 
the feedbacks from impacts to each of the other components. 
Regional impacts can be aggregated, where appropriate, to give 
global impacts which can then be used in evaluating the likely 
effectiveness of global or regional policies. The approach is 
derived from the applied natural sciences, especially ecology, 
agriculture, forestry and hydrology, where climate impact assess- 
ll 
ment has evolved from site or local impact studies towards large 
area assessments, using process-based mathematical models in 
combination with geographical information system (GIS) tech- 
nology. Examples include two related models: ESCAPE 
(European focus) and MAGICC (global) (Rotmans et al., 1994; 
Hulme 
et al., 1995a), and two versions of a global model: 
IMAGE 1.0 (Rotmans, 1990) and IMAGE 2.0 (Alcamo, 1994). 
Box 1 
illustrates an application of IMAGE 2.0, probably the 
most advanced model of this kind yet to have been developed. 
In contrast to the aggregate cost-benefit approach, the esti- 
mates of biophysical impacts in these models are quantitative 
and regionally explicit. In addition, the treatment of gas cycling 
and climate change are usually more sophisticated than in the 
former approach. The economic impacts of climate change are 
not yet incorporated, however, and future versions .of these 
models will strengthen their regional economic and global trade 
components, thus offering a quantitative assessment of the “dam- 
age’ quantities described above. Some of these developments are 
discussed further in relation to IMAGE 2.0 (Alcamo, 1994), 
AIM (Asian-Pacific Integrated Model; Morita et al., 1993) and 
GCAM 
(a model being developed for the United States and 
other industrialized countries; Edmonds et al., 1993). 
The two types of approach outlined above originate from 
quite different disciplinary perspectives and were developed for 
contrasting reasons. However, it is becoming increasingly evi- 
dent that major refinements of one approach will require signifi- 
cant contributions from the other. Indced, 
it appears that the 
two approaches are rapidly converging towards 
a common, 
interdisciplinary method that will become a standard tool in pol- 
icy analysis. Nevertheless, there are numerous problems associ- 
ated with integrated system models, including their complexity, 
lack of transparency and demanding data requirements for cali- 
bration and testing. Further, modellers should take care to bal- 
ance the sensitivity and uncertainties of model components, so 
that the results do not merely reflect noise in the most sensitive 
components of a model. Moreover, 
a major concern remains 
about the ability of these models to represent the uncertainties 
propagating through each level of the modelled system. This is 
discussed further in Section 7.6. 
4.3 Empirical Analogue Studies 
Observations of the interactions of climate and society in a region 
can be of value in anticipating future impacts. The most common 
method employed involves the transfer of information from a dif- 
ferent time or place to an area of interest to serve as an analogy. 
Four types of analogy can be identified: historical event analogies; 
historical trend analogies; regional analogies of present climate; 
and regional analogies of future climate. Analogues can also be 
used as climate scenarios (see Section 6.5.2) 
4.3.1 Historical event analogies 
Historical event analogies use information from the past as an 
analogue of possible future conditions. Data collection may be 
guided by anomalous climatic events in the past record (e.g., 
drought or hot spells) or by the impacts themselves (e.g., periods 
of severe soil erosion by wind). The assessment follows a ‘longi- 
tudinal’ method (Riebsame, 1988), whereby indicators are com- 
pared before, during and after the event. Examples of this 
approach are found in Glantz (1988). However, the success of 
this method depends on the analyst’s ability to separate climatic 
and non-climatic explanations for given effects.

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
4.3.2 Histovical trend analogies 
There are several examples of historical trends that may be unre- 
lated to greenhouse gases but which offer an analogy of GHG- 
induced climate change. Long-term temperature increases due to 
urbanization are onc potential source for a warming analogue (as 
yet seldom considered by impact analysts). Another example is 
past land subsidence, the impacts of which have been used as an 
analogue of future sea level rise associated with global warming. 
4.3.3 Regional analogies of present climate 
These refer to regions having a sunilar present-day climate to the 
study region, where the impacts of climate on society are also 
judged likely to be similar. To justify these premises, the regions 
generally have to exhibit similarities in other environmental fac- 
tors (e.p., soils and topography), in their level of development 
and in their respective economic systems. If these conditions are 
fulfilled, then it may be possible to conduct assessments that fol- 
low the ‘case-control’ method (Riebsame, 1988). Here, a target 
case Js compared with a control case, the target area experiencing 
abnormal weather but the other normal conditions. 
4,3.4 Regional analogies of future climate 
Regional analogies of future climate work on the same principle 
as analogics for present-day climate, except that here the analyst 
attempts to identify regions having a climate today which is sim- 
ilar to that projected for the study region in the future. In this 
case, the analogue region cannot be expected to exhibit com- 
plete similarity to the present study region, because many fea- 
tures may themselves change as a result of climatic change (e.g., 
soils, land use, vegetation). These characteristics would provide 
indicators of how the landscape and human activities might 
change in the study region in the future. Of course, for 
a full 
assessment of this, it would be necessary to consider the ability 
of a system or population to adapt to change. This principle has 
proved valuable in extending the range of applicability of some 
impact models. For example, a model of grass growth in Iceland 
has been tested for species currently found in northern Britain, 
which is an analogue region for Iceland under a climate some 
4°C warmer than present (Bergthorsson et al., 1988). 
Other aspects of the analogue region, however, would need 
to be assumed to be similar to the study region (e.g., daylength, 
topography, level of development and economic system). 
Where these conditions cannot be met (e.g., daylength for grass 
growth in Iceland differs from that in northern Britain), the 
implications need to be considered on a case by case basis. For a 
hydrological example, and discussion of the considerable prob- 
lems involved with regional analogues, see Arnell et al. (1990). 
One method of circumventing these problems 
is to consider 
altitudinal differences in the same region. 
4.4 Expert Judgement 
A useful method of obtaining a rapid assessment of the state of 
knowledge concerning the effects of climate on given exposure 
units is to solicit the judgement and opinions of experts in the 
field. Of course, expert judgement plays an important role in each 
of the other analytical methods described above. On its own, 
however, the method is widely adopted by government depart- 
ments for producing position papers on issues requiring policy 
responses. In circumstances where there may be insufficient time 
to undertake a full research study, literature is reviewed, compara- 
ble studies identified, and experience and judgement are used in 
applying all available information to the current problem. 
12 
The use of expert judgement can also be formalized into 
a 
quantitative assessment method, by classifying and then aggregat- 
ing the responscs of different experts to 
a range of questions 
requiring cvaluation. This method was employed in the National 
Deicnse University’s study of Climatc Change to the Year 2000, 
which solicited probability judgements from experts about cli- 
matic change and its possible impacts (NDU, 1978, 1980). 
The pitfalls of this type of analysis are examined in detail in 
the context of the NDU study by Stewart and Glantz (1985). 
They include problems of questionnaire design and delivery, 
selection of representative samples of experts, and the analysis of 
experts’ responses, 
More recently, decision support systems that combine 
dynamic simulation with expert jadgement have emerged as 
promising tools for policy analysis. Here, subjective probability 
analysis is required where simulation empirical models are lack- 
ing. Participatory assessment is another approach which is being 
tested in the McKenzie Basin study in Canada (cf. Section 2.3.3)

TESTING THE METHOD 
STEP 3: TESTING 
THE METHOD 
Following the selection of the assessment methods, it is impor- 
tant that these are thoroughly tested in preparation for the main 
evaluation tasks. There are many examples of studies where 
inadequate preparation has resulted in long delays in obtaining 
results. Moreover, this step provides an opportunity to refine 
goals and evaluate constraints that may have been overlooked 
(for example, in selecting ‘off the shelf models), Three types of 
analysis may be useful in evaluating the methods: feasibility stud- 
ies, data acquisition and compilation, and model testing. 
5.1 
Feasibility Studies 
One way of testing some or all of the methods, is to conduct a 
feasibility or pilot study. This usually focuses on a subset of the 
study region or scctor to be assessed. Case studies such as these 
can provide information on the effectiveness of alternative 
approaches, of models, of data acquisition and monitoring, and 
of research collaboration. 
Feasibility studies are most commonly adopted as a prelimi- 
nary stage of large multidisciplinary and multisectoral rescarch 
projects. Herc, effective planning and scheduling of rescarch 
relies on the assurance that different research tasks can be under- 
taken promptly and efficiently. Several approaches can be sug- 
gested for conducting feasibility studies: 
@ 
Evaluation of available information. 
Qualitative screening analysis. 
Preliminary scenarios. 
Geographical zoning. 
Microcosm studies. 
Response surfaces. 
Analogue studies. 
5.1.1 Evaluation of available information 
The importance of identifying the main data requirements in an 
impact assessment has already been stressed in Section 3.5. In 
addition, 
a review of the published literature should always be 
undertaken, to provide a background understanding of the study 
region, system or activity being investigated, to examine parallel 
or related studies that have been completed, to obtain new ideas 
on methods, to locate new sources of data, and to identify possi- 
ble research collaboratoxs. 
5.1.2 Qualitative screening analysis 
Assuming that the general sector or sectors of interest have already 
been identified, a useful first step in defining the specific exposure 
units to be studied is to conduct a climatic vulnerability analysis 
(e.g., Downing, 1992; Scott, 1993). This is a qualitative screening 
procedure which classifies climate vulnerability in a matrix format. 
Different exposure units within the scctor(s) are entered on one 
axis, classified, for instance, by type or by scale. On the other axis 
some cffects of climate are categorized, for example, by type of 
chmiatic event, by possible future climate changes, or by a combi- 
nation of these. Qualitative ratings arc then assigned to each cell 
in the matrix, indicating both the likely size of the cffect and its 
probability of occurrence. These estimates can be made using 
whatever information there is available, i.e., from previous stud- 
ies, expert opinion, literature review or simple quantitative assess- 
ments (sce below). An example is presented of a vulnerability rat- 
ing for human settlements in Table 1. 
In this way, an impression can be gained of the relative vul- 
nerability of different cxposure units to variations in climate at 
different scales. This may then assist in selecting appropriate 
exposure units for closcr examination, the geographical scale of 
analysis, the time frame of the study and hence the projection 
horizon for different scenarios and the types of assessment tools 
that arc appropniate for conducting assessments (including mod- 
els, survey methods, visualization tools and decision support sys- 
tems). However, caution should be exercised in interpreting too 
much from a preliminary assessment of this kind, and this type 
of procedure should not be regarded as a substitute for an in- 
depth assessment. 
5.1.3 Preliminary scenarios 
The qualitative screening procedure is a useful device for identi- 
fying the important climatic variables, the region of interest and 
the projection horizon that are needed in constructing climatic, 
environmental and socio-economic scenarios. While the devel- 
Table 1. Hypothetical example of a qualitative screening analysis to assess the vulnerability of human settlements to climatic 
variations (after Scott, 1993) 
CLIMATE VULNERABILITY RATING (Examples) 
Drought effects 
Drought effects 
Flooding effects 
Rural-urban 
Settlement 
on agriculture 
on water supply 
on buildings 
migration 
Villages 
[,U 
2,U 
4L 
2, 
< 500 people 
Market towns, 
2,U 
2,U 
4L 
2,U 
500-1000 
people 
City A 
4,U 
3,U 
2L 
IL 
Ratings: 
| = Large or very important; 
5 = Trivial; 
L = Likely, 
U = Unlikely

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
opment of detailed scenarios can be a time-consuming exercise, 
preliminary large scale projections can usually be made from 
information in the literature. For example, it may be possible to 
derive central, upper and lower estimate projections of trends in 
measures such 
as population, GNP, income, employment, 
energy demand, food demand, GHG concentrations, tempera- 
ture and precipitation (e.g., see Box 3, on page 19). Simple sce~ 
narios of this kind could be very useful in conducting simple 
assessments of the type described below. 
5.1.4 Geographical zoning 
In many impact assessments, the geographical scope of the study 
is already pre-determined ({e.g., focusing on an administrative 
region or a physiographic feature such as 
a river catchment). 
Even so, selection of an appropriate study region can pose some 
problems. First, the region should be relevant to the exposure 
unit. Second, 
it should provide adequate data, expertise and 
conditions for carrying out the assessment. Third, within its 
bounds, the exposure unit should exhibit measurable sensitivity 
to climatic variations. Fourth, 
it should provide representative 
results that can, if necessary, be extrapolated to a larger region. 
One method of targeting appropniate areas for study is to use 
simple, large area geographical zonation. This has been widely 
used in assessing agricultural impacts, but is potentially applicable 
in other sectors. It involves the calculation of simple bioclimatic 
indices, which combine information on climate, soils and 
topography into measures of suitability for crops, trees or natural 
vegetation..Some of the more sophisticated measures can imdi- 
cate plant biomass or even crop yield potential. Examples 
include Képpen’s climatic classification (Képpen, 1931), 
Holdridge Life Zones (Holdridge, 1947), or the FAO Agro- 
Ecological Zones (FAO, 1978) 
Where these have been mapped for both present-day cli- 
mate and possible future climate changes, it is possible to iden- 
tify those zones or regions where there is likely to be a high sen- 
sitivity of a particular exposure unit to climate change. For 
example, 
it could indicate zones where new species could be 
cultivated or regions where species may be threatened. These 
areas can then be targeted for more detailed analysis (e.g., using 
simulation models, village surveys or field experiments). 
Alternatively, zoning may simply serve as a classification method 
for selecting representative sites for further study. 
5.1.5 Microcosm case studies 
In studies where there is likely to be a heavy reliance on a specific 
type of analysis (e.g., model-based, experimental, survey-based) or 
where data requirements are uncertain, 
it can be instructive to 
conduct a smail scale pilot study under conditions representative 
of those anticipated in the main study. These ‘microcosm’ case 
studies allow different analysis tools to be selected, tested and eval- 
uated. In addition, they can assist in identifying the personnel 
required to carry out research. They also offer researchers some 
experience in addressing problems they are likely to encounter in 
the main project. For instance, in a project on regional tourism, a 
representative tourist resort might be chosen as a pilot case study, 
or for a study of coping strategies for drought in an agriculturally- 
based, rural subsistence economy, a representative village might 
be selected for a pilot survey and analysis. 
5.1.6 Response surfaces 
A growing number of detailed climate impact studies are being 
reported for different sectors and from many regions of the 
14 
world. While these frequently make use of sophisticated analyti- 
cal methods or models, their results can often be summarized 
more simply, using generalized response surfaces. For example, 
hydrological models may have been applied to different points 
in a river catchment and run for different climate change scenar- 
ios. The hydrological responses can be complex, but it may still 
be possible to separate out the most important responses to ch- 
mate as simple empirical relationships (for example relating river 
discharge to monthly precipitation). 
Where simple relationships of this kind can be identified 
from previous studies, there may then be an opportunity to 
apply them to similar regions in the new study, to provide 
a 
preliminary assessment of possible responses to climate change. 
The use of response surfaces in studying system sensitivities to 
climate change is discussed further in Box 5 on page 22. 
5.1.7 Analogue studies 
Another method of obtaining a rapid evaluation of the likely cli- 
mate sensitivity of an exposure unit is to identify analogues of 
possible future conditions. These have already been discussed in 
the context of a full impact assessment (Section 4.3)—here they 
are used as 
a screening device. These might be regional ana- 
logues, where the present-day climate and its effects on an expo- 
sure unit are thought to be comparable to possible future condi- 
tions in the study region. This is an attractive device for illustrat- 
ing the possible extent of future climate change, as well as offer- 
ing useful information on the conditions experienced under the 
analogue climate. Alternatively, they could be temporal ana- 
logues, which identify climatic events and their impacts in the 
past as analogues of events which could occur again in the future, 
possibly with an altered frequency under a changed climate. 
5.2 Data Acquisition and Compilation 
An essential element in all climate impact assessment studies is 
the acquisition and compilation of data. Quantitative data are 
required both to describe the temporal and spatial patterns of 
climatic events and their impacts and to develop, calibrate and 
test predictive models. Four main types of data collection can be 
identified: empirical compilation, objective survey, targeted 
measurement and monitonng. 
Empirical compilation of evidence (both quantitative and 
qualitative) from disparate sources is the mainstay of most his- 
torical analysis of past climate-society interactions. The data are 
pieced together to produce a chronology of events, which can 
then be used to test hypotheses about the effects of past climate 
(e.g., see Parry, 1978), or simply as a qualitative description of 
past events (e.g., see Lamb, 1977; Pfister, 1984; Grove, 1988; 
Mikami 1992). 
Objective survey utilizes established procedures to collect data 
from contemporary sources (the information itself may relate to 
the present or the past). Such survey material may represent 
either a subset of a population (e.g., a sample of plant species at 
randomly selected locations within given ecological zones, to be 
related to climate at the same localities) or the complete popula- 
tion (e.g., a regional register of all reported illnesses during a 
given period that can be related to extreme weather conditions). 
The tools employed in data acquisition include use of govern- 
ment statistical sources, different methods of questionnaire sur- 
vey and biological survey techniques. The types of studies 
reliant on this kind of information include most social impact 
assessments (Farhar-Pilgrim, 1985), studies of perception 
(Whyte, 1985), and studies of biophysical impacts where quanti-

TESTING FHE METHOD 
tative data are lacking (e.g., of village-level drought effects on 
agriculture; Akong’a ef al., 1988; Gadgil et al., 1988). 
Targeted measurement refers to the gathering of unique data 
from experiments where data and knowledge about vital pro- 
cesses or interactions are lacking. This type of measurement is 
especially important in considering the combined effects of 
future changes in climate and other environmental factors, com- 
binations which have never before been observed. In many cases 
these data offer the only opportunity for testing predictive mod- 
els (for example, observations of the effects of enhanced atmo- 
spheric CO, on plant growth). 
Monitoring 1s 
a valuable source of information for climate 
impact asscssment. Consistent and continuous collection of 
important data at selected locations is the only reliable method 
of detecting trends in climate itself, or in its cffects. In most 
cases, impact studies make use of long-term data from other 
sources (e.g., observed climatological data, remotcly-sensed 
data). However, in some projects monitoring may form the cen- 
tral theme of research. In these, 
it is important to consider 
aspects such as site selection, multiple-uses of single sites, design 
of measurements and their analysis. It should be noted that there 
are numerous national and international monitoring pro- 
grammes, including one initiated by the IPCC (WG 
II). 
It is 
important that results from such programmes be made available 
to impact researchers for assessment studies. 
Impact assessments are often hampered by the failure to 
assemble appropriate data for a given task. This can be due to 
many causes, including a failure to locate where data arc held, 
bureaucratic delays in the release of data, particularly across 
national boundaries, and the high cost of obtaining some types 
of information. This problem is particularly relevant in devel- 
oping countries. 
Whcere existing data are concemed, government offices often 
hold valuable data for impact assessment, although the custodians 
of such data may not be aware of its special relevance. In many 
cases, data held by the central statistical office of a country is often 
limited in its subject matter and regional coverage, and researchers 
may need to access data archived in departmental or regional 
offices. In some cases, national or regional data may be more eas- 
ily accessible from international organizations, The UNEP GEMS 
‘Harmonization of Environmental Monitoring’ disk is a useful 
guide to data banks held by various organizations. Some impor- 
tant international sources of data are listed in Appendix 4. Other 
potentially valuable sources of longitudinal data are in private 
organizations such as ornithological or botanical societies. 
The quality of data should always be checked, both in terms 
of its level of accuracy and its consistency over time. Measuring 
equipment may deteriorate or be replaced and observation pro- 
cedures or sites often change over time, requiring corrections to 
maintain consistency. 
5.3 Model Testing 
The testing of predictive models is, arguably, the most critical 
stage of an impact assessment. Most studies rely almost exclu- 
sively on the use of models to estimate future impacts. Thus, it 
is crucial for the credibility of the research that model perfor- 
mance is tested as rigorously as possible. Standard procedures 
should be used to evaluate models, but these may need to be 
modified to accommodate climate change. Two main proce- 
dures are recommended—validation and sensitivity analysis— 
and these should always precede more formal impact assessment. 
Validation involves the comparison of model predictions 
15 
with real world observations to test model performance. The 
validation procedures adopted depend to some extent on the 
type of model being tested. For example, the validity of a simple 
regression model of the relationship between tempcrature and 
grass yield should necessarily be tested on data from additional 
ycars not used in the regression. Here, the success of the model 
is judged by its outputs, namely the ability to predict grass yield. 
Conversely, 
a process-based model might estimate grass yield 
based on basic growth processes, which are affected by climate, 
including temperature. Here, the different internal components 
of the model (such as plant development and watcr use) as well 
as final yield each need to be compared with measurements. 
One problem often encountered in applying process-based 
models in less developed countries (LDCs) 
is that the models, 
while extensively validated in the data-rich developed world, are 
found to be ill-suited or poorly calibrated for use under the dif- 
ferent conditions often experienced in LDCs. A lack or paucity 
of data for validation may mean that a data-demanding model 
cannot be used under these circumstances and that 2 model less 
dependent on detailed data may be more appropriate. 
Climate change introduces some additional problems for 
validation, since there may be little local data that can be used to 
test the behaviour of a modelled system in conditions resem- 
bling those in the future. Process-based models ought, in theory, 
to be widely applicable (see Section 4.2.1), and anyway should 
be tested in a range of environments. There are fewer grounds, 
however, for extrapolating the relationships in empirical-statisti- 
cal models or in most economic models outside the range of 
condition for which they were devcloped. The use of regional 
analogies of future climate is one possible method of addressing 
certain aspects of this problem (see Section 4.3.4). 
Sensitivity analysis evaluates the effects on model performance 
of altering the model’s structure, pararneter values, or values of its 
input variables. Extending these principles to climatic change 
requires that the climatic input variables to a model be altered sys- 
tematically to represent the range of climatic conditions likely to 
occur in a region. In this way, information can be obtained on: 
@ 
The sensitivity of the outputs to changes in the inputs. This 
can be instructive, for example, in assessing the confidence 
limits surrounding model cstimates arising from uncertainties 
in the parameter values (e.g., see Buck et al., forthcoming). 
Model robustness, (i.e., the ability of the model to bchave 
realistically under different input specifications, and the cir- 
cumstances under which it may behave unrealistically). 
The full range of potential model application (including its 
transferability from one climatic region to another, and the 
range of climatic inputs that can be accommodated). 
Sensitivity analysis, which is 
a model testing procedure, 
should be distinguished from the use of synthetic scenarios (cf. 
Section 6.5.1), which explicitly seeks to explore system 
behaviour under given variations in climate. For a useful intro- 
duction to sensitivity analysis in ecological modelling see 
Swartzman and Kaluzny, 1987. 
It 
is worth noting here that while predictive models offer 
the most promising means of obtaining estimates of possible 
future impacts of climate change, in some sectors these are not 
yet sufficiently developed to be used for this purpose. Where 
the systems are complex and/or poorly understood (e.g., marine 
ecosystems), considerable efforts are still required to obtain an 
understanding even of variations in the present-day system. 
Only after such basic research is completed can meaningful pro- 
jections be made in the future.

_ IPCC TECIINICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
STEP 4: SELECTING 
THE SCENARIOS 
Impacts are estimated as the differences between two states: the 
environmental and socio-economic conditions expected to exist 
over the period of analysis in the absence of climate change and 
those expected to exist with climate change. Each of these states 
is described by a scenario, which can be defined as 
‘a coherent, 
internally consistent and plausible description of a possible future 
state of the world’. 
In this section, aspects of the selection and construction of 
scenarios for use in climate impact assessment are outlined. At the 
outset, it is important to recognize that the environment, society, 
and cconomy are not static. Environmental, societal, and eco- 
nomic changes will continue, even in the absence of climate 
change. In order to estimate the environmental and socio-cco- 
nomic effects of climate change, it is necessary to separate them 
from unrelated, independent environmental and socio-economic 
changes occurring in the study area. Thus, there is a need first to 
develop baselines that describe current climatological, environ- 
mental, and socio-economic conditions. It is then possible to pro- 
ject environmental and socio-economic conditions over the study 
period in the absence of climate change. Projections should take 
into account, as far as 
is possible, autonomous adjustments (cf. 
Section 8.2) which are likely to occur in response to changes in 
these conditions (Frederick ef al., 1994). The resulting baseline 
conditions are then compared, after impact projections, with 
cnvironmental and socio-economic conditions under climate 
change. Thus development of baselines representing current and 
projected conditions in the absence of climate change is a key and 
fundamental step in assessment. 
An interesting alternative to scenario projections is the ‘nor- 
mative’ reference scenario. This describes 
a desired future, and 
can be related to issues such as development targets and self-suf- 
ficiency goals. Such scenarios also portray a target condition to 
strive for under a changing climate. 
It is worth noting here that there are assessments which may 
not explicitly require a scenario component, it being sufficient 
that system sensitivities arc explored without making any 
assumptions about future climate. Examples of such assessments 
might include model-based studies where extrapolation of 
model relationships to future climatic conditions cannot be justi- 
fied, and where only an indication of the likely direction of sys- 
tem response to climate change is required. In addition, reliance 
on climatic scenarios may actually be misleading or inappropn- 
ate if, for example, the projected climate changes are non-criti- 
cal for the system being studied. 
6.1 Establishing the Present Situation 
In order to provide reference points for the present-day with 
which to compare future projections, three types of ‘baseline’ 
conditions need to be specified: the climatological, environmen- 
tal and socio-economic baselines. 
6.1.1 
Climatological baseline 
The climatological baseline is usually selected according to the 
following criteria: 
@ 
Representativeness of the present-day or recent average cli- 
mate in the study region. 
@ 
Of a sufficient duration to encompass 
a range of climatic 
16 
variations, including a number of significant weather anoma- 
lics (e.g., severe droughts or cool seasons). Such events are 
of particular use as inputs to impact models, providing a 
means to evaluate the impacts of the extreme range of cli- 
matic variability experienced at the present-day. 
@ 
Covering a period for which data on all major climatological 
variables are abundant, adequately distributed and readily 
available. 
. 
@ 
Including data of sufficient quality for use in evaluating 
impacts. 
@ 
Consistent or readily comparable with baseline climatologies 
used in other impact assessments. 
A popular climatological baseline 
is 
a 30-year ‘normal’ 
period as defined by the World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO). The current standard WMO normal period is 1961- 
1990. While it would be desirable to provide some consistency 
between impact studies by recommending this as an appropriate 
baseline period to select in future assessments, there are also dif- 
ficulties in doing so. 
A number of points illustrate this. 
First, 
this period coincides conveniently with the start of the projec- 
tion period commonly employed in estimating future global 
climate (for example, the IPCC projections begin at 1990; 
IPCC, 1990a). On the other hand, most genera! circulation 
models providing regional estimates of climate are initialized 
using observational data sets taken from earlicr periods. Second, 
the availability of observed climatological data, particularly 
computer-coded daily data, varies considerably from country to 
country, thus influencing the practical sclection of a baseline 
period. Third, 
it is often desirable to compare future impacts 
with the current rather than some past condition. However, 
while it can justifiably be assumed in some studies that present- 
day human or natural systems subject to possible future climate 
change are reasonably well adapted to the current climate, in 
other assessments this is not a valid assumption (e.g., many eco- 
logical systems have a lag in response of many decades or more 
relative to climate). Finally, there 
is the problem that more 
recent averaging periods (particularly those that include the 
1980s), may already exhibit a significant global warming ‘sig- 
nal’, although this signal is likely to vary considerably between 
regions, being absent from some. 
Climatological data from the baseline period are used as 
inputs for impact models. Some models produce estimates for 
years or decades (e.g., crop growth models). These can generally 
utilize the original climatological station data for years within 
the baseline period. Other models run over long time periods of 
multiple decades or centuries (e.g., soil erosion models). One 
option here is to select a long baseline period, but lack of data 
usually precludes this. An alternative is to use the baseline data 
on a repeating basis. For example, year 1 in a thirty year baseline 
could be used as years 1, 31, 61 and 91 of a one hundred year 
simulation. One problem with this method is that chance trends 
or cycles in the baseline climate are then repeated in a manner 
that may be unrealistic over the long term. 
To overcome some of the problems of data sparsity and of 
long-term cycles, some modelling studies now employ weather 
generators. These simulate daily weather at a site randomly, based 
on the statistical features of the observed climate. Once developed,

SELECTING THE SCENARIOS 
they can produce time scrics of climatological data having the 
same statistical description as the baseline climate, but extending 
for as long a period 
as 
is required (see Hutchinson, 1987). 
However, many weather generators are unable to represent 
extreme events such as drought realistically, which can be a critical 
drawback in assessing impacts. 
6.1.2 Environmental baseline 
The environmental baseline refers to the present state of 
non-climatic environmental factors that affect the exposure 
unit. It can be defined in terms of fixed or variable quantities. A 
fixed baseline is often used to describe the average state of an 
environmental attribute at a particular point in time. Examples 
include: mean atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide in a 
given year, physiographic features, mean soil pH at a 
site, or 
location of natural wetlands. A notable case is the mean sea 
level, which is expected to change as a result of future climate 
change. Furthermore, 
a fixed baseline 
is especially useful for 
specifying the ‘control’ in ficld experiments (e.g., of CO, effects 
on plant growth), 
A representation of variability in the baseline may be 
required for considering the spatial and temporal fluctuations of 
environmental factors and their interactions with climate. Por 
example, in studies of the effects of ozone and climate on plant 
growth, it is important to have information both on the mean 
and on peak concentrations of ozone under present conditions. 
6.1.3 Socio-economic baseline 
The socio-economic baseline describes the present state of all the 
non-environmental factors that influence the exposure unit. The 
factors may be geographical (e.g., land use, communications), 
technological (e.g., pollution control, crop cultivation, water 
regulation), managerial (e.g., forest rotation, fertilizer use), leg- 
islative 
(e.g., water use quotas, air quality standards), economic 
(e.g., commodity prices, labour costs), social (e.g., population, 
diet), or political (e.g., land set-aside, land tenure). All of these 
are liable to change in the future, so it is important that baseline 
conditions of the most relevant factors are noted, even if they are 
not required directly in impact experiments. 
6.2 Time Frame of Projections 
A critical consideration for conducting impact experiments 
is 
the time horizon over which estimates are to be made. Three 
elements influence the time horizon selected: the limits of pre- 
dictability, the compatibility of projections and whether the 
assessment 1s continuous or considers discrete points in time. 
6.2.1 Limits of predictability 
The time horizon selected depends primarily on the goals of the 
assessment. However, there are obvious limits on the ability to 
project into the future. Since they are a key element of climate 
impact studies, climatic projections define one possible outer 
limit on impact projections. Due to the large uncertainties asso- 
ciated with such long-term projections and to constraints on 
computational resources, most GCM simulations have been 
conducted for periods of up to about 100 years into the future, 
although a few have also been made over longer time periods of 
several centuries. For this reason, the outer horizon commonly 
adopted in impact studies has been 2100. 
Within the context of the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, there is 
a requirement to specify ‘dangerous’ 
levels of GHG concentrations. Such levels, and the climate 
17 
changes associated with them, may not be rcached until after 
2100, so there may be a need for impact assessments over peri- 
ods extending beyond the conventional time horizon of 2100. 
Of course, long time scale projection periods may be wholly 
unrealistic for considering some impacts (e.g., in Many Economic 
assessments where projections may not be reliable for more than 
a few years ahead). On the other hand, if the projection period is 
too short, then the cstirnated changes in climate and their 
impacts may not be easily detectable, making it difficult to evalu- 
ate policy responscs. Caution must be exercised, therefore, in 
ensuring that the projection period is both relevant for policy but 
also valid within the limitations of the approach. 
6.2.2 Compatibility of projections 
It is important to ensure that future climate, environment and 
socio-economic projections are mutually consistent over space 
and time. Many of these are in any case intimately related. For 
instance, changes in greenhouse gas concentrations are related to 
economic activity and resource use, which are themsclves 
a 
function of increasing human population. A common area of 
confusion concerns the relative timing of CO, increase and chi- 
mate change. Thus, 
it should be noted that an equivalent 2 x 
CO, atmosphere, in which the combined effect of CO, and 
other greenhouse gases such as CH,, N,O and tropospheric O, 
on the earth’s radiation balance is equivalent to the cffect of 
doubling CO, alone, does not coincide in time with an atmo- 
sphere in which CO, levels themselves have been doubled. 
Moreover, there is a time lag of several decades in the climate 
response to the radiative forcing (Box 2). Hereafter the terms ‘2 
x CO,’ or ‘doubled-CO,,” imply a radiative forcing cquivalent 
to2x CO, 
This issue is especially important in CO, enrichment experi- 
ments, where the response of a plant is compared for ambient 
and assumed future CO, concentrations. ‘The standard conven- 
tion is to consider a doubling of CO, relative to ambient, but 
the ambient level 
is rising, and experiments conducted in the 
mid-1970s, when the ambient level was near 330 ppm (versus 
660 ppm) are not comparable with experiments conducted in 
the mid-1990s (360 ppm versus 720 ppm). Furthermore, the 
experimental treatments often combinc temperature changes 
with elevated CO,. In this case, projections of regional temper- 
ature change are needed that are contemporaneous with the 
CO, level being used. For this, reference must be made first, to 
global assessments (see Box 2), and then to regional climate 
change scenarios (cf. Section 6.5.3 and Box A2, Appendix). 
It is 
also important to note that enrichment experiments require 
treatments that are sufficiently different from each other to 
induce measurable differences in response. Thus, for example, 
while a feasible and consistent scenario could be developed for 
the year 2020, where CO, increases by about 50 ppm relative to 
ambient and regional temperature increases by 0.5°C, this level 
of change may not produce statistically significant responses in 
enrichment experiments. 
6.2.3 Point in time or continuous assesstnent 
A distinction can be drawn between considering impacts at dis- 
crete points in time in the future and examining continuous or 
time-dependent impacts. The former are characteristic of many 
climate impact assessments based on doubled-CO, scenarios. 
These scenarios have the advantage of being mutually compara- 
ble, and consider impacts occurring at the time specified by the 
scenario climate (although that time is often not easy to define

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX 2 
THE RELATIONSHIP OF EQUILIBRIUM AND 
TRANSIENT WARMING TO INCREASES IN 
CARBON DIOXIDE AND IN EQUIVALENT 
CARBON DIOXIDE 
The figure below 
is based on simulations with the MAG- 
ICC model (see Box 3) of the ‘best estimate’ of global mean 
annual temperature change under the IS92a emissions sce- 
nario produced for the IPCC (IPCC, 1992a), assuming 10 
negative forcing due to sulphate aerosols. It illustrates three 
important points that are a frequent source of confusion and 
misunderstanding among impact analysts: 
(1) The projected doubling dates for atmospheric CO, occur 
at different times depending on the selection of a baseline. 
Climatologists often refer to pre-industrial CO, levels (shown 
in the figure as a concentration of 279 ppmv in the year 1765) 
as 
a baseline to examine effects on climate of subsequent 
CO,-forcing. In contrast, impact assessors are more likely to 
favour selecting a baseline from recent years (e.g., 1990, con- 
centration 355 ppmyv), 
to provide compatibility with other 
baseline environmental or socio-economic conditions of 
importance in impact assessment. 
(2) The projected doubling dates for CO, alone occur sig- 
nificantly later than the doubling dates for equivalent atmo- 
spheric CO,, where all greenhouse gases are considered. 
Hence, the doubling date for 1765 CO, (2060; 558 ppmiv) 
occurs 30 years later than the equivalent doubling date 
(2030). Similarly doubling of 1990 CO, to 710 ppmv 
is 
projected at 2096, whereas equivalent doubling occurs at 
2056. 
(3) The actual or ‘realised’ warming at 
a given time 
in 
response to GHG-forcing (as depicted in transient-response 
GCM simulations) is less than the full equilibrium response 
(as estimated by 2 x CO, GCM simulations), owing to the 
lag effect of the oceans. These effects can be simulated at a 
global scale by MAGICC (curves in figure). Thus, 
at the 
time of equivalenc doubling of 1765 CO, (2030), the equi- 
librium warming relative to 1765 is 2.5°C (point A in fig- 
ure), whilst the realized warming is only 1.8°C (point B). 
Realized warming, AT pe. 
Sr 
~ 
4557 
a 
LK 
4b 
<J 
Wat 
~ 
35F 
Cc 
vw 
3F 
> 
B 
© 
25r 
e 
a 
5 
LSE 
< 
- 
I 
a 
| 
| 
0 
aT 
Lt 
a 
we 
1750 
1800 
'850 
1900 
1950 
2000 
2050 
2100 
18 
and can vary from place to place). However, they ignore any 
effects occurring during the interim period that might influence 
the final impacts. They also make it very difficult to assess rates 
of change and thus to evaluate adaptation strategies. 
In contrast, transient climatic scenarios allow time-depen- 
dent phenomena and dynamic feedback mechanisms to be 
examined and socio-economic adjustments to be considered. 
Nevertheless, in order to present results of impact studies based 
on transient scenarios, 
it 
1s customary to select ‘time slices’ 
at 
key points in ame during the projection period. 
6.3 Projecting Environmental Trends in the Absence of 
Climate Change 
The development of a baseline describing conditions without 
climate change is crucial, for it is chis baseline against which all 
projected impacts are measured. It is highly probable chat fucure 
changes in other environmental factors will occur, even in the 
absence of climate change, which may be of importance for an 
exposure unit. Examples include deforestation, changes in graz- 
ing pressure, changes in groundwater level and changes in air, 
water and soil pollution. Official projections may exist to 
describe trends in some of these 
(e.g., groundwater level), buc 
for others 
it may be necessary to use expert judgement. Most 
factors are related to, and projections should be consistent with 
trends in socio-economic factors 
(see Section 6.4, below). 
Greenhouse gas concentrations may also change, but those 
would usually be linked 
to climate (which 
is assumed 
unchanged here). 
6.4 Projecting Socio-Economic Trends in the Absence of 
Climate Change 
Global climate change 
is projected co occur over time periods 
that are relatively long in socio-economic terms. Over that 
period it is certain that the economy and society will change, 
even in the absence of climate change. One of the most difficult 
aspects of establishing trends in socio-economic conditions 
without climate change over the period of analysis is the fore- 
casting of future demands on resources of interest. Simple 
extrapolation of historical trends without regard for changes in 
prices, technology, or population will often provide an inaccu- 
rate base against which to measure impacts. 
Official projections exist for some of these changes, as they are 
required for planning purposes. These vary in their time horizon 
from several years (e.g., economic growth, unemployment), 
through decades (e.g., urbanization, industrial development, agri- 
cultural production) to 
a century or longer (e.g., population). 
Reputable sources of such projections include the United 
Nations, 
Organization 
of Economic 
Cooperation 
and 
Development, World Bank, International Monetary Fund and 
national governments. Some examples of recent global projections 
are given in Box 3. Nevertheless, many of these are subject to 
large uncertainaes due to polincal decisions (e.g., international 
reguladons with respect to production and trade) or unexpected 
changes in polincal systems (e.g., in the USSR, eastern Europe 
and South Africa dunng the early 1990s). 
Other trends are more difficult to estimate. For example, 
advances in technology are certain to occur, but their nature, um- 
ing and effect are almost impossible to anccipate. In some sectors, 
it is possible to identify trends in past impacts as attributable to the 
effects of technology (e.g., on health, crop yields). In these cases, 
changes in technology can be factored in either by examining past 
crends in resource productivity or by expert judgement consider-

SELECTING THE SCENARIOS 
BOX 3 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC SCENARIOS USED BY THE 
IPCC AND THE DERIVATION OF CONSISTENT 
CLIMATIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCENARIOS 
Six emissions scenarios were prepared for the 1992 IPCC 
Supplementary Report ([S92 a-f) (IPCC, 1992a). These have 
since been reviewed and retained for the 1995 IPCC assess- 
ment. The six scenarios represent 
a range in emissions esti- 
mates based on different assumptions of GNP, population 
growth rate, energy use, Jand use and other socio-economic 
factors that determine emissions levels. The two most impor- 
tant of these ‘socio-economic scenarios’, population and 
GNP, are listed in the Table for 2100, The other assumptions 
and 
a regional breakdown of projections are contained in 
IPCC (1992a). 
A system of simple models named MAGICC (Model for the 
SOCIO-ECONOMIC AND 
TECHNOLOGICAL TRENDS 
Y 
EMISSION SCENARIOS 
(PCC, 1992) 
ATMOSPHERIC 
CONCENTRATION 
RADIATIVE FORCING 
<— 
aerosol forcing 
Assessment of Greenhouse-gas Impacts and Climate Change) 
has been developed 
at 
the Climatic Research Unit, 
University of East Anglia (Hulme 
ef al., 1995a, 
in press) for 
estimating different effects of the IPCC (and other) emissions 
scenarios (see Figure). 
It incorporates all of the important 
state-of-the-art knowledge as reported by the IPCC (IPCC, 
1990a; 1992a), including 
a CO,-fertilization feedback and 
negative forcings due to sulphate aerosols and stratospheric 
ozone depletion. The emissions are converted to atmospheric 
concentrations by gas models, and the concentrations are 
converted into radiative forcing potential for each gas. The 
net radiative forcing is then computed and input into a simple 
upwelling-diffusion energy-balance climate model. This pro- 
duces global estimates of mean annual temperature and fur- 
ther ice melt and thermal expansion models are used to com- 
pute sea level change. The estimates are time-dependent with 
a time horizon up to 2100. Sub-models of MAGICC have 
been widely used by the IPCC, and the system is continually 
being updated to reflect improved scientific knowledge. 
However, it should be noted that an important weakness of 
MAGICC 
is its inability to account for regionally-specific 
processes such as stratospheric ozone depletion and sulphate 
forcing, which are highly dependent on complex atmospheric 
chemistry. 
A number of environmental scenarios that have been gener- 
ated by MAGICC for each of the six IPCC emissions scenar- 
ios are also shown in the Table: che atmospheric concentra- 
tion of CO,, global mean annual temperature change (by 
2100) assuming the mid-range climate sensitivity, and global 
sea level rise (middle, upper and lower estimates). Note that 
GaeBAL FARA 
MAGICC has also been employed, in conjunction with gen- 
Chenave rence 
= 
TEMPERATURE CHANGE 
eral circulation models, to derive more detailed climate sce- 
{ 
narios based on emissions scenario I$92a to assist in the 1995 
Thema expansion mode 
mansveriaacike 
IPCC Working Group II review of impacts of climate change 
Bret 
(cf. Appendix 1, Box A2). 
1990 
Scenario for 2100 
Names of IPCC Scenarios 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92c 
IS92d 
IS92e 
| 
IS92F 
Population (billion)! 
5.252 
113 
113 
64 
64 
13 
| 
176 
Economic growth rate (annual GNP)! 
: 
2.3% 
2.3% 
1.2% 
2.0% 
3.0% 
| 
23% 
] 
CO, concentration (ppmv)? 
355 
733 
710 
485 
568 
986 
848 
Global mean annual temperature 
0 
| 
247 
2.40 
153 
191 
294 
| 
292 
change (°C)23 
| 
= 
= 
— 
—t 
— 
_—. 
T 
~ 
Range (°C),24 
- 
| 1.62-3.75 
| 1.57-3.66 
| 0.97-2.44 
| 1.23-2.99 
| |.89-4.26 | |1.93-4.40 
Sea level rise (cm)23 
0 
45 
| 
4S 
33 
«| 
38 
50 
S| 
Range (cm)2° 
- 
| 
14—85 
| 
(3-85 
7-68 
| 
10-76 
| 7-92 
17-95 
' Leggett et al (1992). 
* Based on ‘best estimate’ assumptions given in Wigley and Raper (1992) with CO, fertilization feedback included, but using an 
updated version of MAGICC (May 1993) giving different values from those reported by Wigley and Raper. 
* Assumes a mid-range climate sensitivity of 
25°C (cf. Section 6.5.3). 
4 Values for low (1.5°C) and high (4.5°C) climate sensitivity. 
> Subjective 10% and 90% confidence levels. 
19 

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX 4 
CASE STUDY: AN INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT OF 
IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON THE 
AGRICULTURAL ECONOMY IN EGYPT 
Background: agriculture in Egypt is restricted to the fertile 
lands of the narrow Nile valley from Aswan to Cairo andl the 
flac Nile Delta north of Cairo. Together this compnises only 3 
per cent of the country’s land area. Egypt’s entire agricultural 
water supply comes from irrigation, solely from the Nile 
River. 
In 1990, agriculture (crops and livestock) accounted 
for 17 per cent of Egypt’s gross domestic product. 
Problem: the study sought to assess the potential impact of a 
change in climate and sea level on Egypt’s agncultural sector, 
accounting for changes in land area, water resources, crop 
production and world agricultural trade. The aim was not to 
predict Egype’s future under a changed climate, but rather to 
examine the combined effects on agriculture of different nat- 
ural factors and the adaptability of the economic system. 
Methods: the assessment was part of an international study of 
climate change impacts on world food supply and trade 
(Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994), fonning one component of 
a 
coordinated international programme of climate change impact 
studies (Strzepek and Smith, in press). 
A number of submodels 
were used to estimate the different sectoral impacts of climate 
change (see Figure). A digital elevation model of the Nile Delta 
was developed for determining land loss due to sea level rise. A 
physically-based water balance model of the Nile Basin was 
used to evaluate river runoff. This was linked to a simulation 
model of the High Aswan dam complex to determine inypacts 
on Lake Nasser yields. Process-based agronomic models (incor~ 
porating direct effects of elevated CO,) were used to estimate 
crop yields and crop water requirements, and cropping patterns 
under different climatic scenarios were determined using the 
Egyptian food supply and trade model, one component of an 
international food trade model, the Basic Linked System (BLS), 
which was run at a global level. 
Results from the BLS and other submodels were then taken 
directly, or aggregated using expert judgement, to provide 
inputs 
to an Egyptian Agricultural Sector Model (EASM- 
CC). This is an integrated model of the agricultural economy 
incorporating effects on water, land, crops, livestock and 
labour. One ourput of the model is the annual consumer-pro- 
ducer surplus, an economic measure of social welfare. 
Testing of methods: each of the submodels used in the study was 
validated against local data. Further, an elaborate comparative 
climate scenanos 
Oy, 
temperature, 
temperature, 
precipitation 
precipitation 
; 
crop yield 
agronomic 
Nile runoff 
crop water use 
crop yield 
water 
supply 
Basic Linked | agricultural inputs 
a 
system 
prices, demand 
A 
(world, Egypt) 
INTEGRATED 
population, 
ASSESSMENT 
economic growth 
a 
population 
agriculture 
land Jost 
population, economics 
sea-level nse 
analysis was undertaken to select an appropriate hydrological 
model from a number of candidate models. Each of the linked 
national or regional models in the BLS has been tested in its 
region of ongin, while the complete model was initialised with 
1980 data from the Food and Agriculture Organization and run 
through to 1990, model parameters being tuned for the 1980s 
period to obtain the ‘best fit’ for 1990. 
Scenarios: the current baseline adopted for the socio-economic 
projections was 1990 and the climatological baseline, 1951- 
1980. The tume horizon of the study, 1990-2060, was largely 
dictated by the climate change projections. Socioeconomic 
scenarios for a future world in 2060 were developed for pop- 
ulation (estimated from UN/World Bank projections to more 
than double, assuming current growth rates) and economic 
growth (based upon growth rates assumed in the world tood 
supply and trade study). 
The climatic scenarios were based on three equilibrium 2 x 
CO, GCM experiments (each displaying results close to the 
continued .., 
ing specific technologies that are on the horizon and their proba- 
ble adoption rates, or by a combination of these. 
6.5 
Projecting Future Climate 
In order to conduct experiments to assess the impacts of climate 
change, it is first necessary to obtain a quantitative representation 
of the changes in climate themselves. No method yet exists of 
providing confident predictions of future climate. Instead, 
ic 
is 
customary to specify 
a number of plausible fucure climates. 
These are termed ‘climatic scenarios’, and they are selected 
co 
provide information that is: 
20 
Straightforward to obtain and/or derive. 
Sufficiently detailed for use in regional impact assessment. 
Siniple to interpret and apply by different researchers. 
Representauve of the range of uncertaincy of predictions. 
Spatially compatible, such that changes 
in one region are 
physically consistent with those in another region and with 
global changes. 
@ 
Mutually consistent, comprising combinations of changes in 
different variables (which are often correlated with each 
other) that are physically plausible. 
Several cypes of climatic scenario have been used in previ-

SELECTING THE SCENARIOS 
. continued 
upper end of the 1.5-4.5°C range of global mean annual tem- 
perature projections given by the IPCC) and a fourth ‘low- 
end’ scenario (in the middle of this range), based on transient 
mode] outputs. Each scenario comprised values of mean 
monthly changes in temperature, precipitation and solar radia- 
tion. Values from the appropriate GCM grid box were applied 
as adjustments to local daily or monthly climatological obser- 
vations for the baseline period. The scenarios were assumed to 
apply in 2060, and to coincide with a CO, level of 555 ppmv, 
broadly similar to the IPCC IS92a projection (cf. Box 2). 
Sea level nse associated with changing temperatures was esti- 
mated to be 37 cm between 1990 and 2060. This estimate is 
derived from 
a one metre global sea level mse by 2100, the 
same 
scenario 
as 
that 
used 
in 
the IPCC Common 
Methodology (IPCC, 1991b; cf. Box 6) but at che high end 
of recent estimates (see Box 3). This was added to a predicted 
38 cm subsidence of the Nile Delta, giving a relative sea level 
rise of 75 cm by 2060. 
Impacts: impacts were estimated as the difference between 
simulations for 2060 without climate change, based on pro- 
jections of population, economic growth, agricultural pro- 
duction, commodity demand, land and water resources and 
water use (Base 2060), and simulations with changed climate 
according to the four climatic scenanios. 
The Table provides a summary of the impacts of the four sce- 
nario climates on each sector together with the integrated 
impacts on economic welfare (the consumer-producer sur- 
Table. A companison of sectoral with integrated impacts for the four climatic scenarios (per cent change from 2060 Base results). 
plus). The agricultural water productivity index is an aggregate 
measure of impacts on agriculture: total agricultural produc- 
tion (tonnes) divided by total agricultural water use (cubic 
metres). The results illustrate how impacts on individual sec- 
tors are affected by impacts on other sectors. For example, 
under the GISS scenario, despite an 18 per cent increase in 
water resources, the 
5 per cent loss of land and 
13 per cent 
reduction in agricultural water productivity leads to 
a 6 per 
cent reduction in economic welfare. The results also demon- 
strate how individual sectoral assessments may give a mislead- 
ing view of the overall impact, which is better reflected in the 
integrated analysis. For instance, under the ‘low-end’ scenario, 
while sectoral impacts are mainly positive, the integrated 
impact is actually a 10 per cent decline in economic welfare. 
This 
is because the rest of the world performs better than 
Egypt under this scenario, Egypt loses some of its competitive 
advantage for exports and thus the trade balance declines. 
Adaptive responses: adaptations in water resources (major river 
diversion schemes), irrigation (improved water delivery sys- 
tems), agriculture (altered crop varieties and crop manage- 
ment) and coastal protection against sea level rise were 
all 
tested for the UKMO scenano. They achieve a modest 7-8 
per cent increase in agricultural sector performance compared 
to no adaptation, but together would be extremely expensive 
to implement. However, investment in improving irngation 
efficiency appears to be 
a robust, ‘no regrets’ policy that 
would be beneficial whether or not the climate changes. 
Source: Strzepek and Smith (in press) 
Sectoral impacts 
Integrated impact 
"Climatic 
Land 
| 
Food 
| 
Agricultural water 
Water 
Consumer-producer 
scenario 
area 
demand 
| 
productivity index 
resources 
surplus 
UKMO! 
s 
3 
| 
45 
“13 
23 
— 
 Giss 
s 
| 
-13 
es: 
~6 
GFDL? 
ee 
| 
36 
-78 
52 
‘Low-end' 
| 
5 
0 
| 
+10 
| 
+14 
—10 
2 
3 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies model (Hansen er ci, 1983) 
i 
United Kingdom Meteorological Office mode! (Wilson and Mitchell, 1987) 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory mode! (Manabe and Weinerald, 
| 987) 
ous impact studies. These fall inco three main classes: synthetic 
scenarios, analogue scenarios and scenarios from general circu- 
lation models. 
6.5.1 
Synthetic scenarios 
Synthetic scenarios describe techniques where particular chimatic 
elements are changed by a 
realistic but arbitrary amount (often 
according to 
a qualitative interpretation of climate mode] pre- 
dictions for a region). Adjustments might include, for example, 
changes 
in mean annual temperature of + 
1, 
2, 3°C, 
etc. 
or 
changes in annual precipitation of +5, 10, 15 per cent, etc. rela- 
21 
tive co the baseline climate. Adjustments can be made indepen- 
dently or in combination. 
Given their arbitrary nature, these are not scenarios jn 
the 
strict sense, but they do offer useful tools for exploring system 
sensitivity in impacc assessments. 
In particular, synthetic scenar- 
jos can be used to obtain valuable infonnation on: 
The sensitivity of the exposure unit co climate change, which 
can be expressed, for example, as a percentage change in response 
per unit change in climate relative to the baseline (see Box 5). 
Thresholds or discontinuities of response that might occur 
under a given magnicude or rate of change. These may represent

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX 5 
SENSITIVITY STUDIES AND RESPONSE 
SURFACES 
One of the problems with adopting any single climatic sce- 
nario is that it represents only one of an infinite number of 
plausible future conditions. Even the more common practice 
of specifying a range of scenarios is limited in that first, the 
range may be modified in the hight of new knowledge and 
second, the full range of projections for one variable may not 
coincide with the full range for another. Thirdly the number 
of scenarios used may not allow the identification of critical 
thresholds and non-linearities in the response of an exposure 
unit to changing climate. This latter point is especially perti- 
nent with respect to the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change, which requires that levels of ‘dangerous’ climate 
change be identified. 
One method of embracing a range of future climates is to 
develop response surfaces that depict (usually in two or 
three dimensions) the response of an exposure unit to all 
relevance and plausible combinations of climatic forcings. 
There are numerous derived variables of practical impox- 
tance such as soil moisture, runoff, frost frequency, accu- 
mulated temperature or flood frequency and return peri- 
ods, that depend in 
a non-linear fashion on more funda- 
mental climatological variables such as temperature, precip- 
itation, cloud cover and windspeed (Pittock, 1993). 
The figure shows 
a response surface for snowcover dura- 
tion, 
as simulated by an impact model, 
as 
a function of 
changes in temperature and precipitation for a location near 
Falls Creek in Victoria, Australia (Whetton 
ef al., 1992), 
The ‘+’ symbol marks the duration for the present climate 
(no change) and the rectangle represents durations possible 
for a range of future climates given in regional scenarios 
produced for 2030. 
Clearly, alternative climate change scenarios (e.g., for more 
distant tume horizons, or representing updated knowledge) 
can readily be applied to a plot of this kind. Moreover, the 
response surface clearly indicates those combinations of 
temperature and precipitation change that would be 
required to produce 
a given (perhaps critical) response 
(e.g., 
a critical threshold of snow duration below which 
investment in snow removal equipment for transportation 
could not be economically justified). 
temperature change (°C) 
2 
—! 
“80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20-10 
O 
[0 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
precipitation change (%) 
22 
levels of change above which the nacure of the response alters 
(e.g., warming may promoce plant growth, buc very high tem- 
peratures cause heat stress), or responses which have 
a critical 
Impact on the system (e.g., windspeeds above which structural 
damage may occur to buildings). 
Tolerable climate change, which refers to the magnitude or rate of 
climate change that 
a modelled system can tolerate without major 
disruptive effects (sometimes termed the ‘critica) load’). This type 
of measure is potenually of value for policy, as ic can assist in defin- 
ing specific goals or targets for liminng furure climate change (cf. 
Section 8.3.2). 
6.5.2 Analogue scenarios 
Analogue scenarios are constructed by identifying recorded cli- 
matic regimes which may serve as analogues for che future cli- 
mate in 
a given region. These records can be obtained either 
from the past (temporal analogues), or from another region 
ac 
the present (spatial analogues). 
Temporal analogues are of two types: palaeoclimatic analogues 
based on information from the geological record, and instrumen- 
tally-based analogues selected from the historical observational 
record, usually wichin che past century. Both have been used to 
identify periods when che global (or hemispheric) temperatures 
have been warmer than chey are today. Other features of the ch- 
mate during these warn periods (e.g., precipitation, air pressure, 
windspeed), if available, are then combined wich che temperature 
pattern to define the scenario climate. Palaeoclimatic analogues are 
based on reconstructions of past chmate from fossil evidence such 
as plant or animal remains and sedimentary deposits. Three penods 
have received particular attention: the Mid-Holocene (5-6000 
years Before Present), the Last (Eemian) Interglacial (125,000 BP) 
and the Phocene (3—4 million BP) 
(e.g., see Budyko, 1989). 
Instrumentally-based analogues idennfy past periods of observed 
global-scale warmth as an analogue of 
a GHG-induced wanner 
world. Maps are constructed of the differences in regional temper- 
ature (and other vanables) during these periods relative either to 
long term averages, Or to similarly identified cold periods (e.g., see 
Lough 
et al., 1983). The main problem with both these types of 
analogue concerns the physical mechanisms and boundary condi- 
vions giving mse co the warmer climate. Aspects of these were 
almost certainly different in che past from those involved in green- 
house gas induced warming. 
Nevertheless, there may be value in idencifying weather 
anomalies from the historical record that can have significant 
short-term impacts (such as droughts, floods and cold spells). A 
change in future climate could mean a change in the frequency of 
such events. For example, several studies have used the dry 1930s 
penod wy central North America as an analogue of possible future 
conditions (Warrick, 1984; Williams 
er al., 1988; Rosenberg, 
1993). Another important anomaly in many regions is the E] 
Nino phenomenon. Changes in the frequency of this event could 
have significant impacts in many sectors. An extension of this idea 
is to select ‘planning scenarios’ (Parry and Carter, 1988), repre- 
senung not the most extreme events, but events having 
a suffi- 
cient impact and frequency to be of concem (for example, a 1-in- 
10 year drought event) or consecutive events, whose combined 
effect may be greater than the sum of individual anomalies. 
Spatial analogues require the identification of regions today 
having a climate analogous to the study region in the future (for 
an example, see Section 4.3.4). This approach 
is severely 
restricted, however, by the frequent lack of correspondence 
between other non-climatic features of two regions that may be

SELECTING THE SCENARIOS 
important for 
a given impact sector (e.g., day length, terrain, 
soils or economic development). 
Given these weaknesses, the use of analogue scenarios to rep- 
resent future climate is not generally recommended (IPCC, 1990a, 
p. xxv), although there may be certain applications where they can 
be used in conjunction with physically-based predictions. Some 
examples of these are given in Appendix 
I. 
6.5.3 Scenarios from general circulation models 
Three dimensional numerical models of the global climate system 
(including atmosphere, oceans, biosphere and cryosphere) are the 
only credible tools currently available for simulating the physical pro- 
cesses that deterrmne global climate. Although simpler models have 
also been used to simulate the radiaave effects of increasing green- 
house gas concentauons, only general circulaton models, possibly in 
conjyuncuon with nested regional models (see Appendix 1), have the 
potenual co provide consistent and physically consistent esamates of 
regional chmate change, which are required in impact analysis. 
General Circulation Models (GCMs) produce estimates of cli- 
matic variables for a regular network of grid points across the 
globe. Results from about 20 GCMs have been reported to date 
(e.g., see IPCC, 1990a and 1992a). However, these estimates are 
uncertain because of some important weaknesses of GCMs. 
These include: 
e 
e 
Poor model representation of cloud processes. 
A coarse spatial resolution 
(at best employing gnd cells of 
some 200 km honzontal dimension in model runs for which 
outputs are widely available to impact analysis). 
Generalized topography, disregarding some locally important 
features. 
BOX 6 
CASE STUDY: EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
ON COASTAL ENVIRONMENTS OF THE 
MARSHALL ISLANDS 
Problem: tor many low-lying coastal areas of the world, the 
effects of accelerated sea level rise (ASLR) associated with global 
cliniate change may result in catastrophic impacts in the absence 
of adaptive response strategies. Even in the absence of clirnate 
change, however, the combined pressures of growth and devel- 
opment will require organized adaptive response strategies to 
cope with an increased vulnerability of populations and 
economies to storms, storm surges and erosion. The Republic 
of the Marshall Islands consists of 34 atolls and islands in the 
Pacific Ocean with majonty elevations below 2-3 metres above 
mean sea level. A vulnerability analysis case study for Majuro 
Atoll was conducted to provide a first order assessment of the 
potenual consequences of ASLR during the next century. 
Method: the study followed a common methodology outlined 
by IPCC (1991b). That methodology follows, in some 
respects, the general framework identified by the seven steps 
described in these Guidelines. However, 
it did not examine 
the comparison between future projections ‘with’ and ‘with- 
out’ climate change. Moreover, the socioeconomic impacts 
of the policy options were not considered explicitly. The 
study was concerned only with the effects of ASLR (inunda- 
tion, flooding, groundwater supplies), leaving the integration 
of frequency and intensity of extreme events, changes in cur- 
rents and tides, increased temperature and changes in rainfall 
patterns for the future, when regional models can simulate 
such changes. 
Testing of method: the study included a multi-disciplinary team 
made up of in-country experts, regional assistance from the 
South Pacific Regional Environment Programme and a con- 
sulting firm which conducted oceanographic/engineering 
studies. The methodology proved very useful in identifying 
potential impacts to atolls and adaptation responses. Reliance 
on existing information and lack of other information placed 
some limitations on the study, but qualitative data obtained 
during the study permitted meaningful extrapolations. 
Scenarios: ASLR of 1.0 m by the year 2100 was used to assess 
the worst case impact to shoreline communities. Three sce- 
nario cases were considered 
{as specified by the Common 
Methodology): 
(1) ASLR=0 for zero sea level 
rise, 
(2) 
ASLR=1 for 0.3m (1.0 ft.) rise, and (3) ASLR=3.3 for a 
1 m 
(3.3 ft.) rise. Subsidence/uplift or regional variability were 
not taken into account due 
to lack of information. The 
effects were considered for both the ocean and lagoon side of 
the atoll and for four major study areas representing most 
environmental conditions of the atoll nation. 
Impacts: the potential effects of ASLR include: (1) an approxi- 
mate 10-30 per cent shoreline retreat with a dry land loss of 
160 acres out of 500 acres on the most densely populated part 
of the atoll; (2) 
a significant increase in severe flooding by 
wave runup and overtopping with ASLR=3.3 resulting in 
flooding of half of the atoll from even normal yearly runup 
events; (3) flood frequency increases dramatically; (4) a reduc- 
tion of the freshwater lens area which is important during 
drought periods; (5) a potential cost of protecting a relatively 
small portion of the Marshall Islands of more than four times 
the current GDP, 
(6) 
a loss of arable land resulting in 
increased reliance on imported foods. 
Policy options: the study considered, though did not formally 
evaluate, the options of protection (including structural con- 
siderations), accommodation (including land elevation and 
adaptive economic activities for flooded areas), 
a retreat 
strategy to the highest elevations on the atoll. and 
a no- 
response strategy (including 
a continuation of ad hoc and 
crisis response measures currently used to address flooding 
problems). The major recommendations included the need 
to develop and implement integrated coastal zone manage- 
ment, which would incorporate ASLR response planning 
and begin the process of developing a baseline of under- 
standing of the natural and human systems likely to be 
affected by climate change. 
Source: Hotthus et al. (1992) 
23

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
® 
Problems in the parameterization of sub-grid scale atmo- 
spheric processes such as convection and soil hydrology. 
A simplified representation of land~atmosphere and ocean- 
atmosphere intcractions. 
As a result, GCM outputs, though physically plausible, often 
fail to reproduce even the seasonal pattern of present-day cli- 
mate observed at a regional scale. This naturally casts some 
doubt on the ability of GCMs to provide accurate estimates of 
future regional climate. Thus GCM outputs should be treated, 
at best, as broad-scale sets of possible future climatic conditions 
and should not be regarded as predictions. 
GCMs have been used to conduct two types of experiment 
for estimating future climate: equilibrium-response and 
transient-response experiments. 
Equilibriurn-vesponse experiments: the majority of experiments 
have been conducted to evaluate the equilibrium response of 
the global climate to an abrupt increase (commonly, a doubling) 
of atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide. Clearly, such a 
step change in atmospheric composition is unrealistic, as 
increases in GHG concentrations (including CO,) are occurring 
continuously, and are unlikely to stabilize in the foreseeable 
future. Moreover, since different parts of the global climate sys- 
tem have different thermal inertias, they will approach equilib- 
riam at different rates and may nevcr approximate the compos- 
ite equilibrium condition modelled in these simulations. 
A measure that is widely used in the intercomparison of var- 
ious GCMs, is the climate sensitivity parameter. This is defined 
as the global mean equilibrium surface air temperature change 
that occurs in response to an cquivalent doubling of the atmo- 
spheric CO, concentration. Valucs of the parameter obtained 
from climate model simulations generally fall in the range 
1.5—4.5°C (IPCC, 1992a). Knowledge of the climate sensitivity 
can be useful in constructing climate change scenarios from 
GCMs (see Appendix 1). 
Transient-response experiments. Recent work has focused on 
fashioning more realistic experiments with GCMs, specifically, 
simulations of the transient-response of climate to GHG-induced 
forcing. The early simulations of this kind considered the transient 
response of climate to an instantaneous equivalent doubling of 
CO,—so-called ‘switch-on’ experiments. More recently, simula~ 
tions have been made of the climate response to a time-dependent 
increase in greenhouse gases (IPCC, 1990a; 1992a). Transient 
simulations offer several advantages over equilibrium -response 
experiments. First, in the recent experiments, the specifications of 
the atmospheric perturbation are more realistic, involving a con- 
tinuous, time dependent, change in GHG concentrations. Second, 
the representation of the oceans is more realistic, more recent sim- 
ulations coupling atmospheric models to dynamical ocean models. 
Third, transient simulations provide information on the rate as 
well as the magnitude of climate change, which is of considerable 
value for impact studies. Fourth, the most recent transient simula- 
tions have also discriminated between the climatic effects of 
regional sulphate aerosol loading (a negative forcing) and global 
GHG forcing (Taylor and Penner, 1994). 
The interpretation of transient simulations is complicated, 
however, by two important problems associated with the cou- 
pling of atmospheric and ocean models. First, the models com- 
monly exhibit drift in the control simulation, such that the 
global mean temperature at the end of the simulation deviates 
from that at the start. This may be an expression of natural cli- 
matic variability, or a result of poor initialization of the ocean 
model or errors in the coupling of the ocean and atmosphere 
24 
models. Second, transient simulations exhibit the so-called ‘cold 
start’ problem (Hasselmann ef al., 1993). This refers to the 
assumption that the climate is in equilibrium at the start of a 
simulation, with GHG concentrations representative of condi- 
tions in recent decades. However, this is not the case, as there 
has been a considerable build-up of GHGs since pre-industrial 
times, and the recent climate is certainly not in equilibrium. 
Thus, for the first few decades of a simulation, global warming is 
strongly inhibited by the inertia of the ocean-atmosphere sys- 
tem. One result of this is that it becomes very difficult to assign 
calendar dates to the climate changes simulated, because 
although the timing of GHG forcing is consistent with projec- 
tions, the timing of the climate response 
is not. 
A method of 
constructing transient climatic scenarios that sidesteps this prob- 
lem is Ulustrated in Appendix 1 (Box A2). 
Ongoing work is attempting to address the cold start problem, 
by simulating the climate response to GHG concentrations during 
the past century. This type of simulation has the useful additional 
feature of allowing comparisons to be made between the mod- 
elled behaviour of the climate and the climate actually observed 
during the instrumental period. 
Additional problems with transient simulations include the 
inability of carrent ocean models adequately to resolve bound- 
ary currents and deep convection, and their poor performance 
in reproducing the El Nifio/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
phenomenon, 
Information from GCMs. The following types of information are 
available from GCMs for constructing scenarios: 
@ 
Outputs from a ‘control’ simulation, which assumes recent 
GHG concentrations, and an ‘experiment’ which assumes 
future concentrations. In the case of equilibrium-response 
experiments, these are values from multiple-year model sim- 
ulations for the control and 2 x CO, equilibrium conditions. 
Transient-response experiments provide values for the con- 
trol equilibrium conditions and for each year of the transient 
model run (e.g., 1990 to 2100). 
Values of surface or near~surface climatic variables for model 
grid boxes characteristically spaced at intervals of several 
hundred kilometers around the globe. 
Values of air temperature, precipitation (mean daily rate) and 
cloud cover, which are commonly supplied for use in impact 
studies. Data on radiation, windspeed, vapour pressure and 
other variables are also available from some models. 
Data averaged over a monthly time period. However, daily 
or hourly values of certain climatic variables, from which the 
monthly statistics were derived, may also be stored for a 
number of years within the full simulation periods. 
Some alternative procedures for constructing regional cli- 
matic scenarios from GCM information are detailed in 
Appendix 1. 
6.6 Projecting Environmental Trends with Climate 
Change 
Projections must be made for each of the environmental variables 
or characteristics of interest in the study and included in the 
description of environmental trends in the absence of climate 
change. These projections are made using the climate projections 
and the biophysical models selected for the study (as described in 
Section 4.2.1). Because all changes in environmental conditions 
not due to climate factors should already have been incorporated 
in the development of the environmental trends in the absence

SELECTING THE SCENARIOS 
of climate change, the only changes in the trends to be incorpo- 
rated here are those due solely to climate change. 
Future changes in climate can be expected to modify some 
of the environmental trends outlined in Section 
6.3. 
Furthermore, there are likely to be a set of additional environ- 
mental changes that are directly related to the changes in climate 
themselves. The two factors most commonly required in assess- 
ments are greenhouse gas concentrations and sea level rise. 
Projections of greenhouse gas concentrations are important 
for assessing effects first, on radiative forcing of the climate, sec- 
ond, on depletion of stratospheric ozone (e.g., CFCs) and third, 
on plant response (e.g., CO, and tropospheric ozone). In apply- 
ing them, however, they should be consistent with the pro- 
jected climate changes (see Section 6.2.2, above). Scenarios for 
CO, concentrations are given in Box 3. 
Sea level rise is one of the major impacts projected under 
global warming. Global factors such as the rate of warming, expan- 
sion of sea water, and melting of ice sheets and glaciers all con- 
tribute to this effect (see Box 3). However, local conditions such as 
coastal land subsidence or isostatic uplift should also be taken into 
account in considering the extent of sea level changes and their 
regional impacts. In most assessrnents, the vulnerability of a study 
region to the effects of sea level rise will be apparent (e.g., in low 
lying coastal zones; see Box 6). Less obvious are some inland loca~ 
tions which may also be affected (for example, through sea water 
incursion into groundwater). The magnitude of future sea level 
rise 
is still under discussion, but the estimates given in Box 3 
(which are consistent with the other changes shown in the Box) 
may serve as a useful basis for constructing scenarios, 
Other factors that are directly affected by climate include 
river flow, runoff, soil characteristics, erosion and water quality. 
Projections of these often require full impact assessments of their 
own, or could be included as interactive components within an 
integrated assessment framework (see Section 4.2.3). 
6.7 Projecting Socio-economic Trends with Climate 
Change 
The changes in environmental conditions that are attributable 
solely to climate change serve as inputs to economic models that 
project the changes in socio-economic conditions due to climate 
change over the study period. All other changes in socio-eco- 
nomic conditions over the period of analysis are attributable to 
non-climatic factors and should have been included in the estima- 
tion of socio-economic changes in the absence of climate change. 
Socio-economic factors that influence the exposure unit may 
themselves be sensitive to climate change, so the effects of climate 
should be included in projections of those. In some cases this may 
not be feasible (e.g., it is not known how climate change might 
affect population growth) and trends estimated in the absence of 
climate change would probably suffice (see Section 6.4). In other 
cases, projections can be adjusted to accommodate possible effects 
of climate (for example, there are quantifiable effects on human 
health of the interaction between local climate and atmospheric 
pollution and toxic waste disposal in many urban areas, the causes 
of which are closely associated with emissions and bi-products of 
fossil fuel combustion.). 
There are also many human responses to climate change that 
are predictable enough to be factored-in to future projections. 
These are often accounted for in model stimulations as feedbacks 
or ‘autonomous adjustments’ to climate change and are consid- 
ered in Section 8.2. 
A final factor to consider in projecting socio-economic 
25 
trends under a changing climate is the effect that various policies 
designed to mitigate climate change might themselves have on 
the future state of the economy and society. For example, 
polices to reduce fossil fuel consumption through higher energy 
prices might alter the pattern of economic activity, thus modify- 
ing the possible impacts of any remaining (unmitigated) changes 
in climate that occur.

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
STEP 5: ASSESSMENT 
OF IMPACTS 
Impacts are estumated as the differences over the study period 
between the environmental and socio-economic conditions 
projected to exist without climate change (the furure baseline), 
and those that are projected with climate change. This defini- 
tion can be extended to include consideration of adaptation in 
the estimation of impacts with climate change. Up 
to now, 
few climate impact studies have paid adequate attention to 
adaptation. Further, many studies have assumed 
a fixed base- 
line, often failing to recognize that conditions in the future 
will be quice different from those at present, even 
in the 
absence of climate change. In practice, however, construction 
of the future baseline is often fraught with difficuldes relating 
to the projection of highly uncertain socio-economic and 
environmental scenarios 
(cf. Section 6), and a fixed baseline at 
least offers 
a ready reference for sensitivity testing. Moreover, 
there are certain impact studies, particularly those involving 
biophysical systems, chat are fully justified in using 
a fixed 
baseline (e.g., hydrological studies of pristine river catch- 
ments). These different approaches to impact assessment are 
illustrated in Box 7. 
BOX 7 
DIFFERING APPROACHES TO THE ASSESSMENT 
OF IMPACTS 
The three figures illustrate schematically how differing 
degrees of realism in assessing impacts result from alternative 
assumptions about the baseline and from consideration of var- 
ious types of adapration. 
In Figure (a), impacts in the year 
2050 (I,) are portrayed as the cumulative effects of future cli- 
mate change on an exposure unit, assuming a fixed baseline 
(i.e., no concomitant changes in the environmental, techno- 
logical, societal and economic conditions relative to the pre- 
sent). This unrealistic, though readily applicable representa- 
tion of the future 
is characteristic of many early climate 
impact assessments. 
Figure (b) shows how more realism is introduced if impacts of 
future climate change are evaluated relative to a future base- 
line without climate change. The impact relative to the future 
baseline may be greater or, as ts shown in Figure (b), less than 
the impact relative to the fixed baseline (I,). 
However, this approach still ignores the many adjustments 
and adaptations that would occur either in expectation of or 
in response to impacts of climate change. These are shown in 
Figure (c), which distinguishes between two types of adapta- 
tion: autonomous adjustment, which 
is implemented imume- 
diately (often unconsciously) as part of the normal package of 
measures available to organisms or systems for coping with 
climatic variability; and deliberate adaptation, which involves 
conscious actions to mitigate or exploit the effects of climate 
change. In most cases (as in Figure (c)), the objective of adap- 
tation is to reduce the negative impacts of climate change (I, 
and I,, respectively), 
(a) Impacts of climate change relative to a fixed baseline 
Impact 
| 
fixed baseline 
| 
1990 
2050 
2100 
(b) Impacts of climate change relative to a future baseline 
Impact 
a 
oo 
ure pase 
] 
1990 
2050 
2100 
(c) Impacts of climate change relative to a future baseline 
following adaptation 
Impact 
1990 
2050 

ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS 
The evaluation of results obtained in an assessment is likely to 
be influenced in part by the approach employed, and in part by 
the required outputs from the research. Some of the more com- 
monly applied techniques of evaluation are described below. 
7.1 
Qualitative Description 
An evaluation may rely solely on qualitative or serni-quantita- 
tive assessments, in which case qualitative description 
is the 
common method of presenting the findings. The success of 
such evaluations usually rests on the experience and interpreta- 
tive skills of the analyst, particularly concerning projections of 
possible future impacts of climate (see, for example, Box 8). 
The disadvantages of subjectivity in this have co be weighed 
against the ability to consider all factors thought to be of impor- 
tance (something that is noc always possible using more objec- 
tive methods such as modelling). 
BOX 8 
CASE STUDY: HEALTH IMPACTS OF 
ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES IN HONDURAS 
Background: 
in the past two decades the landscape of 
Honduras, 
a mountainous, tropical nation in Central America 
with 5.5 million inhabitants, has been transformed through 
overgrazing, monoculture agriculture and deforestation. 
In 
the southern region, soil dessication and erosion caused by 
intensive agriculture has altered the hydrological cycle, and 
mean temperatures have risen. Deforestation in central and 
northern Honduras has affected water basins and water avail- 
ability. These meteorological and ecological changes have 
already affected the distribution of vector-borne diseases. 
Problem: to examine the role of climate in influencing the dis- 
tribution, abundance and transmission of vector-borne dis- 
eases (VBDs) in Honduras. 
Method: the assessment was qualitative, based on expert 
judgement. 
Testing of method: the method involved the empirical compila- 
tion of available data on recent trends in climate, land use, 
pesticide use, population density and prevalence of VBDs, 
and their geographical and temporal integration. 
Scenarios: the study considered qualitative scenarios of climatic 
warming along with increased climatic instability, including 
more frequent droughts and floods, and all trends that are 
already being observed. Short term trends in other environ- 
mental and socio-economic factors were also examined in 
evaluating potential health risks. 
Impacts: attention was paid to the current status and trends in 
a number of common VBDs, which act both directly and 
indirectly on humans. 
Malaria: in southern Honduras, changes in land use and sub- 
sequent soil dessication and erosion during the past two 
decades have disrupted the hydrological cycle, leading to 
a 
recorded increase in median annual temperature in the order 
of 5-10°C between the early 1970s and late 1980s. This 
temperature increase has rendered the region too hot for 
anopheline mosquitoes, and the incidence of malaria has 
fallen. However, the concomitant aridification of the region 
has forced people to move away to the cities, plantations and 
assembly farms further north. Large areas of north-east tropi- 
cal rainforest have been cleared, and migrants concentrated 
there tend to be non-immune to malaria. The indiscriminate 
use of pesticides in banana, pineapple and melon plantations 
has led to widespread anopheline resistance. In 1987, 20,000 
cases of malaria were registered 
in Honduras; 
in 
1993, 
90,000 cases were recorded, of which 85 per cent were in 
northern regions. 
Chagas’ disease: “Kissing bugs’ (Rhodnius prolixis and Triatoma 
dimitata) are the chief vectors of Chagas’ disease, and opos- 
sums, rats, armadillos, cats and dogs are among its reservoirs. 
Massive environmental changes such as deforestation, have 
altered all components in the life cycle and, deprived of habi- 
tat, sustenance and blood meals, reservoirs and bugs alike 
move to peri-urban areas. Chagas’ (a chief cause of heart dis- 
ease) is expected to increase under higher temperatures due to 
a shortening of insect generation time, the stimulation of 
blood meal seeking and an increasing frequency of active par- 
asites, all of which amplify vector abundance and transmission. 
Other VBDs: Dengue fever is increasing as Aedes spp. breed~ 
ing sites swell in peri-urban areas. The advance of Ae aegypti 
(another vector whose maturation and generation are acceler- 
ated by warmth), plus the spread of the cold-hardy Ae albopic- 
tus, are increasing concern throughout Latin America, and 
yellow fever is in resurgence. 
Indirect effects through nutrition: the common bean (Phaseolus 
vulgans) 
is the principal source of protein in the diet of the 
poor in Latin Amenca. Whitefly (Bemisia tabaci) has recently 
emerged as 
a serious vector of geminiviruses, including the 
bean golden mosaic geminivirus (BGMV) which has devas- 
tated bean crops in some years. Whitefly outbreaks have been 
exacerbated in recent years by frequent and severe droughts. 
Over 60 per cent of Honduran children under 10 years are 
malnourished, and the loss of the staple crops to vector- 
borne plant pathogens further stunts growth and develop- 
ment, reduces immunity and increases the burden of com- 
municable illness. 
Adaptation options: Intervention to control VBDs with insecti- 
cides and medication have time-limited effectiveness, and can 
increase vulnerability by eliminating predators of pests and 
selecting resistant strains. Vaccines in development hold some 
promise. However, anticipatory adjustments and improved 
management of ecosystems (forests, watersheds, mangroves) 
are options that may enhance the resilience to climatic stresses 
and improve resistance against the redistribution of oppor- 
tunistic species. 
Source: Almendares et al., (1993) 
27

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX 9 CROSS IMPACTS ANALYSIS 
Figure I. An 
interaction matrix 
for forest impacts 
(after Martin and 
Lefebvre, 1993) 
Climate Change 
CO, Enrichment 
Forest microclimate 
Pathogens 
Tree growth 
Fire 
Variable Names 
Tree death 
Row sum 
(driving 
power) 
Forest products industry 
Forest area 
Nutnent cycling 
Trace gas emissions 
Chemistry 
Fisheries 
Recreation 
Economics 
Climate Change 
—~| 
Wildlife 
8 
CO? Ennchment 
in 
Forest microclimate 
~1~]~] 
Aquatic ecosystems 
Fire 
| 
| 
Pathogens 
| 
Tree birth 
‘Tree growth 
{ 
| 
Tree death 
| 
| 
Forest area 
| 
Nutnent cycling 
| 
| 
Trace gas emissions 
Chemistry 
Aquatic ecosystems 
| 
I 
Wildlife 
| 
| 
Forest products industry 
! 
Fishenes 
Recreation 
| 
| 
Economics 
DID] 
|] BIH pre] 
By] — | HM ]oj cy byw) 
Column sum (dependency) 
10 
10 
5 
—— 
5 
Cross impacts analysis (Holling, 1978) is 
a method of high- 
lighting and classifying the relationships between key ele- 
ments of a system. 
It entails identifying the pertinent vari- 
ables of the system, and entering these into an interaction 
matrix, which represents the relationships between the dif- 
ferent variables. If one variable exerts a direct influence on 
the other variable, an entry is made in the appropmiate cell of 
the matrix. The entry can simply indicate presence or 
absence of an influence (a special case of cross impacts analy- 
sis termed structural analysis), or it can be assigned a quanti- 
tative weight to indicate the strength of the influence. 
Additionally, some measure of uncertainty in the relation- 
ship may also be given (e.g., see Clark, 1986). By summing 
the cell values by rows and columns, a measure is obtained 
of the driving power or influence of a variable (row sums) 
and dependency of a variable (column sums). 
An example of a cross impacts (structural) analysis for 
impacts of climate change on forests is given in Figure 
I 
(Martin and Lefebvre, 1993). Only the presence or absence 
of an influence are indicated. For example, climate change is 
shown to influence forest microclimate, fire, tree birth, tree 
growth, tree death, aquatic ecosystems, wildlife and recre- 
ation: 
a total driving power (row sum) of 8. Similarly, 
pathogens are influenced by forest microclimate and fire, 
giving a total dependency (column sum) of 2. 
Variables can now be categorized into four types: autonomous 
variables (weak drivers and weakly dependent), result variables 
(weak drivers and strongly dependent), relay variables (strong 
drivers and strongly dependent) and forcing variables (strong 
drivers and weakly dependent). These can readily be distin- 
guished by plotting the row and column totals on a dnving 
power/dependency graph (Figure II). In this example, forest 
microclimate appears to be more of a forcing variable than cli- 
mate change from the standpoint of the forest. Moreover, by 
these criteria, tree growth and tree death should constitute 
good indicators of climate change and could be usefully moni- 
tored to determine the future of the forest. 
WS 
LH 
“WW 
“an 
WN we change 
A\. 
forest area» 
OO, ennchment 
15 
e tree death 
» tree growth 
« nutnent 
cycling 
e wildlife 
recreauion 
Driving power 
Uy 
LLM} 
Yr wee My 
“ Chemisty 
fe 
r 
See ay oducts 
in 
e OA, 
e fishenes 
e trace gas eee, 
s ML, 
Z KL. 
r 
0 
ee 
0 
E | 
Relay 
yy br 
10 
Dependency i) 
KZ 
ROS 
Result 
Autonomous 
5 
1S 
DI 
Forcing 
Figure II. Outcomes of the forest impacts structural 
analysis (after Martin and Lefebvre, 1993) 
28 

ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS 
BOX 10 
COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 
Cost-benefit analysis has the specific objective of evaluat- 
ing an anticipated decision or range of decision responses. 
For example, 
in considering the costs and benefits of an 
adaptation strategy, 
a cost-benefit analysis might seek to 
evaluate a question facing a decision maker: ‘Do the bene- 
fits of a given level of adaptation outweigh the costs of its 
implementation?’ The benefits of this action are the 
avoided damages (i.e., costs) 
of impacts of climate change 
(evaluated, for instance, using models of the type described 
in Section 4.2.2), 
The problem can be illustrated in 
a simple diagram (see 
figure). 
In the upper graph, the degree of adaptation 
is 
expressed as two lines: one representing the costs of adap- 
tation and the other the benefits (avoided costs) accruing 
from this action. Both lines show increases with increasing 
levels of adaptation, but the growth in costs accelerates, 
while the growth in benefits diminishes. Characteristically, 
the costs of minimal adaptation are small while the bene- 
fits are high (e.g., at point A), but as the level of adapta- 
tion increases, so the additional or marginal costs increase, 
while the marginal benefits decline. These are the slopes 
of the two lines in the upper graph, plotted as straight 
lines in the lower graph. Economic analysis generally con- 
cludes that the optimal result is where the marginal cost 
and marginal benefit of the change are equal (point B on 
the graph). To the left of point B further action is benefi- 
cial, because the additional (marginal) benefits secured 
exceed the additional (marginal) costs. Further adaptation 
beyond point B produces an unfavourable cost-benefit 
ratio (e.g., at point C) and is therefore not justified. 
Cost 
Cc 
O 
é 
i) 
‘ 
Beneftt 
am 
1 
% 
) 
7 
SG 
i 
a 
1 
t 
cop 
1 
wf 
1 
= 
re) 
U 
' 
A 
B 
Cc 
Degree of 
adapation 
Marginal cost 
a 
4 
4 
a 
L 
1 
' 
é 
Marginal Benefit 
Siope of cost/benefit curve 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
' 
1 
1 
4 
4 
1 
1 
fl 
1 
F 
L 
L 
' 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
Dezree cf 
adapazion 
29 
A more formal method of organizing qualitative information 
on impacts of climate change, cross impacts analysis, 
is illustrated 
in Box 9. 
7.2 Indicators of Change 
A potentially useful method of evaluating both the impacts of 
climate change and the changes themselves 
is to focus on 
regions, Orgamisins or activities that are mmerinsically sensitive to 
climate. For example, climate change might affect the alticude at 
which certain temperature-limited vector-borne diseases are 
found, and high altitude sites 
in Kenya, Rwanda, Costa Rica 
and Argentina have been suggested as potential toci for moni- 
toring both of the vectors themselves, and of the populations at 
risk (Haines et al., 1993). Similarly, changes in plane behaviour 
may indicate that certain critical thresholds of temperature 
change have been approached or exceeded. 
For instance, an 
increasing frequency of events where plants fail to flower may 
suggest that the chilling (vernalization) requirements of the plant 
have not been fulfilled. Another example 
is low-lying coastal 
zones 
at risk from inundation due to msing sea level, and che 
vulnerable populations located in such regions. 
7.3. Compliance to Standards 
Some impacts may be characterized by the ability to meet cer- 
tain standards which have been enforced by law. The standards 
thus provide 
a reference or an objective against which to mea- 
sure the impacts of climate change. For example, the effect of 
climate change on water quality could be gauged by reference 
to current water quality standards. 
7.4 Costs and Benefits 
Perhaps che most valuable resulcs thac can be provided to policy 
makers by impact assessments are those which express impacts as 
potential costs or benefits. Methods of evaluating chese range 
from formal economic techniques such as cost-benefit analysis to 
descriptive or qualitative assessments. 
Cost-benefit analysis 
is often employed 
co assess the most 
efficient allocation of resources (see Box 
10). This 
is achieved 
through che balancing or optimization of various costs and ben- 
efits anticipated in undertaking a new project or implementing a 
new policy, accounting for the reallocation of resources likely to 
be broughe about by external influences such as climate change. 
The approach makes explicit che expectation that 
a change 
in 
resource allocation 
is likely co yield benefits 
as well 
as costs, 
a 
useful counterpoint to many climate nnpact studies, where neg- 
ative impacts have tended to receive the greatest attention. 
Whatever measures are employed to assess costs and benefits, 
they should employ a common metric. Thus, for example, where 
monetary values are ascribed, this should be calculated in terms of 
nec present value, ie. the discounted sum of fucure costs and ben- 
efits. The choice of discount rate used to calculate present value 
will vary from nanon to nanon depending on factors such as the 
level of economic development, debt stock and social provision. 
Moreover, the depreciation of capital assets with ame, which also 
varies from country to country, should be explicitly considered in 
the calculanons. 
Formal cost-benefit analysis proceeds on the basis of apply- 
ing a single money metric for costs and benefits as far as is pos- 
sible and credible. In the context of global warming, the rele- 
vant costs are the costs of mitigation and adapration. These will 
tend 
to be expressed 
in terms of markered resources such 
as 
labour and capital costs. The benefits of mitigation and adapta-

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX 11 CASE STUDY: EFFECTS OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE ON NATURAL TERRESTRIAL 
ECOSYSTEMS IN NORWAY 
Problem: the objectives of this assessment were to examine the 
probable patterns of ecological change in Norway undler a 
changed climate regime, with a particular emphasis on identi- 
fying plant species and communities sensitive 
to or 
at risk 
from climate change. 
Methods: in part descriptive, based on expert judgement, and 
in part using correlative models of species distribution. All 
methods examined the potential impacts of climate change as 
defined in a specific climatic scenario for Norway. 
Testing of methods/sensitivity: correlative models are based on 
the spatial coincidence of vegetation species and climatic vari- 
ables under present-day climate. They are very simple to 
apply, but have the disadvantage that they do not provide an 
ecophysiological explanation of the observed plant distribu- 
tions, although they usually represent hypotheses about which 
factors contro] or limit those distributions. The models can 
really only be tested against palaeoecological evidence of plant 
distributions from previous cool or warm periods, where the 
contemporary climatic information 
is derived from indepen- 
dent sources (e.g., insect evidence). 
Scenarios: 
a seasonal scenario for an equivalent doubling of 
CO, was used, based on 
a subjective composite of results 
from several GCMs for the Norwegian region. 
Impacts: the effects of climate change on species distribution 
were estimated using a narrow west-east transect through cen- 
tral Norway, giving alticude on the vertical axis and distance 
from the Atlantic coast on the horizontal axis. Dashed boxes 
indicate variations in altitude at site locations within the tran- 
sect. Figures A and B 
illustrate the sensitivity of two species: 
Campanula uniflora (a rare alpine and continental species) and 
Hypericum pulchrum (a frost sensitive coastal species) to the cli- 
mate changes described by the scenario. Solid squares indicate 
the current and shaded squares the predicted distribution of a 
species. The analysis suggests that rare northern or Alpine 
species may be threatened by extinction (Figure A), both due 
to shifts in climate and to changes in snow cover and runoff. 
Temperate and oceanic zone species would be favoured under 
the changed climatic regime (Figure B), but their colonization 
could be delayed by anthropogenic or natural barriers. 
A. Campanula uniflora 
Li. 
_L: 
U 
fA 
1S00 
LIL 
oe ee ee 
ee 
1000 
ppt 
pt i} 
b+ 
hl 
{—}_- 
— ee oe ae oe 
++ 
ane 
500 
LItttittttrrrirrrir 
| 
| 
125 km 
inland 
Oo 
j=) 
Sal 
j=) 
coast 
B. Hypericum pulchrum 
Coo 
nd 
g 
°mpettitirrrttrritririr 
wad mm |} 
Ly 
— 
[ 
1 
| 
| 
| 
! 
| 
pp} +} 
| 
s 
| 
125 km 
inland 
oS 
50 
1 
im 
ie) 
wy 
4 
Source: Holten and Carey (1992) 
tion are expressed 
in terms of avoided warming damages. 
In 
turn, chese damages may show up in terms of market values— 
lost crops, forest damage etc., and in non-market values 
changes in human health, changes in amenity and biodiversity, 
for example. As 
far as what counts in assessing damages, 
the 
distinction between market and non-market values is 1mmate- 
rial: boch contnbute 
to human well-being, which 
is che ulti- 
mate yardstick of cost-benefit assessments. 
In practice, both 
types of value raise complex issues. Market values may noc, for 
example, represent the true value of resources to a given econ- 
omy, ¢.g., 
in the presence of taxes or subsidies or if environ- 
mental costs are neglected. 
In this case, they have to be 
adjusted to secure their ‘shadow’ values which measure the cost 
of the damage to society as 
a whole. Non-market values have 
to be elicited by direct and indirect methods such as contingent 
valuation, hedonic property and wage models, travel cost mea- 
sures, etc. The resulting estimates should, like shadow market 
values, reflect the underlying willingness of individuals to pay 
for the commodity, asset or service that is at risk. 
There 
is extensive economic Jiterature on both 
che 
methodologies for valuing non-market damages, and on empir- 
ical estimates (for an overview, see Pearce, 1993). 
30 
7.5 Geographical Analysis 
One common feature of the different approaches to climate impact 
assessment is that they all have a geographical dimension. Climate 
and its impacts vary over space, and this pattem of variation 
is 
hkely to change as the climate changes. These aspeces are of crucial 
importance for policy makers operating at regional, national or 
intemational scale, because changes in resource patterns may affect 
regional equity, with consequent implications for planning. 
Thus the geographical analysis of climate changes and their 
impacts, where results are presented as maps, has received grow- 
ing attention in recent years. This trend has been paralleled by 
the rapid development of computer-based geographical infor- 
mation systems (GIS), which can be used co store, analyse, 
merge and depict spatial information. 
The applications of GIS in climate impact analysis include: 
Depicting pattems of climate (past, present or projected). 
Using simple indices to evaluate the present-day regional 
potential for different activities based on climate and other 
environmenta) factors (e.g., crop suitability, energy 
demand, recreation, water resources). The indices can then 
be compared with observed patterns of each activity as 
a 
validation test.

ASSESSMENT OF IMPACTS 
@ 
Mapping changes in the pattern of potential induced by a 
given change in climate. In this way the extent and rate of 
shift in zones of potential can be evaluated for 
a given 
change in climate. 
Identifying regions of particular sensitivity and vulnerability 
to climate, which may merit more detailed examination (for 
example, regions wherc, on the basis of the map analysis, 
it 
may be possible, under a changed climate, to introduce new 
crop species). 
Considering impacts on different activities within the same 
geographical region, so as to provide a compatible framework 
for comparison and evaluation (e.g., to consider the likely 
competing pressures on Jand use from agriculture, recreation, 
conservation and forestry under a changed climate). 
A simple ecological example is given in Box 11. As computer 
power improves, the feasibility of conducting detailed modelling 
studies at a regional scale has been enhanced. The main constraint 
is on the availability of detailed data over large areas, but sophisti- 
cated statistical interpolation techniques and the application of 
stochastic weather generators to provide artificial climatological 
data at a high time resolution, may offer partial solutions. 
7.6 Dealing with Uncertainty 
Uncertainties pervade all levels of a climate impact assessment, 
including the projection of future GHG emissions, atmospheric 
GHG concentrations, changes in climate, future socio-economic 
conditions, potential impacts of climate change and the evalua- 
tion of adjustments. There are two methods which attempt to 
account for these uncertainties: uncertainty analysis and risk 
analysis. 
7.6.1 
Uncertainty analysis 
Uncertainty analysis comprises a set of techniques for anticipat- 
ing and preparing for the impacts of uncertain future events. It is 
used here to describe an analysis of the range of uncertainties 
encountered in an assessment study. These arise from two 
sources, here referred to as ‘errors’ and ‘unknowns’. 
Errors may arise from several sources, including measure- 
ment error, paucity of data and inadequate parameterization or 
assumptions. Unknowns include alternative scenarios, or the 
omission of important explanatory variables. The maximum 
range of uncertainty is the product of the individual uncertain- 
ties. The upper and lower bounds of these may be highly 
improbable, so more useful alternatives are confidence limits 
(e.g., 5 or 95 percentiles), which can be computed by studying 
the probability of uncertainties propagating, using methods such 
as Monte Carlo analysis (for energy and GHG emissions exam- 
ples, see Edmonds et al., 1986 and de Vries 
et al., 1994; for 
a 
health impacts example, see Martens et al., 1994; for an agricul- 
tural example, see Brklacich and Smit, 1992). These percentiles 
are often used as upper and lower estimates of an outcome, with 
the mean or median outcome used as the ‘best’ or ‘central’ esti- 
mate. The quantification of uncertainty arising from inadequate 
parameterizations or assumptions is more problematic, however, 
as probabilities cannot readily be assigned to different choices. 
7.6.2 Risk analysis 
Risk analysis deals with uncertainty in terms of the risk of 
impact. Risk is defined as the product of the probability of an 
event and its effect on an exposure unit. It has been argued that 
future changes in average climate are likely to be accompanied 
by a change in the frequency of extreme or anomalous events, 
31 
and it is these that are likely to cause the most significant 
impacts (Parry, 1990). Thus there is value in focusing on the 
changing risk of climatic extremes and of their impacts. This 
approach can then be helpful in assessing the potential risk of 
impact relative to predefined levels of acceptable or tolerable 
risk. 
I¢ is important to stress, however, that while occurrence 
probabilities of hypothetical climatic cvents are relatively 
straightforward to compute, it is not generally possible to ascribe 
any degree of confidence to probabilities of future impacts. 
In those disciplines that inherently deal with probabilities, 
frequencies and statistical information to characterize natural 
hazards (floods, storms, waves, earthquakes, streamflow) and 
design critcria for control structures, the application of risk and 
uncertainty analysis 
is 
a central feature of decision-making. 
Extensions of commonly used methods that have evolved for 
dealing with historical climatic variability can be employed for 
climate change impact studies, especially in the important areas 
of hydrology, water management and shore protection (Stakhiv 
et al., 1991; 1993). 
Another form of risk analysis—decision analysis—is used to 
evaluate response strategies to climate change. It can be used to 
assign likelihoods to different climatic scenarios, identifying 
those response strategies that would provide the flexibility, at 
the least cost (minimizing expected annual damages), that best 
ameliorates the anticipated range of impacts (for a water 
resources example, see Fiering and Rogers, 1989). 
A method for evaluating responses to rare and extreme 
hydrological events—multiobjective risk partitioning—has been 
developed by Haimes and Li (1991), which combines both risk 
and uncertainty of individual events with a decision tree frame- 
work, in order to identify solutions that best accommodate the 
range of uncertainty.

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
STEPS 6 AND 7: ASSESSMENT OF AUTONOMOUS 
ADJUSTMENTS AND EVALUATION OF 
ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
Impact expeniments are usually conducted to evaluate the effects 
of climate change on an exposure unit in the absence of any 
responses which might modify these effects. Two broad types of 
response can be identified: mmtigation and adaptation (Figure 5). 
8.1 Mitigation and Adaptation 
Mitigation or ‘limitation’ attempts co deal with che causes of cli- 
mate change. 
It achieves this through actions that prevent or 
retard the increase of atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) con- 
centrations, by limiting current and future emissions from 
sources of GHGs (e.g., fossil fuel combustion, intensive agricul- 
ture) and enhancing potentia) sinks for GHGs (e.g., forests, 
oceans). In recent years there has been a heavy focus on mitiga- 
hon as 
a major strategy for coping with the greenhouse prob- 
Jem. However, it seems likely that realistic policies of mitigation 
will be unable fully to prevent climate changes, and that altema- 
tive adaptive measures are needed. 
Adaptation 
is concerned with responses to both the adverse 
and positive effects of climate change. 
[t refers to any adjust- 
ment, whether passive, reactive or anticipatory, that can respond 
to anticipated or actual consequences associated with clinnace 
change. Many policies of adaptation make good sense 
in any 
case, since present-day climatic variability 
(in the form of 
extreme climatic events such 
as droughts and floods) already 
causes significant damage 
in different parts of the world. 
Adaptation co these events can thus help to reduce damage in 
the short term, regardless of any longer-term changes in climate. 
While mitigation and adaptation are complementary 
responses, 
as both are needed, the evaluation of mitigation 
policies 
is outside the scope of these Guidelines. For more 
information on this coptc, the reader 
is directed to parallel 
Figure 
5. Pathways of response: mitigation and adaptation. 
Black lines indicate direct effects or feedbacks; grey lines depict 
secondary or indirect effects (after Smit, 1993) 
Climate change 
————> 
and 
—_ 
variability 
A 
‘ 
= 
Impacts 
Mitigation 
Adaptation 
Vv 
Responses 
work by Working Group HI of the Intergovernmental Pancl 
on Climate Change. 
Yet the identification and evaluation of adaptanon options 
is 
an essential component of impact assessment. 
In this section, 
a 
basic distinction 
is drawn between system responses to climate 
change that are automadc or built-in (termed auconomous adjust- 
ments), and responses that require deliberate policy decisions, 
descnbed as adaptation strategies. WInle there are some overlaps 
between these nwo types of adaptation, they are allocated separate 
steps in the assessment framework (Figure 4) in recognution of the 
different treatment they usually receive in assessment studies. 
8.2 Assessment of Autonomous Adjustments 
Most ecological, economic or social systems will undergo some 
vatural or spontaneous adjustments in the face of a changing cli- 
mate. These ‘autonomous’ adjustments are likely co occur in 
response both to gradual changes in average climate (which 
themselves may be barely imperceptible relative to background 
climatic variability) 
as well as to more drastic shifts in climate, 
for example, those associated with a change in dominant atmo- 
spheric circulation patterns. What 1s much less certain, however, 
is what forms chese adjustments will take and what costs they 
will incur. Clearly, 
in order to obtain credible estimates of 
impacts, there is 
a need to account for these autonomous adjust- 
ments in the assessment process (Smit, 1993; Rosenberg, 1992). 
Within the broad class of autonomous adjustments it may be 
instructive co distinguish three groups according to their ‘degree 
of sponcaneity’: inbuilc, routine and tactical adjustments. 
8.2.1 
Inbuilt adjustments 
Inbuilt adjustments, someames referred to as physiological adjust- 
ments, are the unconscious or automatic reactions of an exposure 
unit to a climatic perturbation. Some of these are easy to identify 
(for example, the automatic response of a plant to drought condi- 
tions 
is to reduce transpiration water loss by closing its stomata), 
and can be accounted for in models thar describe the system. 
Others are more difficult co detect (for instance, the ability of 
long-lived organisms such as trees to acclimate to a slowly chang- 
ing climate). These may require the implemencation of some con- 
trolled expenments to determine the nature of the adjustment 
mechanisms (for example, by transplanting tree species between 
different climatic regimes to investigate the processes of acclima- 
tion in a changed environment; see Beuker, 1994). 
8.2.2 Routine adjustments 
Routine adjustments refer to everyday, conscious responses to 
variaions in climate that are part of the routine operations of a 
system. For exaruple, as the climate changes, the growing season 
for crop plants would also change, and crop performance might 
be improved by shifting the sowing date. In some crop growth 
models the sowing date is determined by climate (e.g., che start 
of the rainy season or the disappearance of snow cover), so 
it is 
selected automatically to suic the conditions. Here, the model is 
performing internally an adjustment that 
a farmer might do 
instinctively or routinely.

ASSESSMENT OF AUTONOMOUS ADJUSTMENTS AND EVALUATION OF ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
8.2.3 
Tactical adjustments 
Tacncal adjustments imply 
a level of response over and above 
the adjustments that are made routinely in the face of climatic 
vanability. Such adjustments might become necessary following 
a sequence of anomalous climatic events, which indicate 
a shift 
in the chmate. For example, 
a run of years with below-average 
rainfall in 
a semi-arid region may persuade farmers that culuva- 
tion of a drought-resistant crop like sorghum 
is more reliable 
than 
a drought-sensitive crop like maize, in spite of its lower 
yield capacity than maize in favourable conditions. Adjustments 
of this type require a behavioural change, but can snl) be accom- 
modated internally within che system. There are numerous 
examples of assessments that consider these small-scale, low cost 
adjustments (e.g., the MINK study, see Box 13; and a study of 
world food supply, Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994). 
In moving towards 
a more interventionist type of adjust- 
ment, however, the distinction between autonomous adjust- 
ments and adaptation starts to become blurred. For instance, it 1s 
not always a straightforward task to separate out autonomous 
tactical adjustments that are directly related to climate change 
from adjustments that are made to changing external conditions, 
which are themselves an adaptive response to climate change 
(such as government assistance to farmers to cope with adverse 
climatic conditions), The evaluation of these ‘exogenous’ adap- 
tations 1s examined in the following section. 
8.3 
Steps in the Evaluation of an Adaptation Strategy 
In this section, types of adaptation are descnbed and procedures 
presented for identifying, classifying and evaluating available 
options for decision making. For more information on adapta- 
tion strategies, Chapter 6 of the 1990 IPCC Response Strategies 
report (IPCC, 1991a) provides a good overview of the range of 
issues and ideas that should be considered in developing 
a 
coherent approach. Moreover, several countries (including 
Australia, Canada, and the USA) are actively pursuing the 
development of protocols for che assessment of adaptation to 
climate change. 
At present there are no generally accepted procedures for for- 
mulating national and regional policies for adaptation to clirnate 
change, one of the reasons being thac the assessment process 
involves value judgements, which can be both subjective and 
controversial. Nevertheless, formal evaluation procedures do exist 
to address analogous problems as part of the planning process in 
many developed counties. By drawing on the experiences gained 
in formulating those planning guidelines, a broad frarnework for 
the evaluation of adaptation strategies to cope with climate 
change can be identified. As with the general framework for 
assessing climate impacts, the framework for developing adapta- 
tion strategies also compnises seven steps (Figure 6). 
8.3.1 Defining the objectives 
Any analysis of adaptation must be guided by some agreed goals 
and evaluation principles. 
It is noc sufficient merely to state that 
adverse impacts should be avoided, reduced or eliminated. Two 
examples of general goals commonly propounded by interna- 
tional institutions and conventions are: (1) the promouion of sus- 
tainable development, and 
(ii) the reduction of vulnerability. 
However, these are so broad chat they are open to many differ- 
ent interpretations, so specific objectives need to be defined that 
complement the goals. 
Objectives are usually derived either from public invollve- 
ment, from stated public preferences, by legislation, through an 
33 
Figure 6. Development of an adaptation strategy 
| 
DEFINE OBJECTIVES 
f> || 
SPECIFY IMPORTANT CLIMATIC IMPACTS 
3 
IDENTIFY ADAPTATION OPTIONS 
4 
EXAMINE CONSTRAINTS 
5 
QUANTIFY MEASURES/ 
FORMULATE ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES 
é 
WEIGHT OBJECTIVES/ 
EVALUATE TRADE-OFFS 
7 
RECOMMEND ADAPTATION MEASURES 
interpretation of goals such as those descnbed above, 
or any 
combination of these. They represent desired targets which can 
be evaluated using specified critena and constraints. Table 
2 
illuscrates three possible objectives that might be selected to 
achieve each of the two different goals described above, and the 
evaluation cnterna that can be used to measure their success. 
Most of these are quantitative measures (e.g., income, employ- 
ment); others hke biodiversity can be quantified, but not in 
economic terms. 
A common, shared set of evaluanon principles and decision 
rules is an important aspect of analysis. The scientific and techni- 
cal part of the climate impact assessment provides most of the 
information concerning physical effects and direct social and 
economic impacts on the main resource-dependent seccors. The 
options to ameliorate or modify the adverse primary impacts all 
have their own economic, social and environmental benefits and 
costs. 
It is not always apparent what these are, since they differ 
among resource use sectors and the public. 
Virtually 
all forms of cost-benefit analysis follow the basic 
decision rule thac for any action, project, programmie or strategy, 
the benefits must exceed the costs, however they are measured. 
Benefits are measured relative to a sec of desired targets or plan- 
ning objectives, which reflect 
a notion of what needs 
to be 
achieved. Those objectives can further be quantified by conven- 
tional measures of relative worth, termed evaluation criteria 
(e.g., income, employment, change in habicac acreage, popula- 
tion. at nsk, etc.). Constraints may also be part of an evaluation 
framework, defining a set of bounds that are considered accept- 
able (for example, a 100-year return period event or 
a minimum 
habitat size for a species based on per capita water availabiliry).

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
8.3.2 
Specifying the climatic impacts of importance 
This step involves an assessment, following the methods ouc- 
lined elsewhere in this report, of the possible impacts of clirnate 
variability or change on the exposure unit. Where climatic 
events are expected that will cause damage, these need to be 
specified 
in detail so that che most appropriate adaptation 
options can be idenufied. Where beneficial climatic events are 
anticipated, these should be examined, both in their own nght 
and because they may help to compensate for negative effects. 
Details include the magnitude and regional extent of an event, 
its frequency, duration, speed of onset and seasonality (i.e., cim- 
ing during the year). In the case of long-term climate change, 
unpacts should be considered relative co those that would be 
expected to occur in the absence of climatic change. Moreover, 
since there 
is often great scientific uncertaincy attached to pro- 
jections, ic may be useful to express possible changes in terms of 
the probability of their occurrence and/or as changes 
in the 
recurtence frequency of events observed in the historical clima- 
tological record. 
One general approach for identifying the exposure units af 
risk from climate variabilicy 
is vulnerability assessment. 
Vulnerability can be defined as the degree to which an exposure 
unit 
is disrupted or adversely affected 
as 
a result of climatic 
events. 
It follows that vulnerable systems, activities or regions 
are likely to be those most in need of planned adaptation. 
The approach can be illustrated with reference 
to 
a ‘com- 
mon 
methodology’ 
chat 
has 
been 
developed 
for 
the 
nagonal-scale assessment of coastal zone vulnerability to sea level 
nse (IPCC 1991b, 1994; cf. Box 6). One of the main objectives 
of the common methodology 
is to inform national decision 
makers about the vulnerability of the coastal zone, the possible 
problems a country may face due to 
a changing climate and sea 
level and, 
if necessary, the types of assistance that are most 
needed to overcome these problems. The identification of cnti- 
cal levels of vulnerability and cnitical levels of climate change 
is 
likely to be importance in the determination of what constitutes 
‘dangerous’ levels of climate change (a term used in Article 2 of 
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change). A pro- 
posed six step process of determination is outhbned in Figure 7. 
Figure 7. A six step approach to the ultuumate objective of the 
Climate Convention (after Swart and Vellinga, 1994) 
{. Define concept of 
science and 
policy 
7 
| 
2. Determine relationship 
critical fevels 
between climate vanation 
and indicator change 
(dose-effect relationship) 
| 
3. Assess critical levels of 
SCHENCT 
climate change by region 
tf 
4. Compare regional climate 
4a. Climate model X 
change scenanos with 
. 
= 
Scenano run Y 
I 
| 
5. Appreciation of risks 
critical levels 
A 
6, Determine ‘uttimate 
scence end 
objective leves of 
Poiicy 
GHG concentration 
changes 
associated with 
scenanos 
8.3.3 Identifying the adaptation options 
The main task of assessment involves the compilation of a 
detailed lise of possible adaptive responses that might be 
employed to cope with or take advantage of the effects of cli- 
mate. The hst can be compiled by field survey and by interviews 
with relevance experts, and should consider all practices currently 
or previously used, possible alternative strategies that have not 
Table 2. An example of a multiple cateria evaluation framework, in this case, for water resources management (Stakhiv, 1994) 
OVERALL GOAL 
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE 
EVALUATION CRITERIA 
SUSTAINABLE 
| 
| 
Regional economic 
Income 
DEVELOPMENT 
| 
development 
Employment 
2 
Environmental protection 
Biodiversity 
| 
Habitat areas 
Wetland types 
3. 
Equity 
Distribution of employment 
| 
Minonty opportunities 
: 
= 
: 
REDUCE 
| 
Minimize nsk 
Population at nsk 
VULNERABILITY 
| 
Frequency of event 
2 
Minimize economic losses 
Increase institutional response 
Personal losses 
Insured losses 
Public losses 
Warning time 
Evacuation time 

ASSESSMENT OF AUTONOMOUS ADJUSTMENTS AND EVALUATION OF ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
been used, and newly created or invented strategies. Information 
is needed on the frequency with which particular actions are 
taken, in what circumstances and by whom. The effectiveness of 
different actions, their cost and the reasons for their use or oth- 
erwise should also be recorded. 
It 
is useful to noce here that 
there are abundant cases to demonstrate that existing policies 
and practices may actually increase the impacts of present-day 
climatic vanabilicy. For example, agncultural support payments, 
subsidized insurance and damage cooperation payments may 
encourage higher risk caking among farmers and increase che 
total costs to society. These are cases of maladaptation that 
should be identified ac an early stage of assessmenc. This step also 
requires 
a consideration of che hkely impact on adaptation 
surategies of technological change. 
Six genenc types of behavioural adaptation strategy for cop- 
ing with negative effects of climate have been identified by 
Burton et al. (1993): 
@ 
Prevention of loss, involving anticipatory actions to reduce the 
susceptibility of an exposure unit co the impacts of climate 
{e.g., controlled coastal zone retreat to protect wetland 
ecosystems from sea level rise and its related impacts). 
@ 
Tolerating loss, where adverse impacts are accepted in che 
short term because they can be absorbed by the exposure 
ume without long term damage (e.g., a crop mix designed to 
mirunuze the maximum 
loss, to ensure 
a guaranteed mini- 
mum return under the most adverse conditions). 
Spreading or sharing loss, where acuons distnbute the burden 
of impact over 
a larger region or population beyond those 
directly affected by the climatic event (e.g., government dis- 
ascer relief). 
Changing use or activity, involving a switch of acnvity or resource 
use from one that is no longer viable following a climatic per- 
turbation to another that is, so as to preserve a communicy in a 
region (e.g., by employment in public relief works). 
Changing location, where preservation of an activity is consid- 
ered more importance than 
its location, and migration occurs 
to areas that are more suitable under the changed climate 
{e.g., the re-siung of a hydro-electric power utility due to 
a 
change in water availabilicy). 
Restoration, which aims to restore a systexn to its original condi- 
tion following damage or modification due to climate (for 
example, an historical monument suscepuble co flood damage). 
This 
is not scrictly an adaptation to climate, 
as the system 
remains susceptible co subsequent comparable climatic events. 
Table 3. Characteristics of selected coping strategies by smallholders for drought in central and eastern Kenya? (after Akong’a er al., 1988) 
Effectiveness 
| 
Constraints 
; 
— 
Response/ 
Prevalence | Normal 
| Moderate 
Severe 
| 
Recovery 
| 
Labour 
Capital 
| Constraints 
| Education/ 
| 
Land 
coping strategy 
drought 
| 
drought 
technology | information 
| 
| 
: 
Subsistence production 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Soil conservation 
MAH 
M 
M 
L 
0 
- 
| 
_ 
_ 
4 
_ 
Water conservation 
L 
M 
H 
L 
0 
- 
| 
_ 
- 
; 
- 
Imngation 
L 
H 
H 
t+? 
+ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Muitiple farms 
L 
M 
M 
L 
0 
- 
+ 
- 
| 
_ 
+ 
Inter/relay cropping 
H 
H 
H-L 
| 
L 
+ 
~ 
- 
- 
+ 
- 
Dry planting 
M 
H 
H 
L 
0 
| 
- 
| 
- 
+ 
_ 
| 
_ 
Mixed livestock herds 
M-H 
H 
H 
M 
+ 
+ 
| 
- 
- 
- 
+ 
Dispersed grazing 
H 
H 
H 
M 
+ 
+ 
| 
- 
- 
fog 
Fodder production® 
M 
H 
H 
| 
M 
+ 
+ 
| 
_ 
4 
+ 
4 
Drought-resistant crops 
A 
M 
H 
| 
M 
+ 
- 
| 
_ 
| 
+ 
+ 
} 
= 
Monetary activity 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Local wage labour 
M-H 
H 
H 
H 
+ 
+ 
- 
_ 
+ 
_ 
Migrant wage labour 
M 
H 
H 
| 
H 
- 
+ 
- 
_ 
+ 
_ 
Permanent employment 
M 
H 
H 
| 
H 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
+ 
- 
Local business 
L 
M 
M 
L 
| 
0 
+ 
| 
+ 
_ 
Cash crop‘ 
M 
H 
M 
| 
L 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
| 
+ 
Sell capital assets 
M 
H 
M 
L 
- 
- 
= 
; 
oo+ 
Livestock sales 
H 
r 
MH} 
ML 
- 
- 
4) 
+ 
Remittances/donations 
| 
| 
| 
Relatives/friends 
M-H 
M 
H 
| 
oH 
+ 
an 
_ 
- 
_ 
Government and others? 
M-H 
? 
H 
H 
? 
- 
_ 
_ 
+ 
_ 
Loans/credis 
L 
H 
H 
H 
+ 
7 
| 
+ 
| 
- 
+ 
- 
) 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
Key. 
Prevalence/Effectiveness 
Recovery/Constraints 
H 
= 
> S0%/High 
- 
= 
negative, Le. impedes recovery/is a constraint 
M-H 
= 
30—50/Mod. nigh 
+ 
= 
positive, Le€., alds recovery/is not a constraint 
M 
= 
15-30/Moderate 
0 
= 
neutral, .€. no effect on recovery 
L 
= 
0-1 5/Low 
? 
= 
uncertain or variable 
4 Consensus agreement by authors based on available data. Ratings are intended to be qualitative and relative as no systematic survey data are available. In many 
cases, these are hypotheses to be venfied. 
° Very common in the upper altitudinal zones: almost non-existent in the lower zones. 
© Does not include food crops. 
Very commen in upper zones: rere in lower zones. 
© High in the lower zones: low in the upper zones, 
35

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
There are. of course, many cases where climate changes can be 
positive. Here the strategies involve capitalizing on opportunities. 
Different criteria can be used for organizing the information. 
For instance, detailed tables have been used to catalogue tradi- 
tional adjustment mechanisms for coping with imter-annual cli- 
matic variabjlity in self-provisioning societies (Jodha and 
Mascarenhas, 
1985; Akong’a 
ef 
al., 
1988). Table 
3 Wustrates 
a 
classification system for displaying smallholder coping strategies 
for drought in central and eastern Kenya and a qualitative effec- 
tiveness ranking for different measures. 
Other methods of cross-tabulation have been employed in 
formal procedures of resource management. For example, alter- 
native water resource adaptation measures in the United States 
are commonly analysed according to both the type of measure 
and 
its strategic scope. Four groupings of strategy have been 
identified (Stakhiv, 1993): 
@ 
Long range strategies, generally pertinenc to issues involving 
mean changes in climate (e.g., river basin planning, institu- 
tional changes for water allocation). 
Tactical strategies, concerned with mid-term considerations 
of climatic variability (e.g., flood proofing, water conserva- 
tion measures). 
Contingency strategies, relating to short-term extremes asso- 
ciated with climatic variability (e.g., emergency drought 
management, flood forecasting). 
Analytical strategies, embracing climatic effects at 
all scales 
(e.g., data acquisition, water management modelling). 
Numerous options exist for classifying adaptive measures, 
but generally, regardless of the resource of interest (e.g., forestry, 
wetlands, agriculture, water) the prospective list should include 
management measures that reflect: 
Structural/infrastruccural measures. 
Legal/legislative changes. 
Institucional/administrative/organizational measures. 
Regulatory measures. 
Education, 
Financial incentives, subsidies. 
Research and development. 
Taxes, tariffs, user fees. 
Market mechanisms. 
Technological changes. 
It is worth noting that society in general, and each resource 
use sector separately, already contends with contemporary chi- 
matic variability and the wide range of natural hazards (e.z., 
floods, droughts, storm surges and hurricanes) and the variety of 
opportunities (e.g., 
a benign period of weather; an unbroken 
‘snow season’; 
a mild winter) this brings. As a first approxima- 
tion, 
it 
is probably fair to assume chat mose of the current mea- 
sures employed in resource management to deal wich climatic 
variability will be equally feasible, even if not comparatively 
cost-effective, under 
a different climatic regime. 
Ic follows, 
therefore, chat the adaptation measures which ought co be 
selected now are those which are beneficial for reasons other 
than climate change and, for the most part, can be justified by 
current evaluation criteria and decision rules. This 
is sometimes 
referred to as the ‘no regrets’ strategy 
8.3.4 Examining the constraints 
Many of the adaptation options identified in the previous step 
are likely to be subject to legislation, influenced by prevailing 
social nonms related to religion or custom, or constrained physi- 
cally (such as the landward retreat from an eroding coast) or bio- 
36 
logically (e.g., genetic material for plant breeding to adapt to 
changing climate). This may encourage, restrict or totally pro- 
hibit their use. Thus, it is important to examine closely, possibly 
In 
a separate study, what these constraints are and how they 
might affect the range of feasible choices available. 
8.3.5 Quantifying the measures and formulating alternative 
Strategies 
The next step 
is to assess the performance or degree of fulfil- 
menc of each management measure with respect to the stated 
objectives. 
Ic may be possible, if appropriate data and analytical 
tools exist, ro use simulation models co test the effectiveness of 
different measures under different climate scenarios. Historical 
and documentary evidence, survey material or expert judgement 
are some other alternative sources of this information. 
Uncertainty analysis and risk assessment are also considered at 
this stage (see Section 7.6). 
Management measures can be ranked according to their 
responsiveness to individual objectives and criteria as 
a way of 
Figure 8. Some procedures for strategy formulation—top: 
multicriteria analysis of individual management measures; 
bottom: multiobjective strategy formulation. 
GOAL A 
GOAL B 
Management 
Objectives 
Objectives 
measures 
Evaluation criteria 
Evaluation critena 
mm, 
mm, 
mm,, 
MANAGEMENT MEASURES 
OBJECTIVES 
mm, 
Least cost 
STRATEGY A 
mm, 
Regional 
eo ar 
economic 
development 
STRATEGY B 
-— 
Low nsk 
STRATEGY C 
Low growth 
| 
= 
Environmental 
STRATEGY D 
protection 
— 
Equity 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
2080

ASSESSMENT OF AUTONOMOUS ADJUSTMENTS AND EVALUATION OF ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
assessing their robustness, effectiveness and resilience relative to 
other comparable measures. The second step in such analysis 
would be to assess the perfonnance of each management measure 
across 
all che objectives, recogruzing that some of the objectives 
conflict with one another (e.g., 
in Table 2, regional economic 
development often conflicts with environmental protection). This 
step 
is 
a prelude co developing strategies which maximize the 
level of achievement of some objectives while maintaining base- 
line levels of progress towards the remaining objecuves. In order 
to assess Which options are better suited for certain strategies, muJ- 
ticriteria analysis provides 
a formal, useful and replicable method 
of evaluation (Figure 8, top). One of the important aspects to 
consider at chis stage 
is the quantification of achievable rates of 
adaptation and their addiaonal costs. The faster the need for adap- 
tanon, the more it is Likely co cost per annum. 
An example of testing the feasibility of one line of adaptation 
to drought nsk in Saskatchewan, Canada 
is given in Box 12. A 
more extensive range of adaptations has been tested for the cen- 
tral USA (see Box 13). 
8.3.6 Weighting objectives and evaluating trade-offs 
The adaptation strategies that emerge from the foregoing analy- 
sis each relate to specific objectives (Figure 8, bottom). Even if 
all objectives are directed to the same general goal, however, 
it 
is very likely thac many will conflict with one another. This 
step of the analysis, therefore, is the key evaluation step, where 
each objective must be weighted according to assigned prefer- 
ences and then comparisons made between the effectiveness of 
different strategies in meeting these objectives. For instance, for 
coastal responses to accelerated sea leve) rise, there could be a 
‘pure’ retreat option, consisting exclusively of regulatory mea- 
sures, caxes, incentives and legal and institucional measures 
spread out over a penod of ume. Also, a pure protection option 
might be considered, consisting of struccural measures and bet- 
ter organized monitoring, warning and evacuation plans. 
The key aspect of this step of evaluation is that al) the com- 
ponenc measures that comprise a strategy are compared against 
the same set of objectives and criteria, so chat decision makers, 
policy makers and the public can see the relanve range of bene- 
fics and costs for each strategy as well as the distribution of 
impacts among the sectors and population (equicy). Only then 
can trade-offs among objectives and between management mea- 
sures be undertaken. A wide variety of methods and models are 
available for such multicriteria analyses (e.g., Goicoechea 
et al., 
1982; Chankong and Haimes, 1983). 
A standard impact accounting system for evaluating che 
effectiveness of different planning strategies 
is used opera- 
tionally in federal projects in the United Scates. This evaluates 
BOX 12 
CASE STUDY: POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE ON AGRICULTURE IN 
SASKATCHEWAN, CANADA 
Background: the province of Saskatchewan in Canada has 
about 40 per cent of Canada’s farmland and 
it accounts for 
about 60 per cent of Canada’s wheat production, most of 
which is exported. About one eighth of internationally traded 
wheat onginates from Saskatchewan. 
Problem: to evaluate the possible impacts of future climate 
change on Saskatchewan agriculture, assuming the same tech- 
nology and economic circumstances as in the 1980s. 
Methods: four different types of predictive model were linked 
hierarchically: crop growth, farm simulation, input-output 
and employment models. These provided estimates of 
regional crop yields, income and economic activity 
at the 
farm level, commodity use relationships between sectors of 
the provincial economy, and provincial employment. The 
effects of changed climate, described by climatic scenarios, 
were then traced through from changes in crop yield to 
effects on regional employment. 
Testing of methods/sensitivity: each of the models had been 
tested and calibrated based on climatic or cconomic data from 
recent years. 
In addition, the sensitivity of the crop growth 
model to arbitrary changes in climatic input variables was also 
investigated to ascertain its suitability for evaluating the effects 
of climate change. 
Scenarios: three types of climatic scenario were examined: one 
historical anomaly scenano (the drought year 1962), one his- 
torical analogue scenario (the dry period 1933-37) and one 
GCM-based 2 x CO, scenario. The climatological baseline 
was 1951-80. Future changes in other environmental and 
socio-economic factors were not considered. 
Impacts: under present climatic conditions, Saskatchewan can 
expect occasional extreme drought years with wheat yields 
reduced to 
as little 
as one-quarter of normal, with large 
effects on the agricultural economy and on provincial GDP 
and large scale losses in employment. Occasional periods of 
consecutive years with drought can lead to average yield 
reductions of one-fifth and substantial losses of farm income 
and employment. Under the GCM-based 2 x CO, scenario, 
with increased growing season temperatures combined with 
increased precipitation but higher potential evapotranspira- 
tion, wheat yields would also decline, by average levels simi- 
lar in magnitude to an extreme period under present climate, 
with comparable economic impacts. The frequency of 
drought or severe drought is estimated to triple relative ro the 
baseline under this scenario. 
Adjustments. one potential adaptive response to climate change 
was tested: the switching of 10 per cent of the cropped area 
from spring wheat to winter wheat. It was estimated that yield 
losses in drought years would be significantly lower with such 
an adaptation, but that the reverse would be tue in normal 
years. Thus this adaptation would be favoured if climate shifted 
towards wanner and drier conditions in the future. 
Source: Williams et al. (1988) 
37

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX 13 
CASE STUDY: THE MINK PROJECT 
AN INTEGRATED REGIONAL ASSESSMENT 
Background: Missouri, lowa, Nebraska and Kansas (the MINK 
region) are four adjacent states in the central United States 
which are dependent on resource sectors known to be sensi- 
tive to climate change: agriculture, forestry, water resources 
and energy. Except for pockets of forestry on the Ozark 
Plateau of southeast Missouri, and grassland on sand dunes in 
north central Nebraska, the region is fairly coherent, with. flac 
or rolling topography used predominantly for agriculture. 
Problem: to study how climate change might aftect the current 
and future functioning of regional-scale economies. 
Method: a number of models were used to evaluate impacts of 
climate on individual sectors. For agriculture a semi-empirical 
process model (EPIC) was adopted that simulates crop biomass 
and yield production, evapotranspiration and irrigation 
requirements. For forests, 
a succession model (FORENA) that 
simulates the annual development of individual trees within a 
mixed species forest was used. This allows the effects of cli- 
mate change on both forest growth and species composition 
to be evaluated. Both EPIC and FORENA were modified to 
account for the direct effects of CO. on photosynthesis and 
water use. Several approaches were used to estimate regional 
water resources: changes in evapotranspiration and irrigation 
requirements were modelled using EPIC. Regional water 
supply was estimated using empirical relationships between 
present and past streamflows. Impacts on the energy sector 
drew on the modelling and interpretations from the other 
three sectors and on an analysis of how heating and air condi- 
tioning requirements are affected by changing temperature. 
Finally, the economy-wide effects of changes in productivity 
of the above resource sectors were studied using IMPLAN, 
a 
regional input-output model. IMPLAN describes the interac- 
tion between 528 industries in the MINK region. 
Testing of methods/sensitivity: EPIC was validated against 
national agricultural statistics (county level) and observed sea- 
sonal yields in agronomic experiments for seven crops in the 
region. Evapotranspiration terms were compared with field 
observations. FORENA had been validated previously for 
conditions in the eastern United States, and results were also 
compared with observed forest behaviour under drought con- 
ditions in Missoun. A sensitivity study was conducted on the 
response of forest biomass to changes in temperature and pre- 
cipitation. The model coefficients relating inputs and output 
flows between industries in IMPLAN were computed from 
regional data for 1982. 
Scenarios: 
a temporal analogue was employed as the climate 
scenario, specifically the decade 1931-1940 in the MINK 
region. Overall, this period was one of severe drought—both 
drier and warmer than average 
in the region, consistent in 
sign with GCM projections. These conditions were assumed 
to occur in the present and also in the year 2030, along with 
an increase in CO, concentration of 100 ppm (to 450 ppm). 
Four sets of conditions were investigated: 
(1) 
the current 
baseline, which referred to the economic situation in the 
early 1980s, with 1951-1980 as the climatological baseline; 
(2) climate change imposed on the current baseline; 
(3) 
a 
baseline description of the economic structure of the region 
in the future without climate change (including population, 
economic activity and personal income); and 
(4) imposition 
of climate change on the future baseline (including feedbacks 
between sectors, such as the projected extent of irrigated agri- 
culture given scenarios of future water supply). 
Impacts: in the MINK region of 2030 with a climate like that 
of the 1930s the main results of the study are: (1) Crop pro- 
duction would decrease in all crops except wheat and alfalfa, 
even accounting for CO, effects. However, impacts on agri- 
culture overall would be small given adaptation, though at 
the margins losses could be considerable (e.g., a shift in irriga- 
continued ... 
the eftects of different plans on a set of four basic objectives or 
llnpact categories: 
@ 
National economic development (monetary). 
@® 
Environmental quality (significant environmental resources 
and their ecological, culcural and aesthetic atrnbutes). 
@ 
Regional economic development (distribution of regional 
economic activity 
in terms of regiona] income and 
employment). 
@ 
Other social effects (including urban and community 
impacts, 
life, health and safety factors, displacement, 
long-term productivity, energy requirements and energy 
conservauon). 
All impacts and adaptation measures are evaluated according 
to these four categories. Selection of preferred strategies thus 
requires the determination of trade-offs berween the categories. 
8.3.7 Recommending adaptation measures 
The results of the evaluation process should be compiled in 
a 
form that provides policy advisers and decision makers with 
information on the best available adaptation strategies. This 
38 
should include some indication of the assumptions and uncertain- 
ties involved in the evaluation procedure, and the rationale used 
(e.g., decision rules, key evaluation principles, national and inter- 
national support, institutional feasibilicy, cechnical feasibility) co 
narrow the choices. 
8.4 Points to Consider in Developing an Adaptation 
Strategy 
It may be helpful co note some of the practical requirements 
involved in conducting an adaptation assessment of the type 
proposed above. These include: institutional requirements, data 
requirements, analytical too)s and cost. 
8.4.1 Institutional requirements 
The formal procedures described above, which are routinely and 
successfully used in a variety of resource management settings in 
many developed counties, do, however, require an insticutional 
and information infrastructure as prerequisites. This implies that 
there 
1s an organizational, administrative and legal structure 
in 
place that is capable of carrying out the procedures in a unifonn

ASSESSMENT OF AUTONOMOUS ADJUSTMENTS AND EVALUATION OF ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
... continued 
tion from west to east). (2) Impacts on forestry would not be 
fully felt by 2030, but in the long term they would be severe. 
There 
is little potential for adaptation to the climate change 
unless the production of wood for biomass fuel makes adapta- 
tion economically justifiable. However, forestry 
is 
a very 
small part of the MINK economy. 
(3) Impacts on water 
resources would be major and severe. The quality and quan- 
tity of surface waters would diminish, water-based recreation 
would suffer losses and navigation would become uneco- 
nomic on the Missouri, Rising costs of water extraction 
would make agriculture less competitive for surface water and 
groundwater supplies and would hasten the abandonment of 
irrigation in the western portions of the region. 
(4) Only 
about 20-25 per cent of the region’s current energy use 
would be sensitive to 
a 1930s-type climate, and any impacts 
of climate would be eased by adjustments within the energy 
sector so that the effect on the regional economy would be 
minor. 
(5) Unless the climate-induced decline in feedgrain 
production falls entirely on animal producers in MINK 
(which would lead to an overall loss to the regional economy 
of 10 per cent), the regional economic impacts of the climate 
change would be small. This 
is because agriculture, while 
important relative to other regions of the US, 
1s still only a 
small (and diminishing) part of the MINK economy. 
Adaptation: most of the work on adaptation dealt with 
responses to impacts on crop production. Simulated adjust- 
ments included changed planting dates, altered varieties and 
changed tillage practices. In addition technological advances 
Were assumed in irrigation efficiency and crop drought resis- 
tance as well as improvements in a number of crop specific 
characteristics including harvest index, photosynthetic 
effi- 
ciency and pest management. 
In economic terms, 
in the 
absence of on-farm adjustments and CO, enrichment, the 
analogue climate would reduce the value of 1984-87 crop 
production in MINK by 17 per cent. The CO, effect would 
reduce the loss to 8 per cent, and on-farm adjustments would 
reduce it further to 3 per cent. In the forestry sector a num- 
ber of management options were investigated using the 
FORENA model (e.g., the suitability of pine plantations and 
various thinning strategies), but none was considered appro- 
priate as a response to climate change in the region. Rather, 
barring major public intervention, only reactive measures to 
forest decline such as salvage cutting were judged likely. 
Qualitative assessments were made of possible adjustments in 
water use (e.g., water conservation, a shift of emphasis from 
navigation to hydropower production, recreation and water 
supply on the Missounl River) and in energy production and 
use (€.g., Energy-saving water pumping and imigation prac- 
tices, improved energy-use efficiency and adoption of new 
or 
existing technologies for improving electric conversion effi- 
ciency and reducing cooling water requirements). 
Policy options: although the MINK study did not seek to pro- 
vide specific recommendations to policy makers for how to 
cope with climate change in this region, one important con- 
clusion was that the relevant policy issue at the regional scale 
is not one of climate change abatement (which can only be 
dealt with at national and international level), but rather one 
of optimal adjustment to climate change. An important 
assumption of the study was that markets play a major role in 
inducing adjustments needed for adequate response to climate 
change. However, some important elements are not com- 
monly considered in economic terms (e.g., the quality of 
aquatic habitats is projected to decline in the MINK region). 
These should necessarily fall within the ambit of public pol- 
icy. Moreover, the study also speculated on possible policy 
shifts, which could have more far-reaching implications for 
the MINK region (e.g., the removal of subsidies for irrigation 
agriculture under sharply increased water scarcity or subsi- 
dization of plantation forestry as 
a method of capturing atmo- 
spheric carbon and of energy production). 
Source: Rosenberg (1993) 
and replicable manner. Moreover, some of the analytical tools 
employed are both sophisticated and resource intensive 
to 
develop and operate. 
It is clear that some of these prerequisites are likely to be lack- 
ing In less developed counties, due to the limited resources avail- 
able. However, alternative ‘low cost’ procedures are available that 
could be applied in many regions. Additional capabilines could 
then be built up over ame, if desired. The framework outlined 
above 
is therefore 
a general one, which 
is applicable to 
a wide 
range of situations and capabilines in differenc regions. 
8.4.2 Data requirements 
Data requirements can vary considerably, depending on the 
scope of the study. Biological and physical information such as 
climatological, hydrological and agriculcural production data, 
1s 
hikely to be miore readily available than socio-economic infor- 
mation, though not necessarily in the form required. 
I[c 
is very 
likely, however, that original socio-economic data will have to 
be collected as part of the analysis. This can prove to be quite 
expensive in terms of time, money and human resources, 
as 
it 
39 
may require surveys of the population where adaptive actions 
are being considered. An alternative 
1s expert Judgement, but 
this should be blended with 
a knowledge of social values and 
priorines or there 
is 
a danger that loca] perceptions and under- 
standings may be overlooked in the assessment. 
8.4.3 Analytical tools 
As has already been indicated, 
a number of aspects of the analysis 
can be enhanced with the use of models. These can vary from 
formalized methods of qualitative assessment (e.g., Delphi analysis 
of expert Judgement) to advanced quantitative assessment models 
(many of which are described elsewhere in this report). Many of 
these types of model are available as software packages for a per- 
sonal computer. However, aside from their cost (which need not 
be excessive), and the considerable complexity often entailed in 
linking model inputs and outputs, data availabilicy 
is likely to 
impose the greatest constraint on model use in many regions. 
8.4.4 
Cost 
The cost of conducting a study of adaptation to climate change

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
can vary widely. A detailed study can easily cost several hundred 
thousand US dollars, although useful results can be obtained 
from small-scale studies costing in the range 50,000 to 100,000 
US dollars. 
8.4.5 Policy exercises 
One possible method of evaluating policy adjustments is the 
policy exercise. Policy exercises combine elements of a mod- 
elling approach with expert judgement, and were originally 
advocated as a means of improving the interaction between sci- 
entists and policy makers. Senior figures in government, indus- 
try and finance are encouraged to participate with scnior scien- 
tists in ‘exercises’ (often based on the principles of gaming), 
whereby they are asked to judge appropriate policy responses to 
a number of given climatic scenarios. Their decisions are then 
evaluated using impact models (Brewer, 1986; Toth, 1989). The 
method has been tested in a number of recent climate impact 
assessments in South-East Asta (Parry et al., 1992). 
8.4.6 Sensitization seminars 
A less formal method of communicating the important research 
issues to policy makers is through organized mectings on climate 
change and its possible effects. If these are targeted at policy 
makers and other stakeholders, they can be very effective vehi- 
cles for influencing attitudes and, ultimately, policy. 
40

ASSESSMENT OF AUTONOMOUS ADJUSTMENTS AND EVALUATION OF ADAPTATION STRATEGIES 
ORGANIZATION OF RESEARCH AND 
COMMUNICATION OF RESULTS 
9.1 
The Framework in Practice 
The foregoing sections present 
a set of guidelines for potential 
practiuoners On alternative approaches and tools thac they might 
consider adopting in undertaking 
a chmate impact and adapta- 
tion assessment. The scope of these guidelines 
1s very broad, 
though the methods described are often detailed. By way of syn- 
thesis, therefore, this concluding section reviews the analytical 
framework developed in the report, and suggests 
a four stage 
method for applying che framework in practice. 
9.1.1 
The Seven Step Framework 
The guidelhnes have been arranged in 
a seven-step analytical 
framework that aims to capture the major components of an 
assessinent study (cf. Figure 4). The framework 
is able to accom- 
modate the wide range of methods followed in a large number of 
previous assessments, 
as 
is demonstrated 
in some of the boxed 
examples in this report. However, 
it should not be regarded as a 
definitive approach to assessment. There are other assessments chat 
follow perfectly valid alternative analytical methods (for example, 
studies where the main focus 
1s on adaptation to climate change). 
Nonetheless, while the logical order of analysis may be different 
in these studies, most of the basic tools and methods that are accu- 
ally applied are embraced in these Guidelines. 
While this report has sought to be as comprehensive as pos- 
sible, 
it should not be inferred chat all the seven steps or all pro- 
cedures within each step should be applied in any one assess- 
ment. Applying che former may noc be necessary or appropri- 
ate; applying che latter would simply not be feasible. Each 
assessment study has 
its own unique requirements, focus and 
objectives, and these are probably served by only a small subset 
of the approaches described. Furthermore, there are certainly 
aspects that are not covered in the Guidelines—the field is large, 
and methods of climate tmpact assessment 
are developing 
rapidly—and their exclusion here should not preclude cheir use 
in future assessinents. 
9.1.2 
A four stage method for conducting assessments 
The observation was made 
in Section 2.4 thac the procedures 
contained 
in each of the seven general steps are themselves 
somenmes arranged 
in 
a multi-step framework which parallels 
the seven steps. This 
1s not surpnsing, when one considers how 
mMOSE assessments are actually conducted in practice. Few stuches 
proceed monoconically through 
all 
the necessary steps without 
repeating at lease some iterations. For example, where the out- 
puts of one imipact model are used 
as the inputs for another, 
susilar procedures for, inter alia, data acquisition, niodel testing, 
parameter selecuon, fixing of assumptions and scenano develop- 
mene, must occur when applying each model. 
In all, four main stages of iteration can be identified through 
which an assessment may need to proceed (Figure 9): 
@ 
Feasibility. 
@ 
Assessment of biophysical impacts. 
@ 
Assessment of socio-economic unpacts. 
@ 
Evaluacon of adaptation options. 
Figure 9. A four stage method for conducung climate change impact and adaptation assessinents 
STEP 
| 
STEP 2 
STEP 3 
STEP 4 
STEP 5 
ae 
piece 
SELECT 
TEST METHOD/ 
SELECT 
ASSESS 
P LeARSHOUS 
ADAPTATION 
MET 
ENISITIVITY’ 
ENARI 
MPACTS 
FRAISIMT 
d 
BPE 
ANC? 
METHOD 
SENSITIVITY 
SCENARIOS 
IMPACTS 
ADJUSTMENT 
STRATEGIES 
STAGE 
| 
vary 
a 
y 
FEASIBIUTY 
OS 
~-- eee 
LLL q@----------, 
! 
l 
STAGE 2 
Biophysical 
Qn 
C 
d 
. 
| 
Bi cthe oad 
) 
BIOPHYSICAL 
exposure 
|» 
: 
Hp} 
en 
c 
tL» 
Rae 
ts 
I 
IMPACTS 
study 
region 
expert 
judg 
sensit 
analysis 
scenanos 
sia catia 
ia Salita’ 
I 
l 
1 
1 
—-e 
=| 
| 
=| 
~ <4 
—-—_—-- 
— 
~ 
— 
| 
l 
2 
{ 
STAGE 3 
Se Sonacsnagit 
Simulatio 
Detedoquistliin 
SOCIO- 
; ae 
qualitative 
Me 
Socio-economic 
mpacts: 
Sector-leve 
Adaptation 
ECONOMIC 
il otal 
4 
expert 
ta 
sceananos 
uncertainnes 
adjustments 
i! 
strategies 
IMPACTS 
study region 
Aeeiriei 
ser 
° 
sents 
A 
| 
] 
! 
! 
y 
| 
: 
Recommend 
J 
STAGE 4 
_ 
Altemative 
rs 
a 
ADAPTATION 
/-—>} 
b—> 
i> 
Constraints 
= 
. = 
; 
> 
Trade afis 
adaptauicr 
L > 
4]

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
These stages are depicted as rows in Figure 9. The columns 
represent broadly comparable steps, with some of the alternative 
procedures at each step listed in the boxes. Thick arrows show 
the linkages between stages and thin arrows link the steps. 
Dashed lines represent reiterations that may be required to 
repeat an analysis under a new set of assumptions. 
This kind of ‘walk-through’ method can offer a useful tem- 
plate for conducting assessment studies at the national level. 
Following this approach, the United Nations Environment 
Programme is currently preparing non-expert Workbooks based 
on the Technical Guidelines described here. When completed, 
the IPCC Technical Guidelines and UNEP Workbooks will 
form a complementary pair of guides: the former primarily for 
researchers and the latter for non-experts. 
9.2 Organization of Research 
The effective organization of research is a key element in most 
climate impact studies, but especially so in large, multi-disci- 
plinary projects. Two aspects are important to consider: the 
coordination of research, and research collaboration. 
9.2.1 Coordination 
Experience suggests that the executive responsibility for 
coordinating research activities is usually best assigned to a sin- 
gle location, group or person. Overall guidance is sometimes 
provided by a panel of experts or steering committee, including 
the coordinator. Subordinate responsibilities can be delegated 
to other researchers, but the structure should preserve a frame- 
work of accountability. 
Several tasks can be identified that should normally be the 
responsibility of the coordinator, involving the planning of the 
research, identification of stakeholders, selection of common 
approaches, initiation of studies and monitoring of the research. 
Planning of the research. Regardless of the nature of the study, the 
source of funding or the client being served, it is necessary, at an 
early stage of preparation, to formulate 
a research plan. This 
usually comprises 
a statement of the research objectives, 
a 
description of the main tasks, 
the research methods, the 
intended outputs, a preliminary schedule and the estimated cost. 
A research plan can serve several functions: 
@ 
It provides a framework for initiating the research and mak- 
ing preliminary arrangements for elements such as excursions 
and meetings. 
® 
It is helpful for identifying resource requirements such as 
staff, working space, equipment and data. 
@ 
It can be distributed to other experts for comments and 
advice. 
@ 
Itcan be used as a working document for discussing possible 
research collaboration, additional funding, publication or 
other cooperation. 
Identification of stakeholders. The most successful impact studies 
are often those which involve a broad cross-section of the com- 
munity in the study region. Thus, a valuable element of study 
design is the identification of important ‘stakeholders’. Some 
possible stakeholders to consider are listed here: 
@ 
Policy makers, who commission the impact assessments in 
order to obtain information that can be used to guide policy. 
@ 
Experienced climate impact researchers, who are familiar 
with the issues and the analytical methods. It may be primar- 
ily their responsibility to formulate the methods, gather and 
42 
collate the data, and analyse and report the results of the 
study. 
Other researchers, who may have no experience in climate 
impact assessment, but may possess local knowledge, analyti- 
cal tools or data that could be valuable in an impact assess- 
ment. 
Government officials and local advisers, who may be able to 
assist by supplying data, exercising judgement or identifying 
key regions or persons. 
Persons of regional influence, such as village elders, indus- 
trial executives and landowners, who might be able to pro- 
vide advice, resources, access or other assistance to the study. 
Communicators, such as teachers, newspaper editors and 
radio and television producers, who can describe the 
research to the conimunity. 
Other members of the community, whose cooperation may 
be required in conducting surveys, field experiments and 
other research activities. 
Common approaches. The coordinator may also bear responsibility 
for enforcing some commonality of approach in research. This 
ensures that the results of an assessment are readily comparable, 
both within the project, and relative to other projects. It may 
entail, for example, the adoption of standard scenarios, use of 
standard projection periods, and consistency in the reporting of 
results. Consistency is especially important in cases where results 
from one part of the study are used as inputs to another. 
Initiation of studies. As a preliminary stage of research, some pro- 
jects carry out pilot studies to explore the feasibility of the 
methods (Section 5.1). In some cases, pilot studies may have to 
be conducted as a prerequisite for the receipt of funding or of 
development loans. Other projects may hold a meeting of 
researchers, to exchange ideas, forge new links, agree on the 
workplan, allocate tasks, and decide a schedule. Where research 
is being conducted at multiple sites or in different countries, 
another option is for coordinators to travel to meetings at each 
centre. This has the advantage of exposing the coordinator to a 
wider range of researchers, to local conditions and to local prob- 
lems. Finally, in some projects, particularly commissioned stud- 
ies, where the goals are clear and deadlines tight, it may be sufh- 
cient to despatch guidelines to the participants so that they can 
begin work immediately. 
Monitoring of the research. It is often a contractual requirement for 
projects to provide funding agencies with regular reports on 
progress. Although these reports do not always receive close 
scrutiny from funding bodies, they are a useful method of assess- 
ing progress, achievements, and financial status. They can also 
form a basis for the publication of results. 
It is common for 
international projects to receive a mid-term review by indepen- 
dent experts, where researchers are required to present their 
work, justify their methods and report preliminary results. Even 
if this is not a formal requirement, a mid-term review can be a 
valuable aid to project coordinators, as 
a means of assessing 
progress to date, and future goals. 
9.2.2 Collaboration 
Collaboration in conducting an assessment can be required at up 
to four levels: between researchers, between stakeholders, 
nationally and internationally.

ORGANIZATION OF RESEARCH ANID COMMUNICATION OF RESULTS 
Collaboration between researchers. Climate impact assessment is 
interdisciplinary, involving the collaboration of researchers who, 
in many cases, may not have worked together before. The iden- 
tification of researchers who understand the goals of the 
research, and are willing to work together, often under tight 
time constraints, can be a major undertaking in the planning and 
execution of many assessment studies. The cffectiveness of col- 
laboration may also be influenced by the working environment. 
At one extreme, some mternational projects purposefully bring 
together researchers to work at 
a single site. At the other 
extreme, studies may be conducted with no direct contact 
between researchers. A useful framework for interdisciplinary 
and interjurisdictional collaboration at a regional scale is pro- 
vided by Integrated Regional Impact Assessment (see Section 
2.3.3, above). Studies have been aided considerably in recent 
years by the establishment of international networks of 
researchers, common databases and newsletters. 
Collaboration between stakeholders. The involvement of other 
stakeholders in the assessment process has many advantages but 
also some drawbacks. Local knowledge and experience can be 
very useful in conducting the study, mobilising resources, inter- 
preting results and in gaining regional acceptance of the results 
and recommendations. In addition, the monitoring of a project 
by funding agencies can be helpful in focusing the goals of the 
reseatch. However, policy makers should beware of jeopardiz- 
ing the integrity of the research by excessive participation, 
whilst researchers should cnsure that their work meets the needs 
of policy as much as possible. 
National programmes. Under the auspices of the World Climate 
Programme (WCP), many countries have now organized their 
own national climate programmes. Within these programmes 
most have made provision for climate impact studies, and have 
set up committees for directing research and channelling fund- 
ing through national scientific bodies and government depart- 
ments. Examples of countries with national programmes 
include: Australia, Canada, Finland, Hungary, Netherlands, 
Japan, Switzerland, UK and USA. 
Internationally, there are different levels of cooperation and 
organization. Some important activities at global scale include: 
@ 
The World Climate Impact Assessment and Response 
Strategies Studies Programme (WCIRP), which is run by 
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 
is 
one component of the WCP. Projects receiving funding 
from UNEP are generally international in scope, and inno-~ 
vative in content. 
The United Nations Regional Economic Commissions, 
which liaise with national meteorological services in assess- 
ing the socio-economic and population impacts of climatic 
variability and change. 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
Working Group II (Impacts), which was established by 
WMO and UNEP for reviewing research on the impacts of 
future climate change. 
: 
The International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) 
of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), 
which has a number of elements devoted to climate change 
and its impacts. Its function is to promote international col- 
laboration in research. Funding is provided by national gov- 
ermments. 
The Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change 
43 
Programme (HDP) of the International Social Science 
Council (ISSC), which has a similar structure to the IGBP, 
but whose focus is on socio-cconomic aspects of environ- 
mental change. 
The Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment 
(SCOPE), which is also organized by ICSU, prepares state- 
of-knowledge surveys on major environmental issues. 
The Man and the Biosphere Programme of the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO). 
The 
Organization 
of Economic 
Cooperation 
and 
Development (OECD). 
9.3 Communication of Results 
An effective impact assessment is usually characterized by the 
establishment of good communication between researchers and 
other interest groups. Four lines of communication are impor- 
tant for researchers: with other researchers, with policy makers, 
with private enterprise and with the public. 
9.3.1 
Communication among researchers 
Two issues are of critical importance in communicating and 
evaluating research results among researchers: the reporting of 
results and peer review. 
Reporting of results. There is a burgeoning literature on the possi- 
ble effects of future climate, but as yet there has been little 
attempt to coordinate or standardize either the approaches used 
or the reporting of results. It is critical that the methodology, 
assumptions and results of studies are transparent. 
A number of 
important requirements for reporting results are listed here: 
@ 
Methods of assessment should be detailed in full. 
@ 
Information from climate models used in scenario construc- 
tion should be correctly interpreted and original sources 
accurately cited. 
@ 
The major assumptions of a study need to be outlined and 
substantiated. 
@ 
Impact models should be properly tested, fully documented 
or cited, and accessible to other researchers so that results are 
easily reproducible. 
@ 
All results should be accompanied by estimates of their 
attendant uncertainties. 
Peer review. The peer review of results is a vital element ensuring 
the quality control of published research. Proper vetting by 
expert reviewers is the only means by which non-specialists are 
able to evaluate the quality and significance of research. 
Most reputable scientific journals subject submitted papers to 
a rigorous review process. However, there are some cases 
where, given the interdisciplinary nature of the research, special- 
ist review cannot be offered for some elements of a study. 
Therefore, researchers bear some responsibility for ensuring that 
all their methods and models are exposed to such a review pro- 
cess from appropriate experts. Indeed, many large projects orga- 
mize their own review process, whereby specialists are asked to 
provide formal reviews of results prior to final publication. 
9.3.2 Communication with policy makers 
Much climate impacts research seeks to answer questions that 
impinge on or are specifically defined by policy. Thus, commu- 
nication between policy makers and researchers is essential, the 
former demanding of the latter solutions to problems and the

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
latter alerting the former to issues of importance and requesting 
the resources to research them. 
One of the major problems of communication between 
researchers and policy makcrs is the need to convcy the consid- 
erable uncertainties attached to future estimates, while demon- 
strating that there is a problem to be addressed. Moreover, the 
recent upsurge of interest in environmental issucs has led to 
a 
rapid increase in the demands on researchers to communicate 
results directly to policy makers (e.g., through government hear- 
ings). Since many of the goals of policy makcrs are short-term, 
there may be advantages in presenting research results in the 
form of the types of impacts likely to be experienced in the early 
stages of 
a more gencral climatic change. Such results could use- 
fully be expressed, for example, in terms of the risk of certain 
events occurring that are of immediate concern (e.g., drought or 
coastal flooding). Nonetheless, there are 
still major issues that 
should be addressed over a longer time perspective (for example, 
potential impacts such as extinctions, that are irreversible, or 
more tangible planning questions such as construction of dams 
or coastal defences). 
9.3.3 Communication with private enterprise 
The private sector is a key player in influencing climate policy, 
both as a significant contributor to GHG emissions and as an 
end-user of climate as a resource. Besides wiclding considerable 
political and economic influence, some sectors, such as insur- 
ance, are greatly concerned about the possible impacts of climate 
change and sea level rise on their activities. Moreover, in many 
countries engineering consultant firms are key players in the 
preparation of climate assessments, often as part of larger envir- 
onmental impact assessments of proposed developments. 
9.3.4 Communication with the public 
Ultimately, most policy makers are answerable to the public, 
and public opinion plays an important role in determining pol- 
icy. 
It 
is important, therefore, that the public 
is kept 
well-informed about progress in research. Effective communica- 
tion is thus vital, and it is brought about partly through educa- 
tion but primarily via the mass media. While researchers have a 
responsibility to communicate their work in a clear and concise 
manner to the public, the media also bears a great responsibility 
for accurate reporting of the research. Unfortunately, there has 
been a tendency by some to report only the most dramatic or 
controversial aspects of climatic change and its impacts, rather 
than to present a more balanced view. Researchers should be 
wary of checking thoroughly any material which is to be com- 
municated to the public in this way. 
44.

ORGANIZATION OF RESEARCH AND COMMUNICATION OF RESULTS 
REFERENCES 
ACCIS (1990). Directory of United Nations Databases and 
Information Services. 4th Ed. United Nations. 
Ackerman, T.P. and Cropper, W.P. (1988). Scaling global cli- 
mate projections to local biological assessments. Environment, 30, 
31-34. 
Adams, R.M., Rosenzweig, 
C., Peart, R.M., Ritchie, J.T., 
McCarl, B.A., Glyer, J.D., Curry, R.B., Jones, J.W., Boote, 
KJ. and Allen, L.H., 
Jr. (1990). Global climate change and U.S. 
agriculture. Nature, 345(6272), 219-222. 
Akong’a, J.. Downing, T.E., Konijn, N.T., Mungai, D.N., 
Muturi, H.R. and Potter, H.L. (1988). The effects of climatic 
variations on agriculture in central and eastern Kenya. In Parry, 
M.L., Carter, T.R., and Konijn, N.T. 
(eds). The Impact of 
Climatic Variations on Agriculture, Volume 2. Assessments 
in 
Semi-Arid Regions. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
pp. 121-270. 
Alcamo, J. (ed.}. (1994). IMAGE 2.0: Integrated Modelling of 
Global Climate Change. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
321 
pp. (reprinted from Wat. Air Soil Pollut., 76). 
Almendares, J., Sierra, M., Anderson, P.K. and Epstein, P.R. 
(1993). Critical regions, 
a profile of Honduras. Lancet, 342, 
1400-1402 (reprinted in Health and Climate Change, Lancet, 
London, 1994, pp. 29-31). 
Arnell, N.W., Brown, R.P.C. and Reynard, N.S. (1990). 
Impact of Climatic Variability and Change on River Flow Regimes in 
the UK. Report No. 107, Institute of Hydrology, Wallingford, 
UK, 154 pp. 
Bardossy, A. and Plate, E.J. (1992). Space-time model for daily 
rainfall using atmospheric circulation patterns. Water Resources 
Research, 28, 1247-1260. 
Beier, J. (1991). Global Change Data Sets: Excerpts from the Master 
Directory. National Aeronautic and Space Administration 
(NASA), USA. 
Bergthorsson, 
P., 
Bjomsson, 
H., 
Dyrmundsson, 
0., 
Gudmundsson, B., Helgadottir, A., and Jomnundsson, J.V. 
(1988) 
. The Effects of Climatic Variations on Agriculture in 
Iceland. In Parry, M.L., Carter T.R. and Konijn N.T. (eds). The 
Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture. Volume 1. Assessments 
in Cool Temperate and Cold Regions. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, 
pp. 381-509, 
Beuker, E. (1994). Long-term effects of temperature on the 
wood production of Pinus sylvestris L. and Picea abies (L.) Karst. 
in old provenance experiments. Scand. 
J. For. Res., 9, 34-45. 
Binkley, 
C. 
(1988). 
A 
Case 
Study 
of the 
Effects 
of 
CO,-Induced Climatic Warming on Forest Growth and the 
Forest Sector: B. Economic Effects on the World’s Forest 
Sector. In Parry, M.L., Carter T.R. and Konijn N.T. (eds). The 
45 
Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture. Volume 1. Assessments 
in Cool Temperate and Cold Regions. Kluwer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, 
pp. 197-218. 
Boer, G.J., Arpe, K., Blackburn, M., Deque, M., Gates, W.L., 
Hart, T.L., Le Treut, H., Roeckner, E., Sheinin, D.A., 
Simmonds, 
I., Smith, R.N.B., Tokioka, T., Wetherald, R.T. 
and Williamson, D. (1991). 
An Intercomparison of the Climates 
Simulated by 14 Atmospheric General Circulation Models. CAS/JSC 
Working Group on Numerical Experimentation Report No. 
15, WMO/TDNo. 425, World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, 37 pp. 
Bonan, G.B. (1993). Do biophysics and physiology matter m 
ecosystem models? Climatic Change, 24, 281-285. 
Brewer, G.D. (1986). Methods for synthesis: policy exercises. In 
Clark W.C. and Munn R.E. (eds). Sustainable Development of the 
Biosphere. Cambridge University Press, pp. 455-473. 
Brklacich, M. and Smit, B. (1992). Implications of changes in 
climatic averages and variability on food production opportuni- 
ties in Ontario, Canada. Climatic Change, 20,1—21. 
Buck, RJ., Pavis-Mortlake, D.T. and Downing, T-E. (in press). 
Parsimonious statistical emulation of a complex crop simulation 
model—an application for climate change impact assessment. 
Climate Research. 
Budyko, M.I. (1989). Empirical estimates of imminent climatic 
changes. Soviet Meteorology and Hydrology, No. 10, 1-8. 
Bultot, 
F., Coppens, A., Dupriez, G.L., Gellem D. and 
Meulenberghs, F. (1988). Repercussions of 
a CO, doubling on 
the water cycle and on the water balance—a case study for 
Belgium. Journal of Hydrology, 99, 319-347. 
Burtis, M.D. (1992). Catalog of Data Bases and Reports. 
ORNL/CDIAC-34/R4, Carbon Dioxide Information and 
Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 
USA. 
Burton, 
I., Kates, R.W. and White, 
G.F. 
(1993). The 
Environment as Hazard. Guilford Press, New York. 
Burton, I. and Cohen, SJ. (1992). Adapting to Global Warming: 
Regional Options. Paper presented 
at the International 
Conference on Impacts of Climatic Variations and Sustainable 
Development in Semi-Arid Regions (ICID), Fortaleza, Brazil, 
27 January—1 February, 1992. 
Carter, T.R., Parry, M.L., Nishioka, 
S. and Harasawa, H. 
(1992). Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of Climate 
Change. Environmental Change Unit, University of Oxford, 
United Kingdom and Center for Global Environmental 
Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies, 
Tsukuba, Japan, 28 pp.

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSENG CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
Chankong, V. and Haimes, Y. (1983). Multiobjective Decision 
Making: Theory and Methodology. Elsevier, New York, 406 pp. 
CIA (1972). World Databank I, Central Intelligence Agency, 
Washington, D.C., USA. 
Clark, W.C. (1986). Sustainable development of the biosphere: 
themes for 
a research program. In: Clark, W.C. and Munn, 
R.E. (eds). Sustainable Development of the Biosphere. Cambridge 
University Press, 
pp. 5—48. 
Cline, W. (1992). The Economics of Global Warming. Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, D.C. 
Cohen, SJ. (1991). Possible impacts of climatic warming scenar- 
ios on water resources in the Saskatchewan River sub-basin, 
Canada. Climatic Change, 19, 291-317. 
Cohen, S.J. (ed.) (1993). Mackenzie Basin Impact Study. Interim 
Report #1. Environment Canada, Edmonton, 163 pp. 
Croley, J.E. II (1990). Laurentian Great Lakes double-CO,, climate 
change hydrological impacts. Climatic Change, 17, 
pp. 27-47. 
Crosson, P.R. and Rosenberg, NJ. (1993). An overview of the 
MINK study. Climatic Change, 24, 159-173. 
CRU (1992). Development of a Framework for the Evaluation of 
Policy Options to deal with the Greenhouse Effect: A Sctentific 
Description of the ESCAPE model, 
Version 1.1, May 1992. 
Climatic Research Unit, Norwich, UK, 126 pp. 
Cubasch, U., Hasselmann, K., Hick, H., Maier-Reimer, E., 
Mikolajewicz, U., Santer, B.D. and Sausen, R. (1992). Time- 
dependent greenhouse warming computations with a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. Clim. Dynamics, 7, 55-69. 
Department of the Environment (1991). The Potential Effects of 
Climate Change in the United Kingdom, United Kingdom Climate 
Change Impacts Review Group, HMSO, London, 124 pp. 
Downing, T.E. (1992). Climate change and vulnerable places: 
global food security and country studies in Zimbabwe, Kenya, 
Senegal and Chile. Research Report No. 
1, Environmental 
Change Unit, University of Oxford, 54 
pp. 
ECMWFE (1993). The Description of the ECMWF/WCRP Level 
I-A Global Atmospheric Data Archive, European Centre for 
Medium Range Weather Forecasting, Shinfield, Reading, UK. 
Edmonds, J.A., Reilly, J.M., Gardner, R.H. and Brenken, A. 
(1986). Uncertainty in Future Global Energy Use and Fossil Fuel 
CO,-emissions 1975 to 2075. TRO36, DOE3/Nbb-0081 Dist. 
Category UC-11, National Technical Information Service, U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Springfield, Virginia. 
Edmonds, J.A., Pitcher, H.M., Rosenberg, N.J. and Wigley, 
T.M.L. (1993). Design for the Global Change Assessment 
Model GCAM. Paper presented at the International Workshop on 
Integrated Assessment of Mitigation, Impacts and Adaptation 
to 
Climate Change, 13-15 October 1993, International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 
7 pp. 
46 
EPRI (1994). The Evaluation of Regional Climate Simulations. 
Summary Report of IPCC WGI/MECCA Workshop, 
Macquarie University, NSW, Australia, February 1994, Electric 
Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA USA. 
Fankhauser, S. (1993). The social costs of greenhouse gas emis- 
sions: an expected value approach. Paper presented at the 
International Workshop on Integrated Assessment of Mitigation, 
Impacts and Adaptation to Climate Change, 13-15 October 1993, 
. 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, 
Austria, 26 
pp. 
FAO (1978). Report on the Agro-Ecological Zones Project. 
Volume 
1, Methodology and Results for Africa. World Soil 
Resources Report, 48. Food and Agniculture Organization, Rome, 
Italy. 
FAO (1992a). CROPWAT. A computer program for imigation 
planning and management. FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper 46, 
Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, 126 pp. 
FAO (1992b). AGROSTAT-PC, Computerized Information 
Series: User Manual, Population, Land Use, Production, Trade, Food 
Balance 
Sheets, 
Forest Products. 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization, Rome. 
PAO (1993). Agriculture: Towards 2010. Report C93/24, Food 
and Agriculture Organization, Rome. 320 pp. plus appendices. 
FAO/UNESCO (1971-1981, various dates). Soil Map of the 
World. 
Volumes 1-10. Food and Agriculture Programme and 
United 
Nations 
Educational, 
Scientific 
and 
Cultural 
Organization, Paris. 
Farhar-Pilgrim, B. (1985). Social analysis. In Kates, R.W., 
Ausubel, J.H. and Berberian M. (eds.). Climate Impact Assessment: 
Studies of the Interaction of Climate and Society, SCOPE 27, Wiley, 
Chichester, pp. 323-350. 
Fiering, M.B. and Rogers, P.P. (1989). Climate Change and 
Water Resource Planning Under Uncertainty. Research Report pre- 
pared for the US Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water 
Resources, Washington, D.C. 
Frederick, K.D. (1993). Paper 4. Climate change impacts on 
water resources and possible responses in the MINK region. 
Climatic Change, 24, 83-115. 
Fritz, J. (1990). A Survey of Environmental Monitoring and 
Information Management Programmes of International Organizations. 
United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi. 
Gadgil, S., Huda, A.K.S., Jodha, N-S., Singh, R.P. and Virmani, 
S.M. (1988). The effects of climatic variations on agriculture in 
dry tropical regions of India. In Parry, M.L., Carter T.R. and 
Konijn, N.T. (eds). The Impact of Climatic Variations on 
Agriculture. Volume 2. Assessments in Semi-Arid Regions. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
pp. 495-578. 
Geign, S.C. van de, Goudriaan, J. and Berendse, F. (eds) (1993). 
Climate change; crops and terrestrial ecosystems. Agrobiologische 
Thema’s 9, CABO-DLO, Centre for Agrobiological Research, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands, 144 pp.

REFERENCES 
Giorgi, F. (1990). Simulation of regional climate using a limited 
area model nested in 
a general circulation model. J. Climate, 3, 
941-963. 
Giorgi, F. and Mearns, L.O. (1991). Approaches to the simula- 
tion of regional climate change: 
a review. Rev. Geophys., 29, 
191-216. 
Giorgi, 
F., Marinucci, M.R. and Visconti, G. (1992). A 2 x 
CO, climate change scenario over Europe generated using a 
limited area model nested in a general circulation model. 
2. 
Climate 
change 
scenario. 
J. 
Geophys. 
Res., 
97(D9), 
10011-10028. 
Glantz, M.H. (ed.) (1988). Societal Responses to Regional Climate 
Change: Forecasting by Analogy. Westview Press, Boulder. 
Grove, J.M. (1988). The Little Ice Age. Methuen, London, 498 pp. 
Goicoechea, A., Hansen, D. and Duckstein, 
L. 
(1982). 
Multiobjective Decision Analysis with Engineering and Business 
Applications. Wiley, New York, 520 pp. 
Haimes, Y.Y. and Li, D. (1994). Multiobjective risk partitioning 
for rare hydrologic events. In Haimes, Y.Y., Moser, D. and 
Stakhiv, E. 
(eds). Risk-Based Decision Making in Water Resources 
VI. Proc. Engineering Foundation Conference, American 
Society of Civil Engineers, New York, NY. 
Haines, A., Epstein, P.R. and McMichael, A.J. (1993). Global 
health watch: monitoring impacts of environmental change. 
Lancet, 342, 1464-1469. 
Hansen, 
J., Russell, G., Rind, D., Stone, P., Lacis, A., Lebedeff, 
S., Ruedy, R. and Travis, L. (1983). Efficient three-dimensional 
global models for climate studies: Models 
I and II. Mon. Wea. 
Rev., 111, 609-662. 
Hasselmann, K., Sausen, R., Maier-Reimer, E. and Voss, R. 
(1993). On the cold start problem in transient simulations with 
coupled atmosphere-ocean models. Climate Dynamics, 9, 53-61. 
Haxby, W.F. 
et al. (1983). Digital images of combined oceanic 
and continental data sets and their use in tectonic studies. EOS 
Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, 64, 995-1004. 
Hicks, A.J. (1993). Directory of Organizations and Institutes Active 
in Environmental Monitoring. United Nations Environment 
Programme, Nairobi. 
Holdridge, L.R. (1947). Determination of world plant forma- 
tions from simple climatic data. Science, 105, 367-368. 
Holling, C.S. (ed.}(1978). Adaptive Environmental Assessment and 
Management. Wiley, Chichester, 377 pp. 
Holten, J.J. and Carey, P.D. (1992). Responses of Climate 
Change on Natural Terrestrial Ecosystems in Norway. NINA 
Forskningsrapport 29, Norwegian Institute for Nature 
Research, Trondheim, Norway, 59 
Hotthus, P., Crawford, M., Makroro, C. and Sullivan, S. (1992). 
Vulnerability assessment for accelerated sea level rise case study: 
47 
Majuro Atoll, Republic of the Marshall Islands, SPREP Reports 
and Studies Series No. 60, Apia, Western Samoa, 107 pp. 
Hulme, M. (1994). Validation of large-scale precipitation fields 
in general circulation models. 
In Desbois, M., and Désalmand, 
F, (eds). Global Precipitation and Climate Change. NATO ASW 
Proceedings, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
pp. 387—405. 
Hulme, M., Wigley, T., Jiang, T., Zhao, Z-c., Wang, F., Ding, 
Y., Leemans, R. and Markham, A. (1992). Climate Change due to 
the Greenhouse Effect and its implications for China. World Wide 
Fund for Nature, Gland, Switzerland, 57 pp. 
Hulme, M., Raper, S. and Wigley, T. M. L. (1995a, in press). 
An integrated framework to address climate change (ESCAPE) 
and further developments of the global and regional climate 
modules (MAGICC). Energy Policy. 
Hulme, M., Conway, D., Jones, P.D., Jiang, T., Barrow, E.M. 
and Turney, C. (1995b, in press). A 1961-90 climatology for 
Europe for climate change modelling and impact applications. 
Int. J. Climatology. 
Hutchinson, M.F. (1987). Methods of generating weather 
sequences. In Bunting, A.H. (ed.) Agricultural Environments: 
Characterization, Classification and Mapping. CAB International, 
Wallingford, UK, pp. 149-157. 
IBSNAT (1989). Decision Support System for Agrotechnology 
Transfer Version 2.1 (DSSAT V2.1), International Benchmark 
Sites Network for Agrotechnology Transfer, Department of 
Agronomy and Soil Science, College of Tropical Agriculture 
and Human Resources, University of Hawaii, Honolulu. 
IPCC (1990a). Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
Houghton, J.T., Jenkins, GJ., and Ephraums, J.J. (eds). Report 
of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, Cambridge University Press, 364 pp. 
IPCC (1990b). Climate Change: The IPCC Impacts Assessment. 
Tegart, W.J.McG., Sheldon, G.W. and Griffiths, D.C. 
(eds). 
Report prepared for IPCC by Working Group II, Australian 
Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 210 
pp. 
IPCC (1991a). Climate Change: The IPCC Response Strategies. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C. 
IPCC (1992a). Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report to 
the IPCC Scientific Assessment. Houghton, J.T., Callander B.A. 
and Varney S.K. (eds). Cambridge University Press, 200 pp. 
IPCC (1992b) Climate Change 1992: the Supplementary Report to 
the IPCC Impacts Assessment. Tegart, W.J. McG., Sheldan, 
G.W. and Griffiths, D.C. 
(eds). Report prepared for 
IPCC Working Group II, Australian Government Publishing 
Service, Canberra. 
IPCC (1994). Preparing 
to meet the Coastal Challenges of the 21st 
Century. Conference Report, World Coast Conference 1993. 
Nordwijk, The Netherlands. 
Johda, N.S. and Mascarenhas, A.C. (1985). Adjustment in self- 
provisioning societies. In Kates, R.W., Ausubel, J.H. and

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
Berberian, M. (eds). Climate Impact Assessment: Studies of the 
Interaction of Climate and Society. SCOPE 27, Wiley, Chichester, 
pp. 437-464. 
Jones, P.D., Raper, $.C.B., Bradley, R.S., Diaz, H.F., Kelly, 
P.M. and Wigley, T.M.L. (1986a). Northem Hemisphere sur- 
face air temperature variations 1851-1984. J. Clim. Appl. Met., 
25, 161-179. 
Jones, P.D., Raper, S.C.B. and Wigley, T.M.L. (1986b). 
Southern Hemisphere surface air temperature variations 
1851-1984. J. Clim. Appl. Met., 25, 1213-1230. 
Karl, T.R., Wang, W-C., Schlesinger, M.E., Knight, R.W. and 
Portman, D.A. (1990) 
. A method of relating general circulation 
model simulated climate to the observed local climate. Part 
I: 
scasonal studies. J. Climate, 3, 1053-1079. 
Kates, R.W. (1985). The interaction of chmate and society. In 
Kates, R.W., Ausubel, J.H. and Berberian, M. 
(eds). Climate 
Impact Assessment: Studies of the Interaction of Climate and Society. 
SCOPE 27, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 3-36. 
K6ppen, W. (1931). Criinde der Klimakunde. Walter de Gruyter, 
Berlin. 
Kutzbach, J.E. and Guetter, P.J. (1986). The influence of 
changing orbital parameters and surface boundary conditions on 
climate simulations for the past 18,000 years. J. Atmos. Sci., 43, 
1726-1759. 
Lamb, H.H. (1977). Climate: Present, Past and Future. Volume 2: 
Climatic History and the Future. Methuen, London, 835 pp. 
Leemans, R. and Cramer, W.P. (1991). The IIASA database for 
mean monthly values of temperature, precipitation, and cloudi- 
ness on a global terrestrial grid. ITASA Research Report, RR-91- 
18, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 
Laxenburg, Austria, 62 pp. 
Leggett, J., Pepper, WJ. and Swart, R.J. (1992). Emissions sce- 
narios for the IPCC: an update. In Houghton, J.T., Callander, 
B.A. and Varney S.K. 
(eds). Climate Change 1992: The 
Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 69-95. 
Liverman, D. (1986). The response of a global food model to 
possible climate changes: A sensitivity analysis. J. Climatol., 
6, 
355-373. 
Lorenz, E.N. (1968). Climate determinism. Meteorological 
Monographs, 8(30), 1-3. 
Lough, J.M., Wigley, T.M.L. and Palutikof, J.P. 
(1983) 
. 
Climate and climate impact scenarios for Europe in a warmer 
world. J. Clim. Appl. Meteorol., 22, 1673-1684. 
Lovell, C.A.K. and Smith, V.K. (1985). Microeconomic analy- 
sis. In Kates, R.W., Ausubel, J. H. and Berberian, M. 
(eds). 
Climate Impact Assessment: Studies of the Interaction of Climate and 
Sodety. SCOPE 27, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 293-321. 
McGregor, J.L. and Walsh, KJ. (1993). Nested simulations of 
48 
perpctual January climate over the Australian region. J. Geophys. 
Res., 98(D12), 23283-23290. 
McGregor, J.L., Walsh, KJ. and Katzfey, J.J. (1993). Nested 
modelling for regional climate studies. In Jakeman, A.J., Beck, 
M.B. and McAleer, M.J. (eds) Modelling Change in Environmental 
Systems. John Wiley, pp. 367-386. 
McKenney, M.S. and Rosenberg, NJ. (1991). Climate Data 
Needs from GCM Experiments for Use in Assessing the Potential 
Impacts of Climate Change on Natural Systems. Climate Resources 
Program, Resources for the Futurc, Washington, D.C., 19 pp. 
McWilliams, B.E. (ed.) (1991). Climate Change: Studies on the 
Implications for Ireland. Department of the Environment, 
Stationery Office, Dublin, 193 pp. 
Magalhaes, A.R. and Neto, E.B. 
(eds) (1989). Socio-economic 
Impacts of Climatic Variations and Policy Responses in Brazil. 
UNEP/SEPLAN-CE, Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil (unpublished). 
Manabe, S. and Wetherald, R.T. (1987). Large scale changes of 
soil wetness induced by an increase in atmospheric carbon diox- 
ide. J. Atmos, Sd., 44, 1211-1235. 
Manabe, S., Stouffer, R.J., Spelman, M.J. and Bryan, K. (1991). 
Transient responses of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to 
gradual changes of atmospheric CO,. Part 
1: Annual mean 
response. J. Climate, 4, 785-818. 
Manabe, S., Spelman, MJ. and Stouffer, RJ. (1992). Transient 
responses of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to gradual 
changes of atmospheric CO,. Part 2: Seasonal response. J. 
Climate, 5, 105-126. 
Manne, A.S. and Richels, R.G. (1992). Buying Greenhouse 
Insurance: The Economic Costs of Carbon Dioxide Emission Limits. 
Cambridge MA, MIT Press. 
Manne, A., Mendelsohn, R. and Richels, R. (1993). MERGE - 
A Model for Evaluating Regional and Global Effects of GHG 
Reduction Policies. Paper presented at the International Workshop 
on Integrated Assessment of Mitigation, Impacts and Adaptation 
to 
Climate Change, 13-15 October 1993, International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 38 pp. 
Martens, W.J.M., Rotmans, J. and Niessen, L.W. (1994). 
Climate Change and Malaria Risk: An Integrated Modelling 
Approach. RIVM Report No. 461502003, National Institute of 
Public Health and Environmental Protection, Bilthoven, The 
Netherlands, 37 pp. 
Martin, P. and Lefebvre, M. (1993). 
9 to 5. 
9 approaches to 
tackle 5 aspects of climate change. Climatic Change, 25, 421-438. 
Matthews, E. (1983). Global vegetation and land use: new high- 
resolution data bases for climate studies. J. Appl. Clim. Meteor., 
22, 473-487. 
Matthews, E. (1985). Atlas of archived vegetation, land-use and sea- 
sonal albedo data sets. NASA Technical Memorandum No. 
86199, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, New 
York, 23 pp.

REFERENCES 
Matthews, E. and Fung, I. (1987). Methane emission from natu- 
ral wetlands. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 1, 61-86. 
Mearns, L.O. and Rosenzweig, C. (1994). Use of a nested 
regional climate model with changed daily variability of precip- 
itation and temperature to test related sensitivity of dynamic 
crop models. Preprints of the AMS Fifth Symposium on Global 
Change Studies, January 23-28 1994, American Meteorological 
Socicty. 
Mikami, T. (cd.) (1992). Proceedings of the International Symposium 
on Little Ice Age Climate. Department of Geography, Tokyo 
Metropolitan University, Hachioji, Japan, 342 pp. 
Morita, T., Matsuoka, Y., Kainuma, M., Harasawa, H. and Kai, 
K. (1993). AIM—Asian-Pacific Integrated Model for Evaluating 
Policy Options to reduce GHG Emissions and Global Warming 
Impacts. Paper presented at the International Workshop on 
Integrated Assessment of Mitigation, Impacts and Adaptation 
to 
Climate Change, 13-15 October 1993, International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 26 
pp. 
Murphy, J.M. (1994). Transient response of the Hadley Centre 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model to increasing carbon dioxide. 
Part I: Control climate and flux correction. J. Climate (in press). 
Murphy, J.M. and Mitchell, J.F.B. (1994). Transient response of 
the Hadley Centre coupled occan-atmosphere model to increas- 
ing carbon dioxide. Part II: Spatial and temporal structure of the 
response. J. Climate (in press). 
National Defense University (NDU) (1978). Climate Change to 
the Year 2000. Washington, D.C., Fort Lesley J. McNair. 
National Defense University (NDU) (1980). Crop Yields and 
Climate Change to the Year 2000. Vol. 
1. Washington, D.C., Fort 
Lesley J. McNair. 
Nordhaus, W.D. (1992). The DICE Model: Background and 
Structure of 
a Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy Model of 
the Economics of Global Warming. Cowles Foundation Discussion 
Paper, No. 
1009, New Haven, Connecticut. 
Ninh, N.H., Glantz, M.H. and Hien, H.M. 
(eds) 
(1991). 
Climate Related Impact Assessment in Vietnam. Center for Natural 
Resources Management and Environmental Studies, University 
of Hanoi, Vietnam and National Center for Atmospheric 
Research, Boulder, Co., USA (unpublished). 
Nishioka, 
$., Harasawa, H., Hashimoto, H., Ookita, T., 
Masuda, K. and Morita, T. (eds) (1993). The Potential Effects of 
Climate Change in Japan. Center for Global Environmental 
Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies, 
Tsukuba, Japan, 94 pp. 
OECD (1990). Main Economic Indicators—Historical Statistics, 
1969-1988. 766 pp. 
OECD Environment Committee (1991). Climate Change: 
Evaluating the Socio-Economic Impacts. 109 
pp. 
Olson, J., Watts, J.A. and Allison, L.J. (1985). Major World 
Ecosystem Complexes Ranked by Carbon in Live Vegetation: A 
Database. Carbon Dioxide Information and Analysis Center, 
Oak Ridge, Tennessce, USA. 
Parry, M.L. (1978). Climatic Change, Agriculture and Settlement. 
Dawson, Follkestone, 214 pp. 
Parry, M.L. and Carter, T.R. (1988). The assessment of effects 
of climatic variations on agriculture: aims, methods and sum- 
mary of results. In Parry, M.L., Carter, T.R. and Konijn, N.T. 
(eds). The Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture. 
Volume 
1. 
Assessments in Cool Temperate and Cold Regions. Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 
pp. 11-95. 
Parry, M.L., Carter, T.R. and Konijn, N.T. (eds) (1988a). The 
Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture. Volume 
1. Assessments 
in Cool Temperate and Cold Regions, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, 876 pp. 
Parry, M.L., Carter, T.R. and Konijn, N.T. (cds) (1988b). 
‘The 
Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture. Volume 2. Assessments in 
Semi-Arid Regions, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 764 pp. 
Parry, M.L. (1990). Climate Change and World Agriculture, 
Earthscan, London, 210 pp. 
Parry, M.L., Blantran de Rozari, M., Chong, A.L. and Panich, 
S. (1992). The Potential Socio-Economic Effects of Climate Change in 
South-East Asia. United Nations Environment Programme, 
Nairobi, 126 pp. 
Pearce, D. W. (1993) Economic Values and the Natural World, 
Earthscan, London 
Pearman, G.I. 
(ed.) (1988) Greenhouse: Planning for Climate 
Change. CSIRO, Melbourne. 
Peck, S.C. and Teisberg, TJ. (1992). CETA: A model for 
Carbon Emissions Trajectory Assessment. The Energy Journal, 
13(1), 55-77. 
Pfister, C. (1984). Das Klima der Schweiz und Seine Bedeutung in 
der Geschichte von Bevolkenung und Landwirtschaft. 
2 volumes. 
Haupt, Bern. 
Pitovranov, S.E. (1988). The assessment of impacts of possible cli- 
mate changes on the results of the IIASA RAINS sulfur deposition 
model in Europe. Wat. Air Soil Pollut., 40, 95-119. 
Pittock, A.B. (1993). Climate scenario development. In 
Jakeman, AJ., Beck, M.B. and McAleer, MJ. 
(eds). Modelling 
Change in Environmental Systems. John Wiley, pp. 481-503. 
Riebsame, W.E. (1988). Assessing the Social Implications of Climate 
Fluctuations: A Guide 
to Climate Impact Studies. United Nations 
Environment Programme, Nairobi, 82. pp. 
Robinson, J. (1985). Global monitoring and simulations. 
In 
Kates, R.W., Ausubel, J.H. and Berberian, M. 
(eds). Climate 
Impact Assessment: Studies of the Interaction of Climate and Society. 
SCOPE 27, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 3-36. 
Robock, A., Turco, R.P., Harwell, M.A., Ackerman, T.P., 
Andressen, R., Chang, H-S. and Sivakumar, M.V.K. (1993). Use

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
of general circulation model output in the creation of climate 
change scenarios for impact analysis. Climatic Change, 23, 293-335. 
Rosenberg, NJ. (1992). Adaptation of agriculture to climate 
change. Climatic Change, 21, 385-405. 
Rosenberg, NJ. 
(ed.) (1993). Towards an integrated impact 
assessment of climate change: the MINK study. Climatic Change 
(Special Issue), 24, 1-173. 
Rosenzweig, C. and Parry, M.L. (1994). Potential impact of cli- 
mate change on world food supply. Nature, 367, 133-38. 
Rotmans, J. (1990). IMAGE: an Integrated Model 
to Assess the 
Greenhouse Effect. Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Rotmans, J., Hulme, M. and Downing, T.E. (1994). Climate 
change implications for Europe. An application of the ESCAPE 
model. Global Environmental Change, 4(2), 977-124. 
Santer, B.D., Wigley, T.M.L., Schlesinger, M.E. and Mitchell, 
J.F.B. (1990). Developing climate scenarios from equilibrium 
GCM results. Report No. 
47, Max-Planck-Institut-fiir- 
Meteorologie, Hamburg, 29 pp. 
Scheraga, J.D., Leary, N., Goettle, R., Jorgenson, D. and 
Wilcoxen, P. (1993). Macroeconomic modelling and the assess- 
ment of climate change impacts. In Kaya, Y., Nakicenovic, N., 
Nordhaus, W.D. and Toth, F.L. (eds). Costs, Impacts and 
Possible Benefits of CO, Mitigation. IZASA Collaborative Paper, 
CP-93-2, pp. 107-132. 
Scott, MJ. (1993). Impacts of Climate Change on Human 
Settlements: Guidelines for Assessing Impacts. Draft Mimeo sub- 
mitted to the UNEP-Canada Workshop on Impacts and Adaptation 
to Climate 
Variability and Change, Toronto, Canada, 29 
November—3 December 1993, 3 pp. 
Smit, B. (1991). Potential future impacts of climatic change on 
the Great Plains. In Wall, G. (ed.) Symposium on the Impacts of 
Climatic Change and Variability on the Great Plains. Department of 
Geography Publication Series, Occasional Paper No. 12, 
University of Waterloo, Canada. 
Smit, B (1993). (Ed.) Adaptation 
to Climatic Variability and 
Change. Report of the Task Force on Climate Adaptation, The 
Canadian Climate Program. Occasional Paper No. 
19, 
Department of Geography, University of Guelph, 53 pp. 
Smith, J.B. and Tirpak, D.A. (1990). The Potential Effects of Global 
Climate Change on the United States. Report to Congress, United 
States Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. 
Smith, M. (1992). Expert Consultation on Revision of FAO 
Methodologies for Crop Water Requirements. Land and Water 
Development Division, Food and Agriculture Organization, 
Rome, 60 pp. 
Stakhiv, E.Z., Ratick, S.J. and Du, W. (1991). Risk-cost aspects 
of sea level rise and climate change in the evaluation of shore 
protection projects. In: Ganoulis, J. (ed.). Water Resources 
Engineering Risk Assessment. NATO ASI Series. Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, pp. 311-335. 
50 
Stakhiv, E.Z. (1993). Water resources planning and manage- 
ment under climate uncertainty. In: Ballentine, T.M. and 
Stakhiv, E.Z. (eds). Proceedings of the First National Conference on 
Climate Change and Water Resources Management, IWR Report 
93-R-17, Institute of Water Resources, US Army Corps of 
Engineers, Washington, D.C., [V—20-IV—35 
Stakhiv, E.Z. (1994). Water resources planning of evaluation 
principles apphed to ICZM. In: Proc. Preparatory Workshop on 
Integrated Coastal Zone Management and Responses to Climate 
Change. World Coast Conference 1993, New Orleans, Louisiana. 
Stewart, T.R. and Glantz, M.H. (1985). Expert judgement and 
climate forecasting: 
A methodological critique of Climate Change 
fo the Year 2000. Climatic Change, 7, 159-183. 
Strain, B.R. and Cure, J.D. (eds) (1985). Direct Effects of 
Increasing Carbon Dioxide on Vegetation. DOE/ER-0238, United 
States Department of Energy, Office of Energy Research, 
Washington D.C., 286 pp. 
Strzepek, K.M. and Smith, J. B. (in press). As Climate Changes: 
International Impacts and Implications. Cambridge University Press, 
United Kingdom. 
Strzepek, K.M., Onyeji, S.C., Saleh, M. and Yates, D. 
(in 
press). An assessment of integrated climate change impact on 
Egypt. In Strzepek, K.M. and Smith, J. (eds). As Climate 
Changes: International Impacts and Implications. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Swart, RJ. and Vellinga, P. (1994). The ‘ultimate objective’ of the 
framework convention on climate change requires 
a new approach 
in climate change research. Climatic Change, 26, 343-349. 
Swartzman, G.L. and Kaluzny, S.P. (1987). Ecological Simulation 
Primer. Macmillan, New York, 370 pp. 
Tarpley, J.D. (1991). The NOAA global vegetation index pro- 
ject—a review. Palaeogeog., Palaeoclim., Palaeoecol., 90, 189-194. 
Taylor, K.E. and Penner, J.E. (1994). Response of the climate 
system to atmospheric aerosols and greenhouse gases. Nature, 
369, 734-737. 
TSU (1994). Climatic Scenarios and Socioeconomic Projections for 
IPCC WGI! Assessment. IPCC WGII Technical Support Unit, 
Washington, D.C, 12 pp. plus appendices and diskettes. 
Toth, F.L. (1989). Policy exercises. IIASA Research Report 
RR-89-2, Reprinted from Simulation and Games, 19 
(3). 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, 
Austria, 43 pp. 
United Nations (1991). 
World Population Prospects, 
1990. 
Population Studies No. 120, New York. 
United Nations (1992). World Population Prospects: The 1992 
Revision, New York. 
UNEP (1987). World Directory of Environmental Expertise, 
INFOTERRA. United Nations Environment Programme, 
Nairobi.

REFERENCES 
UNEP (1992). 
World Atlas of Desertification. Edward Arnold, 
London. 
UNEP (1993). Environmental Data Report, 1993—94. United 
Nations Environment Programme, Blackwell, Oxford. 
Viner, D. and Hulme, M. (1992). Climate Change Scenarios for 
Impact Studies in the UK: General Circulation Models, Scenario 
Construction Methods and Applications for Impact Assessment. 
Report for the UK Department of the Environment, Climatic 
Research Unit, University of East Anglia, Norwich, 70 pp. 
Viner, D. and Hulme, M. (1994). The Climate Impacts LINK 
Project: Providing Climate Change Scenarios for Impacts Assessment in 
the UK. Report for the UK Department of the Environment, 
Climatic Research Unit, Norwich, 24 pp. 
Vinnikov, K.Ya. and Groisman, P.Ya. (1979). An empirical 
model of present-day climate change. Meteorol. Gidrolog., 1979, 
No. 3, 25-36 (in Russian). 
Vloedbeld, M. and Leemans, R. (1993). Quantifying feedback 
processes in the response of the terrestrial carbon cycle to global 
change: the modeling approach of IMAGE-2. 
Wat. Air Soil 
Pollut., 70, 615-628. 
de Vries, H.J.M., Olivier, J.G.J., van den Wijngaart, R.A., 
Kreileman, GJ J. and Toet, A.M.C. (1994). Model for calculat- 
ing regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse 
gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Wat. Air 
Soil Pollut., 76, 79-131. 
Warrick, R.A. (1984). The possible impacts on wheat produc~ 
tion of a recurrence of the 1930s drought in the U.S. Great 
Plains. Climatic Change, 6, 5-26. 
Warrick, R.A., Barrow, E.M. and Wigley, T.M.L. (eds). (1993). 
Climate and Sea Level Change: Observations, Projections and 
Implications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Whetton, P.H., Hennessy, KJ., Pittock, A.B., Fowler, A.M. 
and Mitchell, C.D. (1992). Regional impact of the enhanced 
greenhouse effect on Victoria. Annual Report 1991-92. CSIRO 
Division of Atmospheric Research, Commonwealth Scientific 
and Industrial Research Organization, Mordialloc, 64 pp. 
WHO (1990). Global estimates for health situation assessments 
and projections 
1990. 
WHO/HST/90.2, Division 
of 
Epidemiological Surveillance and Health Situation and Trend 
Assessment, World Health Organization, 61 pp. 
Whyte, A.V.T. (1985). Perception. In Kates, R.W., Ausubel, 
J.H. and Berberian, M. (eds). Climate Impact Assessment: Studies 
of the Interaction of Climate and Society. SCOPE 27, Wiley, 
Chichester, pp. 403-436. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and Raper, S.C.B. (1992). Implications for cli- 
mate and sea level of revised IPCC emissions scenarios. Nature, 
357, 293-300. 
Wigley, T.M.L., Jones, P.D., Briffa, K.R. and Smith, G. (1990). 
Obtaining sub-grid-scale information from coarse-resolution general 
circulation model output. J. Geophys. Res., 95(D2), 1943-1954. 
51 
Wilks, 
D.S. 
(1988). 
Estimating 
the 
consequences 
of 
CO,-induced climate change on North American grain agricul- 
ture using general circulation model information. Climatic 
Change, 13, 19-42. 
Wilks, D.S. (1992). Adapting stochastic weather generation algo- 
rithms for climate change studies. Climatic Change, 22, 67-84. 
Willams, G.D.V., Fautley, 
R.A. Jones, K.H., Stewart, R.B., and 
Wheaton, E.E. (1988). Estimating Effects of Climatic Change on 
Agriculture in Saskatchewan, Canada. In Parry, M.L., Carter, 
T.R. and Konijn, N.T. (eds). The Impact of Climatic Variations on 
Agriculture, Volume 
1. Assessments in Cool Temperate and Cold 
Regions., Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 219-379. 
Wilson, C.A. and Mitchell, J.F.B. (1987). A doubled Co, cli- 
mate sensitivity experiment with a global climate model includ- 
ing a simple ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 92(13), 315-343. 
WMO (1985). Report of the WMO/UNEP/ICSU- SCOPE 
Expert Meeting on the Reliability of Crop-Climate Models for 
Assessing the Impacts of Climatic Change and Variability. WCP-90, 
World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, 31 pp. 
WMO (1988). Water Resources and Climatic Change: Sensitivity of 
Water Resource Systems 
to Climate Change and Variability. 
WCAP-4, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva. 
World Bank (1991). World Development Report, 1991. Oxford 
University Press, New York. 
WRI (1992). World Resources, 1992-1993. A Guide to the Global 
Environment. Toward Sustainable Development. World Resources 
Institute, Oxford University Press, New York, 385 pp. 
Yin, Y. and Cohen, SJ. (1994). Identifying regional goals and 
policy concerns associated with global climate change. Global 
Environmental Change, 4(3), 246-260. 
Zobler, L. (1986). A world soil file for global climate modelling. 
NASA Technical Memorandum 87802, National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration, New York.

TPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
APPENDIX 1: APPROACHES FOR DEVELOPING 
CLIMATIC SCENARIOS FROM GCM INFORMATION 
Al 
Some standard mcthods of scenario construction are outlined 
below. Most impact assessments relying on GCM outputs for 
scenarios have adopted one of the alternatives described. For 
further details, readers are referred to the examples cited. Useful 
reviews of climatic scenario devclopment are provided by 
Giorgi and Mearns (1991) and Pittock (1993). 
A1.1 Equilibrium changes 
Two methods are commonly used for computing the change in 
climate between the modelled control and 2 x CO, conditions 
for each grid box: by calculating the difference or ‘delta’ (1e., 2 
x CO, minus control), or the ratio 
(i.e., 
2 x CO, divided by 
control) between pairs of values. The former method is usually 
preferred for considering temperature changes and the latter for 
precipitation changes. Note that if ratios are applied to tempera- 
tures, data should be converted from the relative Celsius scale to 
the absolute Kelvin scale (0°C = 273.15K). 
A1.2 Scaling to the bascline 
Since GCM outputs are not generally of a sufficient resolution 
or reliability to estimate regional climate even for the 
present-day (1.e., via the control run), 
it is usual for baseline 
observational data to be used to represent the present-day cli- 
mate. These are then adjusted to represent the 2 x CO, climate, 
either by adding the deltas or multiplying the ratios described 
above (Box Al). The method implicitly assumes, therefore, that 
any systematic errors in the control run are also present in the 
experiment. A further note of caution concems the application 
of precipitation ratios derived from GCM outputs to baseline 
precipitation in dry regions. If the GCM indicates that precipi- 
tation increases due to 
a shift in circulation, this increase 
expressed as a percentage has little effect when multiplied by the 
low baseline value, producing an unrealistic scenario. In such 
cases, the discretionary use of differences rather than ratios 
might be appropuate. 
A1.3 Transient changes 
The procedure for constructing transient scenarios is somewhat 
different. Firstly, the problem of drift in the control run (see 
Section 6.5.3) makes the selection of an averaging period prob- 
lematic. Some workers use the full control period for averaging, 
others a period at the beginning, and still others a period in the 
control run corresponding to the equivalent period in the per- 
turbation run. 
Second, the requirements for scenario information from 
transient model outputs are either for discrete or continuous 
estimates. Discrete estimates provide values for time slices in the 
future (for example, decadal averages of change relative to the 
control). Continuous estimates refer to year-by-year values 
throughout the projection period. A simple method of scenario 
construction, developed for use in deliberations by IPCC 
Working Group IT (TSU, 1994) is described in Box A2. 
A1.4 Missing variables 
In the absence of information on changes in certain climatic vari- 
ables important for impact assessment, values of these variables are 
usually fixed at baseline levels. Given the sometimes strong corre- 
52 
lations between variables under present-day climate, this proce- 
dure should be adopted with caution. An altcrnative involves 
invoking these statistical relationships to adjust missing variables 
according to changes in predicted variables. 
A1.5 Time resolution 
It is usually assumed that monthly adjustments made to climatic 
variables can be applied equally to data at shorter, within-month 
time steps. In the absence of information about the year-to-year 
variability of climate, 
it is further assumed that this remains the 
same under the scenario climate as during the baseline period. 
Recently, methods have becn reported that make use of the daily 
data that are available from a limited number of GCM simulations. 
The statistical properties of these data can be used to generate 
stochastic weather data sets suitable as inputs to impact models. 
A1.6 Sub-grid-scale data 
One of the major problems faced in applying GCM projections 
to regional impact assessments is the coarse spatial scale of the 
estimates. Typically, GCM data are available at a horizontal prid 
point resolution of, at best, some 200 kilometers. Several meth- 
ods have been adopted for developing regional GCM-based sce- 
narios at sub-grid scale: 
(1) The study area baseline 
is combined with the scenario 
anomaly of the nearest centre of a grid box (e.g., Bultot et al., 
1988; Croley, 1990). This has the drawback that sites which are 
in close mutual proximity but fall in different grid boxes, while 
exhibiting very similar baseline climatic characteristics, may be 
assigned a quite different scenario climate. 
(2) The scenario anomaly field is objectively interpolated, 
and the baselinc value (at a site or interpolated) 
is combined 
with the interpolated scenario value (e.g., Parry and Carter, 
1988; Cohen, 1991). This overcomes the problem in (1), but 
introduces a falsc precision to the estimates. 
(3) Experiments are conducted with regional ‘fine mesh’ cli- 
mate models, which use inputs from GCMs and are then run 
(nested) 
at a higher spatial resolution (e.g., see the review by 
McGregor et al., 1993). This is 
a physically-based method of 
accounting for important local forcing factors such as surface 
type and elevation, which GCMs are unable to resolve. A num- 
ber of model runs have been conducted for regions in Europe 
and North America (e.g., Giorgi ef al., 1992) and Australia (e.g., 
McGregor and Walsh, 1993), and at least one (agricultural) 
impact study has been reported based on the outputs from a 
nested model (Meams and Rosenzweig, 1993). 
(4) Statistical relationships are established between observed 
chmate at local scale and at the scale of GCM grid boxes. These 
relationships are used to estimate local adjustments to the baseline 
climate from the GCM grid box values (e.g., Wilks, 1988; Karl et 
al., 1990; Wigley et al., 1990). A variant of this approach relates 
local climate to objective measures of historical circulation types 
and then determines a scenario climate on the basis of the circu- 
lation type computed from GCM predictions (e.g., Bardossy and 
Plate, 1992). A weakness of both of these methods is that they 
assume that the relationships between sub-grid scale and large- 
scale climate will not change under GHG forcing.

APPENDIX 
} 
A1.6 Composite scenarios 
A nunber of studies have combined the anomaly felds from sev- 
eral scenarios (e.g., GCMs, historical) into one scenano using 
either dynamical/empirical reasoning (e.g., Pearman, 1988; 
Ackerman and Cropper, 1988; Robock et al., 1993) or averaging 
(e.g., Sancer et al., 1990). Composice scenanios of this type are not 
generally realisnc at a global scale, as they are based on a range of 
source scenanos, each having different assumptions and regional 
paramecterizations. However, they have become useful in impacc 
assessment both because they are relatively simple to apply and 
because they can provide information on berween-model uncer- 
tainty of projections (Viner and Hulme, 1992). 
A1.7 Scaling GCM outputs to global projections 
It has become common to use simple climate models rather rhan 
GCMs to estimate the eftects on future global temperatures of 
alternative GHG emission scenarios (IPCC, 1990a, 1992a). 
Their attractiveness as policy tools makes ic desirable to use these 
scenarios in impact studies. However, since only global estimates 
are provided chey cannot be used directly in regional assess- 
ments. 
A method of overcoming this problem makes use of 
GCM information in conjunction with the global estimates, 
whereby the GCM estimates of regional changes are scaled 
according cto the ratio between the GCM estimate of global 
temperature change and chat provided in che simple scenano 
(for example, for 
a doubling of CO,). An example of how this 
technique can be used in developing transient scenarios is shown 
in Box A2. 
A1.8 Selecting models 
Many GCM simulations have been conducted in recent years, 
and it 1s not easy co choose suitable examples for use in impact 
assessments. In general, the more recenc simulations are likely to 
be more reliable as they are based on recent knowledge, and 
they tend to be of a higher spatial resolution than earlier model 
runs. The IPCC has undertaken 
a GCM intercomparison exer- 
cise, which should provide useful information on mode} rebabil- 
ity and uncertainties (EPRI, 1994). 
Ic is strongly recommended 
that recent reviews of GCMs be consulted before selection. The 
National Center of Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado, 
USA has been acting as 
a cleaning house for GCM data from 
different modelling groups. 
In addition, the Model Evaluation 
Consortium for Climate Assessmenc (MECCA) 
at Macquarie 
University, New South Wales, Australia has developed a proto- 
type compace disc, MECCA CID, which contains data from 
GCMs and a protocol for their distnbution and use. 
53 
BOX Al 
SCENARIOS FROM EQUILIBRIUM 
GCM OUTPUTS 
To illustrate how equilibnum GCM outputs are commonly 
used to develop climatic scenarios, let us consider that the 
climatic vanable of interest is June surface air temperature at 
a site, S. A long time series of mean June temperatures 
is 
available from 
a meteorological station 
at the 
site 
(Figure (a)). GCM estimates of monthly mean temperature 
for a model grid point adjacent to or interpolated to site S 
have been obtained for an equilibrium 2 x CO2 simulation, 
accompanied by estimates for a control simulation assuming 
present-day atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) concentra- 
tions (Figure (b)). 
The climatological baseline 
is selected as the most recent 
standard 30-year averaging period for which observations 
are available (1961-1990; Figure (a)). Note that this period 
encompasses notable extreme events and some cyelicity at a 
decadal time scale. 
The GCM estimates for the control and equilibrium 2 x 
CO2 simulations are shown in Figure (b) as annual values 
of mean June temperature. Climate modellers usually pro- 
vide model results only for a period during which the 
global mean annual temperature approximiates equilibrium 
(often 
a 10-year period). A similar period is also selected 
from late 
in the control run, 
as 
ic often takes several 
decades for the modelled 
1 x CO2 atmosphere to equilibri- 
ate. The difference berween the mean equilibrium control 
and mean equilibrium 2 x CO2 temperature is then com- 
puted, and this 
is applied as an adjustment co each annual 
baseline value of June temperature at site S (Figure (c)). 
(a) Observed temperature 
© 
a 
_ 30-year baseline (1961-90) 
| 
3 
Ls 
T 
i 
1 
Cc 
a 
4 
f \ 
/\ 
‘A 
; 
/\ 
| 
| 
‘A 
“ 
= 
vy 7 
\ ai 
AL 
Wau 
t 
ioe 
t ra 
= 
Daseline 
2 
= 
N! 
a 
| 
| 
| 
1950 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000 
(b) GCM equilibrium simufations 
a 
AT 
wo 
a 
0 
. 
4 
eit 
eas 
: 
=) Tay 
ri aa hreea 
Hy aeaone 
BEAD 
n 
" 
sb 
B 
hal 
ey 
yy 
Sea 
Vey. GCM 
2 x CO, 
a L' 
ali 
i 
A 
|* >10-year mean 
& 
kus \y) I MANA 
| 
| Nl/\P GCM Ix CO; 
= 
| 
VV 
f 
| 
Ls 
5! 
ty 
' 
' 
l 
| 
| 
| 
J 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
(year) 
(c) 2 x CO, scenario 
c -— 
IWAN 
HO 
ea 
; 
scenario 
ee 
AT 
J 
aL 
| 
; 
5 
baseline 
! 
| 
| 
{ 
| 
6) 
5 
10 
I5 
20 
25 
30 
(year) 

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
BOX A2 
SCENARIOS FROM TRANSIENT GCM OUTPUTS 
A simple method of constructing scenarios based on transient 
GCM outputs has been developed at the Climatic Research 
Unit, UK for use in the IPCC WG 
II Second Assessinent 
(TSU, 1994). The method 
is adapted from ideas originally 
proposed by Santer ef al. (1990), and links information on the 
regional pattern of climate. change from transient GCM simu- 
lations with output from a 
set of simple models which deter- 
mine the global temperature response to given assumptions 
about future greenhouse gas emissions and concentrations 
(MAGICC). 
MAGICC 
is described elsewhere in this report (Box 3). 
In 
order to obtain time dependent regional scenarios from the 
global mean temperature changes estimated by MAGICC, 
information 
is required from transient runs with GCMs. 
Results from three coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM experi- 
ments have been used in this exercise: the UK Hadley Centre 
model (UKTR; Murphy, 1994, Murphy and Mitchell, 1994), 
the Max Planck Institute, Hamburg model (ECHAM1-A; 
Cubasch 
ef al., 1992) and the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics 
Laboratory, Princeton model (GFDL89; Manabe et al., 1991, 
1992). Each model has been run over different time horizons 
and with slightly different assumptions about GHG comncen- 
trations. 
All models are affected by the cold start problem (cf. Section 
6.5.3), making it difficult to assign dates to the transient cli- 
mate changes projected with these models. To overcome this, 
the time development of mean annual global temperature 
change was obtained using MAGICC, which starts with 
a 
pre-industrial climate and accounts for the GHG and sulphate 
aerosol forcing up to 1990. The model was run for the IS92a 
emissions scenario (including sulphates) assuming the mid- 
range climate sensitivity (2.5°C). The mean annual global 
temperature change was computed for the years 2020 and 
2050 as 0.53°C and 1.16°C, respectively. These values have 
been used to identify the decades in three transient GCM 
runs where the global mean annual temperature changes are 
equivalent (see Table I). In addition to overcoming the cold 
start problem, 
this method also harmonizes the different 
radiative forcing scenarios used in each experiment. 
To construct the scenarios, differences (or ratios) have been 
computed between the mean climate during the identified 
decades and equivalent decades in the control run simulation. 
These differences (ratios) can then be used as adjustments to 
the climatological baseline following the methods described 
in Appendix 1, Section A1.2. 
It should be stressed that the levels of warming shown in 
Table 
I are mean annual global averages and represent only 
the mid-range climate 
sensitivity 
as determined 
by 
MAGICC., They are illustrative of the differences in seasonal 
and geographical pattern of climate change between the three 
GCMs, and are not intended to embrace the range of umcer- 
tainties attributable to different climate sensitivities, to alter- 
native GHG emissions scenarios or to less tangible sources of 
error. For example, for a high emissions scenario (e.g., IS92f) 
combined with high climate sensitivity (4.5°C) the corre- 
sponding values of global warming for 2020 and 2050 are 
0,81°C and 1.91°C, respectively. For 
a low emissions sce- 
nario (e.g., IS92c) and low climate sensitivity (1.5°C), 
the 
respective values are 0.34°C and 0.65°C. Therefore, the 
adoption of alternative assumptions would yield quite differ- 
ent regional scenarios. 
An additional limitation of the approach is that the pattern of 
change derived from the GCMs does not reflect the likely pat- 
tern attributable to sulphate forcing (sulphates are treated only 
at a global scale by MAGICC). Transient experiments with 
GCMs which include both GHG and sulphate forcing have 
only recently been completed (Taylor and Penner, 1994). 
Notwithstanding their limited range of representativeness, the 
scenarios described above still exhibit large inter-regional and 
between-model differences. To illustrate this, three locations 
have been arbitrarily selected to represent temperate (Beijing), 
semi-arid (Bulawayo) and oceanic (Havana) environments. 
Table II shows winter and summer ternperature and precipita- 
tion changes estimated by the three GCMs for 2020 and 2050 
at the nearest GCM grid boxes to these locations. 
Table I. Ten-year periods in the three transient GCM simula- 
tions assumed to be equivalent to the decades centred around 
2020 and 2050 in the MAGICC model simulations (with 
increase in global mean surface air temperature of 0.53°C and 
1.16°C, respectively, relative to 1990). Source: TSU (1994). 
Equivalent years in GCM 
YEAR 
GFDL89 
ECHAMI]-A 
UKTR 
2020 
18~27 
35-44 
24-33 
2050 
36-45 
48-57 
49-58 
continued ... 
54 

APPENDIX 
1 
.. continued 
Table H. Model-simulated changes in seasonal (December to February—DJF; June to August—JJA) temperature and precipitation at 
prid boxes representing three contrasting sites: Beijing, Bulawayo and Havana. Values are from transient GCM simulations and rep- 
resent mean climate in 2020 and 2050 following procedures described in the text. Source of data: TSU (1994). 
GCM 
Change in climate by 2020 
Change in climate by 2050 
Temperature (°C) 
Precipitation (%) 
Temperature (°C) 
Precipitation (%) 
D)F 
A 
D\F 
YA 
DJF 
A 
DJF 
JA 
Beying, China (39.93°N, 116.28°E) 
GFDL89 
0.4 
0.5 
-18 
+9 
28 
I. 
5 
0 
UKTR 
1.5 
1.0 
+82 
+20 
25 
i) 
+70 
+28 
ECHAMI-A 
0.7 
0.4 
-20 
+45 
1.0 
15 
+5 
-13 
Bulawayo, Zimbabwe (20.15°S, 28.62°E) 
GFDL89 
-0. 
0.2 
+] 
+6 
\.7 
1.6 
-7 
+B) 
UKTR 
0.3 
0.1 
+34 
+84 
2.0 
2.0 
+27 
+77 
ECHAM I-A 
0.6 
0.9 
-| 
-2) 
1.0 
2.1 
+14 
-45 
Havana, Cuba (23.1 7°N, 82.35°W) 
GFDL89 
0.7 
0.7 
+{ 
1 
+14 
0.9 
0.9 
+7 
-8 
UKTR 
0.8 
0.7 
+28 
+14 
1.0 
l2 
-10 
-42 
ECHAMI-A 
0.7 
0.5 
-13 
-3 
0.3 
0.7 
+10 
-19 
55 

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
APPENDIX 2: A SELECTION OF CLIMATE IMPACT 
ASSESSMENTS, SHOWING THE STUDY REGION, 
SECTORS CONSIDERED, CLIMATIC SCENARIOS 
ADOPTED AND ANALYTICAL METHODS EMPLOYED 
2 
Kenya, Senegal, 
Chile 
REGION 
SECTORS 
CLIMATIC 
APPROACH 
STUDY 
REFERENCE 
| 
SCENARIOS 
METHODS 
— 
! 
Globe 
Agr. For, Wai, Ene 
GCM Equilibnum 
Parallel sectoral 
| 
Modelling 
Sirzepek and 
2x CO, 
assessments 
| 
Smith (in press) 
Globe 
Agr, For. Eco, Ene 
| 
GCM Equilibnumi 
Integrated 
| 
Modelling 
Alcamo, 1994 
| 
| 
2xCO, 
| 
| 
* 
= 
Globe 
Hea 
| 
GCM Equilibhum 
Sectoral 
Modelling 
| 
Martens et al. 
| 
2x CO, 
1994 
| 
: 
| 
Brazil 
Agr. Ene, Ind, Hea. 
Tempora! analogue 
Parallel sectoral 
Modelling: qualitative | 
Magalhaes and 
| 
Urb, Wat 
assessments 
Neto, 1989 
| 
| 
= 
T 
T 
China 
Sea. Eco, Agr. Ene 
GCM Equilibnum 
Parallel sectoral 
Modelling 
Hulme et al., 
2 x CO, (Composite) 
assessments 
1992 
Iceland, Finland, 
Agr 
GCM Equilibrium 
Sectoral 
Modelling 
Parry et dl. 
anada, 
2 x CO,; temporal 
1988a 
N. USSR, Japan 
| 
analogue 
Indonesia, 
| 
Sea, Wat. Agr. 
GCM Equilibrium 
Parallel sectoral 
Modelling 
Parry et dl., 
Malaysia & 
| 
Coa. Fis 
2x CO; 
assessments 
1992 
Thailand 
| 
Ireland 
| 
Agr, For. Eco, Wat. 
Expert judgement 
Parallel sectoral 
| 
Expert judgement: 
| 
McWilliams, 1991 
| 
Sea, Fis 
assessments 
modelling 
Japan 
| 
Wat, Agr, For. Fis, 
Various 
Parallel sectoral 
| 
Expert judgement: 
| 
Nishioka et ot, 
| 
Eco, Coa, Ene. 
assessments 
modelling 
1993 
Urb, Hea 
Kenya. Brazil, 
| 
Agr 
| 
Temporal analogue 
Sectoral 
Modelling: 
| 
Parry et al. 
Ecuador, India, 
| 
empirical survey 
_ 
1988 
S. USSR, 
| 
Australia 
| 
Missoun, Illinois, 
| 
Agr, For, Ene 
| 
Temporal analogue 
Integrated 
Modelling 
Rosenberg, 
Nebraska, 
| 
| 
1993 
Kansas, USA 
| 
| 
(MINK) 
| 
UK 
Sea, Eco. Agr, For, 
| 
GCM Equilibhum 
Parallel sectoral 
| 
Expert judgement: 
Depariment of 
Coa. Wait. Ene. 
2 x CO, (Composite) 
assessments 
modelling 
the Environment, 
ind, Tra, Fin, Rec 
| 
1991 
| 
USA 
Sea. Agr, For, Wat 
GCM Equilibrium: 
Parallel sectoral 
Modelling 
Smith and 
| 
2x CO, 
assessments 
| 
Tirpak, 1990 
] 
7 
Vietnam 
Agr. Hea. Ene, 
| 
Expert judgement. 
Parallel sectoral 
Modelling: 
Ninh et al., 
For, Fis, 
| 
temporal analogue? 
assessments 
| 
qualitative 
| 
199 | 
Zimbabwe, 
Agr 
| 
Expert judgement 
Sectoral 
Modelling 
Downing, 1992 
Agr. agriculture 
For forestry 
Ene: energy supply and demand 
Wat: water resources 
Sea: sea level mse 
Coa: coastal zone 
Eco: natural ecosystems 
Fis: fisheries 
Ind: industry 
Urb: urban areas 
Fin: financial sector 
Hea: human health 
Tra: transport 
Rec: recreation and tourism 
56

APPENDIX 3 
APPENDIX 3: ABBREVIATIONS, 
ACRONYMS AND CHEMICAL FORMULAE 
3 
AIM 
ASLR 
BaU 
BGMV 
CO, 
CEC 
CEOS-IDN 
CETA 
CFC 
CGE 
CH, 
CRU 
CSIRO 
DICE 
DMI 
ECHAM 1-A 
EPIC 
ESCAPE 
FAO 
GCAM 
GCM 
GDP 
GEMS 
GFDL 
GHG 
GIS 
GNP 
GRID 
HDP 
HEM 
IBSNAT 
ICSU 
IGBP 
ITASA 
IMAGE 
IPCC 
IRIA 
ISRIC 
ISSC 
LDC 
MAGICC 
MERGE 
MINK 
NATO 
Asia-Pacific Integrated Model 
NCAR 
Accelerated Sea Level Rise 
Business-as-Usual 
NDU 
Bean Golden Mosaic Virus 
NOAA 
Carbon Dioxide 
AVHRIX 
Commission of the European Communities 
Commission on Earth Observing Systemn- 
N,O 
International Data Network 
OECD 
Carbon Emissions Trajectory Assessment Mode] 
Chlorofluorocarbon 
ppmv 
Computable General Equilibrium (models) 
SCOPE 
Methane 
, 
Climate Research Unit 
TSU 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organization (Australia) 
UKTR 
Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy 
Dynamic Macroeconomic Interindustry (models) 
UNEP 
Max Planck Institute for Meteorology ECMWF 
UNESCO 
Hamburg model Version 1-a 
Eroston-Productivity Impact Calculator 
VBD 
Evaluation Strategies to Address Climate Change 
WMO 
by Adapting to and Preventing Emissions 
WCP 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
WCIRP 
Global Change Assessment Model 
General Circulation Model 
WRI 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Environmental Monitoring System 
(UNEP) 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
Grecnhouse Gas 
Geographical Information Systems 
Gross National Product 
Global Resource Information Database (UNEP) 
Human Dimensions of Global Environmental 
Change Programme 
Harmonization of Environmental Monitoring 
International Benchmark Sites Network for 
Agrotechnology Transfer 
International Council of Scientific Unions 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
International Institute for Applied Systems 
Analysis 
Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse 
Effect 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Integrated Regional Impact Assessment 
International Soil Reference and Information 
Center 
International Social Science Council 
Less Developed Country 
Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse-Gas 
Induced Climate Change 
Model for Evaluating Regional and Global 
Effects of GHG reduction policies 
Missouri, lowa, Nebraska, Kansas study on the 
US Corn Belt 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
57 
National Center of Atmospheric Research, 
Boulder, Co, USA 
National Defence University 
National Occanographic and Atmosphcric 
Administration, Advanced Very High Resolution 
Radiometer 
. 
Nitrous Oxide 
Organization of Economic Cooperation and 
Development 
parts per million by volume 
Scientific Committee on Problems of the 
Environment 
Technical Support Unit IPCC Working 
Group ID 
United Kingdom Meteorological Office 
Transient Model 
United Nations Environment Programme 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization 
Vector Borne Disease 
World Meteorological Organization 
World Climate Programme 
World Climate Impact Assessment and Response 
Strategies Studies Programme 
World Resources Institute

IPCC TECHNICAL GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS 
APPENDIX 4: SOME INTERNATIONAL DATA 
SOURCES OF INTEREST IN CLIMATE 
IMPACT ASSESSMENT STUDIES 
Table I: Data Sources 
1961-1990 period monthly means 
Europe 0.5° lat:lon grid/ 
1961-1996 period monthly means 
Type of data 
Source 
Spatial/temporal resolution 
Content 
Projections 
; 
Population 
IPcc! 
7 regions and global/ totals in 2100 
Total population (various projections) 
Economic development 
IPcc! 
4 regions and global/trends 1990-2100 
GNP (average annual rate—various projections) 
Gas and aerosol 
IPCC! 
Global/annual rates 
IS92a-f scenarios: CO, CH4, N50, 
emissions 
1990, 2025 and 2100 
CFCs, Halocarbons, SO, 
Radiative forcing 
Wigley/Raper? 
Global/annual up to 2100 
IS92a-f scenarios and various assumptions 
Climate change 
NCAR? 
Gridded (various resolutions)/ 
Equilibriurn GCM (various models); 
daily, monthly and seasonal 
Transient GCM (various models); 
(time series or time slice up to 2100) 
Temperature, precipitation and other variables 
“ 
CRU 
Gridded (various resolutions) 
Equilibrium GCM (various models, inc. 
and globally averaged/monthly, 
composite); Transient GCM (various models); 
seasonal and annual (time series 
{-dimensional model (MAGICC); 
or time slice up to 2100) 
Temperature, precipitation and other variables 
Sea level rise 
CRU? 
Global/annual up to 2100 
MAGICC (for any given emissions scenario) 
Agniculture, forestry 
FAO® 
Regional, global/ 
Area, production, trade, 
and fisheries 
totals in 2010 
consumption and other data 
Current baseline 
Population 
UN? 
National/annual 
Total population/urban 
. 
population (various projections) 
Economic growth 
World Bank® 
National/annual 
GNP, GDP 
Climate 
CDIAC? 
Global stations/ 
Temperature, precipitation, cloudiness 
monthly (historical time series) 
atmospheric pressure 
" 
UNEP/GRID!® 
Global 05° lat:lon grid/ 
Temperature, precipitation, 
1931-1960 period monthly means 
‘ 
CRU!! 
Global 5° lat:lon grid/ 
Temperature, precipitation 
Temperature(max, min), precipitation, sunshine, 
windspeed, vapour pressure, rain days, frost days 
. 
ECMWEF/WCRP!2 
Global 2.5°, 1.125°, 0.5° lation grid/ 
daily, monthly for individual years 
Temperature, precipitation, 
atmospheric pressure 
Land use/cover 
UNEP/GRID!3 
Global 0.5° lat:lon grid/recent 
Major ecosystem complexes 
based on maps and observations 
" 
UNEP/GRID 4 
Global 
|° latlon grid/ 
Predominant vegetation types, cultivation intensity 
1960-1979 
and seasonal albedo based on maps 
“ 
UNEP/GRID!> 
Global 
|° latlon grid 
Wetlands (derived) 
Agriculture, forestry 
FAOQ® 
National, regional, global/ 
Area, production, trade, food 
and fisheries 
1970, 1980, 1990 
supply and other data 
General environment 
UNEP!® 
National 
Water, air, health and other 
environmental measures 
Soil 
UNEP/GRID!? 
Global 2 minute grid 
FAO/UNESCO Soil Map of the World 
. 
UNEP/GRID!8 
Global |° grid 
Zobler soil type (based on UNESCO/FAO maps), 
soil texture, surface slope and other properties 
Soil degradation 
ISRIC!?? 
Global 
UNEP World Atlas of Desertification 
Global vegetation index 
UNEP/GRID2° 
75°N-55°S on 8.6 minute grid/ 
NOAA AVHRR Monihly Global Vegetation 
1982-199 
| 
Index based on satellite data 
Natural resources 
WRI?! 
National/annual 
Energy, raw matenials, agriculture, 
forestry and many others 
Human health 
'WHO” 
National/annual 
Distribution of and mortality from major diseases 
Other data 
Elevation/Bathymetry 
UNEP/GRID23 
Global 5 minute grid 
Integrated database derived from 
map information 
Boundaries 
UNEP/GRID24 
Global (vector format) 
World Databank Il: Coastlines, islands, lakes, 
reefs, ice shelves, glaciers, rivers, canals, 
railways, administrative boundaries 
58 

APPENDIX 4 
Notes for Table I: 
1) 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Leggett et al., 
1992) 
Wigley and Raper (1992) 
National Center of Atmospheric Research, Boulder, 
Colorado, USA {information from R. Jenne and D. Joseph) 
Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, 
Norwich, UK (Viner and Hulme, 1994) 
As 4 (Wigley and Raper, 1992; Warrick et al., 1993) 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO, 1992b; 1993) 
United Nations (1991; 1992) 
World Bank (1991) 
Carbon Dioxide Information and Analysis Center, Oak 
Ridge, Tennessee, USA (Burtis, 1992) 
10) United Nations Environment Programme/Global Resource 
Information Database (GRID—Geneva, 6, rue de la Gabelle, 
CH-1227 Carouge, Geneva, Switzerland), Climate data— 
Leemans and Cramer (1990) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 
Table II: Information About Data Sources 
11) As 4 (Jones et al, 1986a,b; Hulme, 1994; Hulme eft al., 
1995b, in press) 
12) European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting, 
Reading, UK/World Climate Research Programme 
(ECMWFE, 1993) 
13) As 10 (Olson et al, 1985) 
14) As 10 (Matthews, 1983; 1985) 
15) As 10 (Matthews and Fung, 1987) 
16) United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP, 1987) 
17) As 10 (FAO/UNESCO,, various dates) 
18) As 10 (Zobler, 1986) 
19) International Soil Reference and Information Center 
(UNEP, 1992) 
20) As 10 (Tarpley, 1991) 
21) World Resources Institute (WRI, 1992) 
22) World Health Organization (WHO, 1990) 
23) As 10 (Haxby et al, 1983) 
24) As 10 (CIA, 1972) 
Name (and media) 
Source 
Contents 
ACCIS (Hardcopy) 
UNEP! 
Information services and computerized database 
HEM (Hardcopy, Disk) 
UNEP/GEMS? 
Data banks; inventory of international research organizations 
and programmes; directory of environmental monitoring 
INFOTERRA (Disk, Hardcopy) 
UNEP? 
Directory of information sources 
Master Directory (Network) 
NASA‘ 
Scientific data information service 
CEOS-IDN (Network) 
MECCA/NASA/ 
Directory of remotely sensed data 
NASDAVESA? 
Notes for Table II: 
1) 
ACCIS (1990) 
2) 
Harmonization of Environmental Monitoring 
(UNEP/Global Environmental Monitoring System), 
Fritz (1990); Hicks (1993) 
International Referral Systern for Sources of Environmental 
Information (UNEP, 1987) 
3) 
59 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Beier, 
1991) 
Commission on Earth Observirig System-International Data 
Network (NASA/National Aeronautics and Space 
Development Agency/European Space Agency) 

The use of Eco-mark was approved for this publication.
