Climate Change 
1994 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
and 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Edited by J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, 
E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell. 
Reports of Working Groups I and III of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, forming part of the IPCC Special Report to the first 
session of the Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
CAMBRIDGE 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge 
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RP 
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011^211, USA 
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia 
© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1995 
First published 1995 
Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge 
British Library cataloguing in publication data available 
Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data available 
ISBN 0 521 55055 6 
hardback 
ISBN 0 521 55962 6 paperback 
GE 

Contents 
Foreword 
vii 
Parti 
1 
Preface to WGI Report 
3 
Dedication 
5 
Summary for Policymakers: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
7 
1 
C0 2 and the Carbon Cycle 
35 
2 Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
73 
3 Aerosols 
127 
4 Radiative Forcing 
163 
5 Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
205 
Part II 
233 
Preface to WGIII Report 
235 
Summary for Policymakers: An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
237 
6 An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios 
247 
Appendix 1 Organisation of IPCC 
305 
Appendix 2 List of Major IPCC Reports 
307 
Appendix 3 Contributors to IPCC WGI Report 
309 
Appendix 4 Reviewers of IPCC Working Group I Report 
315 
Appendix 5 Reviewers of IPCC Working Group III Report 
321 
Appendix 6 Acronyms 
327 
Appendix 7 Units 
331 
Appendix 8 Some Chemical Symbols Used in this Report 
333 
INDEX 
337 


Foreword 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
was jointly established by our two organizations in 1988, 
under the chairmanship of Prof. Bert Bolin, in order to: (i) 
assess available scientific information on climate change, 
(ii) assess the environmental and socio-economic impacts 
of climate change, and (iii) formulate appropriate response 
strategies. 
The IPCC First Assessment Report was completed in 
August 1990. The Report became a standard work of 
reference, widely used by policymakers, scientists and 
other experts, and represented a remarkable co-ordinated 
effort by hundreds of specialists from all over the world. 
Following the completion of the IPCC First Assessment 
Report and the holding of the Second World Climate 
Conference (Geneva, October-November, 1990), 
intergovernmental negotiations began on the elaboration of 
a UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). Appreciating that the treaty negotiators 
would need the most up-to-date information on climate 
change, the Panel in 1991 undertook to review critically 
the key conclusions of its 1990 Report in the light of new 
data and analyses. The Panel published its 1992 update a 
few months ahead of the UN Conference on Environment 
and Development (Rio de Janeiro, June, 1992), where the 
Convention was signed by most of the world's nations. 
In 1991-93, after some reorganization and with the 
endorsement of UNEP and WMO, the Panel committed 
itself to produce a Second Assessment Report in 1995, 
covering the same range of topics as in 1990 as well as the 
new subject area of technical issues related to the 
economic aspects of climate change. The Panel was aware 
that the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC (CoP) 
was likely to meet before the 1995 report was complete. It 
therefore undertook to produce for the first session of the 
CoP, a Special Report covering selected key topics of 
particular interest to the UNFCCC. The Special Report 
consists of: 
• 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change, with a 
Summary for Policymakers 
• 
An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission 
Scenarios, also with a Summary for Policymakers 
IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptations 
IPCC Phase I Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories 
The present volume, Climate Change 1994, contains the 
first two items on radiative forcing of climate change and 
an evaluation of emission scenarios. The two Guidelines 
are stand-alone documents and are being published as 
such. 
As usual in the IPCC, success in producing this report 
has depended upon the enthusiasm and co-operation of 
busy scientists and technical experts world-wide. We are 
exceedingly pleased to note here the very special efforts 
undertaken by the IPCC in ensuring the participation of 
experts from the developing and transitional economy 
countries in its activities, in particular in the writing, 
reviewing and revising of its reports. This has been a 
worthwhile and timely capacity-building exercise. The 
experts have given of their time very generously, and 
governments have supported them, in the enormous 
intellectual and physical effort required, often going 
substantially beyond reasonable demands of duty. Without 
such conscientious and professional involvement the IPCC 
would be greatly impoverished. We express to all these 
experts our grateful and sincere appreciation for their 
commitment. 
We take this opportunity to express our gratitude, for 
nurturing another IPCC report through to a successful 
completion, to: Prof. Bolin, the Chairman of the IPCC, for 
his able leadership; the Co-Chairmen of the three IPCC 
Working Groups, Sir John Houghton and Drs L.G. Meira 
Filho, R.T. Watson, M.C. Zinyowera, J.P. Bruce and 
Hoesung Lee; the Technical Support Units of the Working 
Groups; and to the IPCC Secretariat in Geneva under the 
leadership of Dr N. Sundararaman, the Secretary of the 
IPCC. 
G O P . Obasi 
Secretary-General 
World Meteorological Organization 
Elizabeth Dowdeswell 
Executive Director 
United Nations Environment 
Programme 


Climate Change 1994 
Parti 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Prepared by Working Group I 
IPCC reports are formally described as "approved" or "accepted". An "approved" 
report has been subject to detailed, line-by-line discussion and agreement in a plenary 
session of the relevant IPCC Working Group. For practical reasons only short 
documents can be formally approved, and larger documents are "accepted" by the 
Working Group, signifying its view that a report presents a comprehensive, objective 
and balanced view of the subject matter. In this Part, the Summary for Policymakers 
has been approved, and Chapters 1 to 5 have been accepted by Working Group I. 


Preface to WGI Report 
This report is the third produced by the Scientific 
Assessment Working Group of IPCC. The first 
comprehensive report on Climate Change (1990) 
concluded that continued accumulation of anthropogenic 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere was likely to lead to 
measurable climate change. The 1990 report also 
introduced the concept of the Global Warming Potential 
(GWP) which allows the cumulative warming effect of 
different gases to be compared. Values for the GWPs of a 
range of greenhouse gases were published, the values 
including both the direct component due to the gas itself, 
and the indirect component arising from the breakdown 
products of greenhouse gases. 
The IPCC Supplementary Report (1992) confirmed the 
essential conclusions of the 1990 assessment concerning 
our understanding of climate and the factors affecting it. It 
reported progress in quantifying two factors other than 
anthropogenic greenhouse gases which influence radiative 
forcing: the depletion of ozone in the stratosphere (by 
CFCs), and the effect of aerosols produced primarily by 
industrial emissions but also by biomass burning and other 
processes. Further research in atmospheric chemistry was 
revealing a more complicated picture than was first 
thought, and the updated values of GWP in the 1992 report 
quoted only the direct component of the GWP, and not the 
indirect. 
A second comprehensive assessment, spanning all 
working groups, will be completed in late 1995. It has 
been recognised, however, that the first Conference of the 
Parties (scheduled for March 1995) of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
would require, at an earlier date, scientific and technical 
advice on several key issues. This 1994 report has been 
prepared to help meet this need and covers two main 
topics. 
The first topic concerns the relative importance 
(determined here using the concept of radiative forcing) of 
anthropogenic increases in atmospheric concentrations of 
different greenhouse gases and aerosols. The latest 
information is presented about the sources and sinks of 
greenhouse gases and aerosols, and values of GWP are 
updated. 
The second topic, concerning the stabilisation of 
greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere, arises in 
the context of Article 2 of the UNFCCC: 
"The ultimate objective of this Convention and any 
related legal instruments that the Conference of the 
Parties may adopt is to achieve, in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of the Convention, stabilization of 
greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a 
level that would prevent dangerous 
anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system. Such a level should 
be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow 
ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to 
ensure that food production is not threatened and to 
enable economic 
development 
to proceed 
in a 
sustainable manner." 
The 1995 report from all three IPCC Working Groups 
will address issues raised by Article 2 more 
comprehensively, including the likely impacts of different 
levels and time-scales of stabilisation. The present report 
presents a preliminary investigation into levels of 
greenhouse gas emissions that might lead to stable 
atmospheric concentrations. 
This report was compiled between February 1993 and 
September 1994 by 25 Lead Authors from 11 countries; 
for their enthusiasm, commitment and sheer hard work we 
express our grateful thanks. Over 120 contributing authors 
from 15 countries submitted draft text and information to 
the Lead Authors and over 230 reviewers from 31 
countries submitted valuable suggestions for improvement 
during the two-stage review process, and to them also we 
express our sincere appreciation. 
The task of keeping the whole process together and on 
schedule fell to the IPCC Secretariat in Geneva -
Narasimhan Sundararaman (IPCC Secretary), Sam 
Tewungwa, Rudie Bourgeois, Cecilia Tanikie, Chantal 
Ettori - and to the Working Group I Technical Support 
Unit in Bracknell - Bruce Callander, Neil Harris, Kathy 
Maskell, Fay Mills, Arie Kattenberg and, in particular 
recognition of her careful and thorough work in preparing 
the text of the report for final publication, Judy Lakeman. 

4 
Preface to Part I 
For their endurance, diligence, and persistent good-humour 
we are very grateful. Lastly we acknowledge with 
appreciation the work of the Graphics Section of the UK 
Meteorological Office, who prepared the final diagrams 
for this publication. 
Bert Bolin 
IPCC chairman 
John Houghton 
Co-chair (UK) IPCC WGI 
L. Gylvan Meira Filho 
Co-chair (Brazil) IPCC WGI 

Dedication 
ULRICH SIEGENTHALER: 1941 to 1994 
The present IPCC 1994 report is dedicated to our long-
time friend Uli Siegenthaler. Uli has made major 
contributions to the scientific community and to the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which has 
benefited from his sound scientific background, his 
profound understanding of climate processes, and his long-
term experience in the field of Earth System Science. As a 
lead author, he was actively involved and interested in the 
IPCC debate, and his efforts helped shape this and past 
IPCC assessments into excellent reference books. 
Uli Siegenthaler was born in 1941 in the Bernese 
Oberland, Switzerland, and started his scientific career 
studying physics at the Eidgenossische Technische 
Hochschule in Zurich. After receiving his master's degree, 
he joined the group of Prof. H. Oeschger at the Physics 
Institute in Bern, where he completed his thesis studies on 
the application of stable isotopes to water cycle studies. In 
Bern Uli married Use, and together they raised a family of 
two children. 
His research was characterised by quality and by a 
readiness to cross interdisciplinary boundaries. His style 
was quiet and modest. At the Physics Institute of the 
University of Bern he was the leader of the carbon cycle 
modelling group and was deeply involved in the 
development of various carbon cycle models, well known 
by experts as the box-diffusion model, the outcrop-
diffusion model, and the HILDA-model. He also helped 
shape the carbon cycle studies at Princeton University. It 
is a reflection of the quality of Uli's research that the Bern-
carbon cycle model is used in the present and previous 
IPCC assessments as a reference for scenario calculations. 
Certainly, his models of the oceanic uptake of 
anthropogenic CO, have set the standards for work in this 
area. His many review articles demonstrate his in-depth 
knowledge of the global carbon cycle and the problems 
related to the anthropogenic perturbation in particular. As 
well as the future evolution of the carbon cycle he was also 
interested in past natural variations of the atmospheric C0 2 
levels, and Uli's models of ice-age CO, concentrations 
have been used by many other researchers. 
Uli Siegenthaler was not only a brilliant scientist, but 
also an excellent teacher. He shared his broad knowledge 
and his scientific interest with his students teaching many 
different courses on Earth System Science as well as 
Introductory Physics and Atomic Physics. His sound 
theoretical background and his clear logic made every one 
of his lectures a special event. He was an excellent 
advisor: his friendly and quiet character combined with his 
scientific excellence created a pleasant and stimulating 
environment for his many students over the years, and we 
all could count on his thorough and honest, yet gentle, 
critique of our work. 
Uli Siegenthaler's death in July 1994 was a great loss to 
us and the scientific community. For all of us, Uli was a 
good friend. We will sorely miss his kind and gentlemanly 
manner as well as his scientific creativity. 
This tribute was prepared by Fortunat Joos, Thomas Stacker, Hans 
Oeschger and colleagues, Climate and Environmental Physics, Physics 
Institute, Sidlerstr. 5, CH-3012 Bern, in response to the unanimous wish 
of all the Lead Authors that this report should be dedicated to the memory 
of Uli Siegenthaler. 


Summary for Policymakers: 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
A Report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change 


CONTENTS 
Executive Summary 
11 
4 Nitrous Oxide (N20) 
27 
1 What is Radiative Forcing? 
15 
5 Halocarbons 
28 
2 Carbon Dioxide (C02) 
16 
2.1 How Has the Atmospheric Concentration of C0 2 
Changed in the Past? 
16 
2.2 Sources and Sinks of C0 2 — Our Current 
Knowledge of the Carbon Budget 
17 
2.3 C0 2 Concentrations in the Future 
19 
2.3.1 For a given C0 2 emission scenario, 
how might C0 2 concentrations change in the 
future? 
20 
2.3.2 For a given C0 2 concentration profile leading 
to stabilisation, what anthropogenic emissions 
are implied? 
21 
2.4 Climate Feedbacks Associated with the Carbon 
Cycle 
24 
6 Ozone (03) 
29 
6.1 Stratospheric Ozone 
29 
6.2 Tropospheric Ozone 
30 
6.3 The Importance of NOx 
30 
7 The Effect of Tropospheric Aerosols 
30 
8 What Else Influences Radiative Forcing? 
32 
8.1 Solar Variability 
32 
8.2 Volcanic Activity 
32 
9 Global Warming Potential (GWP) — a Tool for 
Policymakers 
32 
3 Methane (City 
25 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Introduction 
In its first Scientific Assessment of Climate Change in 
1990 the IPCC concluded that the increase of greenhouse 
gas concentrations due to human activities would result in 
a warming of the Earth's surface. "Radiative forcing" is 
the name given to the effect which these gases have in 
altering the energy balance of the Earth-atmosphere 
system and, using this concept, the 1990 report introduced 
a tool for policymakers, the Global Warming Potential, 
which allowed the relative warming effect of different 
gases to be compared. Other factors, natural and human, 
also cause radiative forcing. The 1990 report not only 
examined these factors but also reviewed a wide range of 
information on how climate has behaved in the past and 
how it might change in the future as a result of human 
influence. 
The 1992 IPCC Supplementary report reviewed the key 
conclusions of the 1990 report and affirmed the basic 
understanding of climate change contained in the 1990 
report. It did, however, provide more detail on two sources 
of negative radiative forcing — depletion of ozone in the 
stratosphere, and aerosols derived from anthropogenic 
emissions. 
The scope of the present report covers only those factors 
which cause radiative forcing of climate change, and 
includes updated values of Global Warming Potentials. 
The full range of topics related to climate, including the 
response of climate to radiative forcing, will be covered in 
the second IPCC Scientific Assessment, scheduled for 
publication in 1995. 
Major new results since IPCC 1992 
These new findings add to the detail of our knowledge but 
do not substantially change the essential results concerning 
radiative forcing of climate which appeared in the 1990 or 
the 1992 IPCC scientific assessments. 
• 
Revised values of Global Warming 
Potentials 
(GWPs) — compared to GWPs listed in the 1992 
IPCC report most values are larger by typically 10 to 
30%. The uncertainties in the new GWPs are 
typically ±35%. 
Revised methane GWP — includes both direct and 
indirect effects. While the product of the revised 
GWP for methane and the current estimated annual 
anthropogenic emissions is significantly less than 
that of carbon dioxide over a 100-year time horizon, 
it is comparable over a 20-year time horizon. 
Stabilisation 
of atmospheric 
carbon 
dioxide 
concentrations — a range of carbon cycle models 
indicates that stabilisation of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide concentration at all considered levels between 
one and two times today's concentrations (that is to 
say, between 350 and 750 ppmv1) could be attained 
only with global anthropogenic emissions that 
eventually drop to substantially below 1990 levels. 
Improved estimation of forcing by aerosols — model 
calculations indicate that the negative radiative 
forcing from sulphate aerosols and aerosols from 
biomass burning, when globally-averaged, may be a 
significant fraction of the positive radiative forcing 
caused by anthropogenic greenhouse gases since the 
pre-industrial era. However, the estimates of the 
aerosol radiative forcing are highly uncertain, 
moreover the forcing is highly regional and cannot 
be regarded as a simple offset to greenhouse gas 
forcing. 
Recent 
low growth 
rate of carbon 
dioxide 
concentration is not unusual2 — between 1991 and 
1993 the rate of increase in the atmospheric 
1 1 ppmv = 1 part per million by volume. 
2 In the sense that anomalies in the growth rate of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide are not unusual. The anomaly of the early 1990s 
does have some unusual features in terms of its magnitude, 
duration and its coincidence with the decrease in the growth rate 
of methane, but it remains too early to identify either the causes 
of the 1990s' anomaly or its significance to the long-term growth 
of carbon dioxide. See the box: "Variations in the growth rates 
of carbon dioxide and methane concentrations" to be found on 
page 24. 

12 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
concentrations 
of 
carbon 
dioxide 
slowed 
substantially compared to the average rates of 
increase over the previous decade. However, the 
modern observational record for carbon dioxide 
since the 1950s contains other periods of similarly 
low growth rates. In the latter half of 1993, the 
carbon dioxide growth rates increased. 
Sharp reduction in methane growth rate — the rate 
of increase of the atmospheric abundance of methane 
has declined over the last decade, slowing 
dramatically in 1991 to 1992, though with an 
apparent increase in the growth rate in late 1993. 
Climatic impact of Ml. Pinatubo — the eruption of 
Mt. Pinatubo in June 1991 produced a large, 
transient increase of stratospheric aerosols which 
resulted in a surface cooling over about 2 years 
estimated from observations to be about 0.4 °C, 
consistent with model simulations which predicted a 
global mean cooling of 0.4 to 0.6 °C. 
Global carbon budget — New estimates of terrestrial 
carbon uptake during the 1980s have better 
quantified the known sinks, particularly forest 
regrowth in the Northern Hemisphere. 
The observed concentrations of halocarbons, 
including CFCs 11, 12, 113, 114, 115, methyl-
chloroform and carbon tetrachloride, have resulted in 
a direct radiative forcing of about 0.3 Wm"2. 
• 
The atmospheric concentrations of a number of 
HCFCs and HFCs, which are being used as 
substitutes for halocarbons controlled under the 
Montreal Protocol have increased substantially. 
Their combined contribution to radiative forcing is, 
however, still less than 0.05 Wm"2 because of their 
low atmospheric concentrations. 
Second, we consider changes in concentrations of ozone 
and aerosols which are believed to contribute significantly 
to radiative forcing. Patterns of historical change in these 
constituents are strongly regional in character, leading to 
two important consequences: (i) estimates of their 
globally-averaged radiative forcing are less certain than for 
the well-mixed gases (because the patterns of change are 
not well-quantified) and (ii) any negative forcing due to 
aerosols cannot be regarded as a simple offset to the effect 
of greenhouse gases (because the regional patterns of the 
forcings are different). Nevertheless, we report such 
estimates in order to provide a broad indication of their 
relative magnitude. 
Sources of radiative forcing and their magnitude 
Anthropogenic and natural factors cause radiative forcing 
of various magnitudes and of different signs. The concept 
of radiative forcing enables us to compare the potential 
effects of different factors, though care must be taken 
where these factors have large seasonal or regional 
variation. 
First, we consider the gases carbon dioxide, methane, 
nitrous oxide and the halocarbons which have increased 
through human activities and which are well-mixed 
throughout the atmosphere. 
The increase in carbon dioxide (CO-,) since the pre-
industrial era (from about 280 to 356 ppmv) makes 
the largest individual contribution to greenhouse gas 
radiative forcing: 1.56 Wm"2, consistent with 
previous IPCC reports. 
The increase of methane (CH4) since pre-industrial 
times (from 0.7 to 1.7 ppmv) contributes about 
0.5 Wm"2 to radiative forcing. 
The increase in nitrous oxide (N-,0) since pre-
industrial times (from about 275 to about 310 ppbv1) 
contributes about 0.1 Wm"2 to radiative forcing. 
Limited observations and model simulations suggest 
that tropospheric ozone in the Northern Hemisphere 
has increased since pre-industrial times resulting in a 
global average radiative forcing of 0.2 to 0.6 Wm"2. 
Halocarbon-induced depletion of ozone in the 
stratosphere has resulted in a negative global average 
radiative forcing of about -0.1 Wm"2. This has 
occurred mainly since the late 1970s over which 
period it has been of similar magnitude, but opposite 
sign, to the forcing caused by the halocarbons. Prior 
to the onset of significant ozone depletion the 
radiative forcing due to the halocarbons was between 
+0.1 and 0.2 Wm2. 
Anthropogenic particles in the atmosphere, derived 
from emissions of sulphur dioxide and from biomass 
burning, exert a net negative radiative forcing. The 
direct forcings, globally averaged, are probably in 
the ranges -0.25 to -0.9 Wm"2 for sulphate aerosols 
and -0.05 to -0.6 Wm"2 for aerosols from biomass 
burning. The indirect effect of aerosols, due to their 
effect on cloud properties, may cause a further 
negative forcing of a magnitude similar to the direct 
effect. The forcing shows large regional variations, 
1 ppbv = 1 part per billion (thousand million) by volume. 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
13 
with the largest values in industrialised regions in the 
Northern Hemisphere. 
Third, we consider natural factors which can also exert 
positive or negative radiative forcings. 
• 
Since about 1850 a change in the Sun's output may 
have resulted in a positive radiative forcing 
estimated at between 0.1 and 0.5 Wm2. 
• 
Some volcanic eruptions, such as that of Mt. Pinatubo 
in June 1991, result in a short-lived (a few years) 
increase in aerosols in the stratosphere, causing a 
large (about -4 Wm"2 in the case of Mt. Pinatubo) 
but short-lived negative radiative forcing of climate. 
The effect of the Mt. Pinatubo eruption has been 
detected in the observed temperature record. 
Trends in greenhouse gas and aerosol concentrations 
• 
Over the decade 1980 to 89 the atmospheric 
abundance of C0 2 increased at an average rate of 
about 1.5 ppmv (0.4% or 3.2 billion tonnes of 
carbon) per year as a result of human activities, 
equivalent to approximately 50% of anthropogenic 
emissions over the same period. 
The rate of increase of the atmospheric abundance of 
methane has declined over the last decade, slowing 
dramatically in 1991 to 1992, though with an 
apparent increase in the growth rate in late 1993. The 
average trend over 1980 to 1990 is about 13 ppbv 
(0.8% or 37 million tonnes of methane) per year. 
• 
The atmospheric abundance of nitrous oxide 
increased at an average annual rate (1980 to 1990) of 
about 0.75 ppbv (0.25% or 3.7 million tonnes of 
nitrogen) per year. The observations indicate that the 
growth rate varied during this period. 
• 
The rates of increase of atmospheric concentrations 
of several major ozone-depleting halocarbons have 
fallen, demonstrating the impact of the Montreal 
Protocol and its amendments and adjustments. The 
total amount of organic chlorine in the troposphere 
increased by only 1.6% in 1992, about half of the 
rate of increase (2.9%) in 1989. 
• 
The monitoring network for tropospheric ozone is 
sparse, making detection of global trends difficult. 
Since the 1960s concentrations of tropospheric 
ozone have almost certainly increased over large 
parts of the Northern Hemisphere but trends during 
the 1980s were small and of variable sign. 
Anthropogenic aerosol and precursor emissions have 
increased over the past 150 years, but while local 
trends (positive and negative) in concentrations are 
evident, no clear picture emerges of a contemporary 
global trend in atmospheric concentrations of 
anthropogenic aerosols in the size range important 
for radiative forcing. 
The stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations 
Several carbon cycle models have been used to study the 
implications for future atmospheric concentrations of 
carbon dioxide, of a range of global anthropogenic 
emission scenarios. The same models have been used to 
study the broad implications, in terms of emissions, of 
stabilising carbon dioxide concentrations in the range 
350 ppmv (near current levels) to 750 ppmv. Differences 
in projected concentrations and emissions between models 
are typically ±15%; additional uncertainties arise from the 
various assumptions and simplifications used. The 
following results emerge: 
• 
If carbon dioxide emissions were maintained at 
today's levels, they would lead to a nearly constant 
rate of increase in atmospheric concentrations for at 
least two centuries, reaching about 500 ppmv 
(approaching twice the pre-industrial concentration) 
by the end of the 21st century. 
• 
A stable level of carbon dioxide concentration at 
values up to 750 ppmv can be maintained only with 
anthropogenic emissions that eventually drop below 
1990 levels. 
To a first approximation the eventual stabilised 
concentration is governed more by the accumulated 
CO, emissions from now until the time of 
stabilisation, and less by the exact path taken to 
reach stabilisation. This means that, for example, for 
a given stabilisation scenario, higher emissions in 
early decades imply lower emissions later on. For the 
range of arbitrary stabilisation cases studied, 
accumulated emissions to the end of the 21st century 
were between 300 and 430 GtC1 for stabilisation at 
350 ppmv, between 880 and 1060 GtC for 
stabilisation at 550 ppmv, and between 1220 and 
1420 GtC for stabilisation at 750 ppmv. For 
comparison the corresponding 
accumulated 
emissions for IPCC IS922 emission scenarios are 770 
to 2190 GtC. 
1 lGtC = 1 billion tonnes of carbon. 
2 In 1992 IPCC producted six scenarios, termed IS92a-f, for 
future emissions of greenhouse gases and their precursors. 

14 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
If methane emissions were maintained at today's levels, 
atmospheric concentrations would effectively stabilise 
within 50 years at about 1900 ppbv, 11% higher than at 
present. Conversely, a reduction in annual methane 
emissions to levels about 35 million tonnes (roughly 10% 
of anthropogenic emissions) below current levels would 
stabilise concentrations at today's levels. (This calculation 
assumes that natural sources and atmospheric losses of 
methane are not affected by changing climate and 
atmospheric composition over the next century.) 
If emissions of nitrous oxide were maintained at today's 
levels, atmospheric concentrations would effectively 
stabilise after several centuries at about 400 ppbv, 30% 
higher than at present and 50% above pre-industrial levels. 
Conversely a reduction of more than 50% of 
anthropogenic sources would stabilise concentrations at 
today's level of about 310 ppbv. 
In contrast to the long-lived greenhouse gases, aerosols 
and tropospheric ozone are rapidly removed from the 
atmosphere and stabilisation of precursors would lead 
quickly to stable atmospheric concentrations. 
The predictions of changes in atmospheric chlorine 
loading indicate that the depletion of stratospheric ozone 
should peak within the next decade and then slowly 
recover during the first half of the next century. 
Global Warming Potential 
Revised GWPs have been calculated. Furthermore, GWPs 
have been calculated for a number of new species, in 
particular hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), hydro-
fluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). 
The GWP concept is difficult to apply to short-lived 
species (for example, oxides of nitrogen, non-methane 
hydrocarbons and aerosols). New tools need to be 
developed to characterise their radiative forcing. 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
15 
1 What is Radiative Forcing? 
The ultimate energy source for all weather and climate is 
radiation from the Sun (called solar or short-wave 
radiation). Averaged globally and annually, about a third 
of incoming solar radiation is reflected back to space. Of 
the remainder, some is absorbed by the atmosphere, but 
most is absorbed by the land, ocean and ice surfaces. The 
solar radiation absorbed by the Earth's surface and 
atmosphere (which amounts to about 240 Win"2) is 
balanced at the top of the atmosphere by outgoing 
radiation at infrared wavelengths (Figure 1). Some of the 
outgoing infrared radiation is trapped by the naturally 
occurring greenhouse gases (principally water vapour, but 
also carbon dioxide (C02), ozone (03), methane (CH4) and 
nitrous oxide (N20)) and by clouds, which keeps the 
surface and troposphere1 about 33 °C. warmer than it 
would otherwise be. This is the natural greenhouse effect. 
In an unperturbed state, the net incoming solar radiation at 
the top of the atmosphere, averaged over the globe over 
long periods of time, must be balanced by net outgoing 
infrared radiation (Figure 1). 
A change in average net radiation at the top of the 
troposphere (known as the tropopause). because of a 
change in either solar or infrared radiation, is defined for 
the purpose of this report as a radiative forcing. 
A 
radiative forcing perturbs the balance between incoming 
and outgoing radiation. Over time climate responds to the 
perturbation to re-establish the radiative balance. A 
positive radiative forcing tends on average to warm the 
surface; a negative radiative forcing on average tends to 
cool the surface. As defined here, the incoming solar 
radiation is not considered a radiative forcing, but a change 
in the amount of incoming solar radiation would be a 
radiative forcing. 
1 The troposphere is the lower part of the atmosphere from the 
surface to around 10-15 km. 
Net incoming solar 
radiation 
Incoming 
solar radiation 
343 Wm- 2 
Net outgoing infrared 
radiation 
240 W m"2 
Some of the infrared 
radiation is absorbed 
and re-emitted by the 
greenhouse gases. 
The effect of this is to 
warm the surface 
and the troposphere 
IS 
solar radiation is absorbed 
lithe surface and warms it 
EARTH 
Infrared radiation 
is emitted from the! 
earth's surface 
Figure 1: A simplified diagram illustrating the global long-term radiative balance of the atmosphere. Net input of solar radiation 
(240 Wnr2) must be balanced by net output of infrared radiation. About a third (103 Wnr2) of incoming solar radiation is reflected and 
the remainder is mostly absorbed by the surface. Outgoing infrared radiation is absorbed by greenhouse gases and by clouds keeping 
the surface about 33 °C warmer than it would otherwise be. 

16 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
For example, an increase in atmospheric CO., 
concentration leads to a reduction in outgoing infrared 
radiation and a positive radiative forcing. For a doubling of 
the pre-industrial CO, concentration, in the absence of any 
other change, the global mean radiative forcing would be 
about 4 Wm -. For balance to be restored, the temperature 
of the troposphere and of the surface must increase, 
producing an increase in outgoing radiation. For a 
doubling of CO, concentration, the increase in surface 
temperature at equilibrium would be just over 1 °C, if other 
factors (e.g., clouds, tropospheric water vapour and 
aerosols) are held constant. Taking internal feedbacks into 
account, the 1990 IPCC report estimated that the increase 
in global average surface temperature at equilibrium 
resulting from a doubling of C0 2 would be likely to be 
between 1.5 and 4.5 °C, with a best estimate of 2.5 °C. 
Other anthropogenically emitted gases which act in the 
same way as CO, and contribute to an 
enhanced 
greenhouse effect arc CH4, N,0, and CFCs and other 
halocarbons. Some minor atmospheric constituents, such 
as the nitrogen oxides (NOJ and carbon monoxide (CO), 
although not important greenhouse gases in their own 
right, can influence the concentration of some greenhouse 
gases (tropospheric ozone in particular) through 
atmospheric chemistry. Contributions of this kind are 
known as indirect radiative forcings. 
Human activity has also led to an increase in the 
abundance of aerosols in the troposphere, mainly produced 
by oxidation of sulphur dioxide and from biomass burning, 
which cause a direct radiative forcing through their 
reflection and absorption of solar radiation. An indirect 
radiative forcing effect is believed to result from the 
influence of aerosols on the size of cloud droplets, and 
hence on cloud reflectivity. The radiative effects of 
aerosols are mainly negative and tend to cool the surface. 
Natural factors, such as an increase in aerosols in the 
stratosphere produced by volcanic activity, or changes in 
the Sun's output, can also lead to radiative forcing. 
The magnitude and timing of climate change due to 
human 
activities will depend on the 
ultimate 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols and their 
rates of growth and on the detailed response of the climate 
system. 
Radiative forcing, averaged globally, has been used to 
compare the potential climatic effect of different climate 
change mechanisms. For a range of mechanisms there 
appears to be a similar relationship between global mean 
radiative forcing and global mean surface temperature 
change. However, the applicability of global mean 
radiative forcing to mechanisms such as changes in ozone 
or tropospheric aerosols which are spatially very 
inhomogeneous, is unclear. The degree of offset between 
the positive global mean radiative forcing from greenhouse 
gases and the negative forcing from aerosols may be an 
unreliable guide to the climatic consequences. For 
example, even a net global mean radiative forcing of zero 
could still lead to regional and possibly even global-scale 
climate changes, if the forcing mechanisms have different 
geographical distributions. This issue is beginning to be 
addressed through the use of climate models and a more 
detailed assessment can be expected in the 1995 IPCC 
report. Because of these problems, we avoid summing the 
various positive and negative contributions of the human-
induced global mean radiative forcing to produce a net 
anthropogenic forcing. 
It should also be noted that climate variations are 
believed to occur in the absence of any radiative forcing as 
a result of the complex interactions between the 
atmosphere and oceans and, possibly, the cryosphere, land 
surface and biosphere. 
2 Carbon Dioxide (C02) 
2.1 How Has the Atmospheric Concentration of CO, 
Changed in the Past? 
C02 levels in the atmosphere have increased since the pre-
industrial period1 from about 280 to about 356 ppmv 
(Figure 2a). We know this from analysis of air trapped in 
ice cores and, since the late 1950s, from precise, direct 
measurements of atmospheric concentration. The radiative 
forcing due to this increase is 1.56 Wm"2 (Figure 3). 
Evidence that the observed increase in atmospheric C0 9 
concentration is due to anthropogenic activity comes from 
the following facts. 
• 
The long-term rise in atmospheric C0 2 closely 
follows the increase in anthropogenic C0 2 emissions 
(Figure 2a). 
• 
Although C0 2 is well-mixed in the atmosphere, 
concentrations are slightly higher in the Northern 
Hemisphere (due to higher emissions). The increase 
in the inter-hemispheric gradient is growing in 
parallel with C02 emissions. 
• 
Fossil fuel and biospheric carbon have a lower ratio 
of the carbon isotope 13C to the isotope 12C. Fossil 
fuels contain no 14C because of their age. Decreases 
since pre-industrial times in the 13C:12C isotope ratio 
and in 14C are fully consistent with the addition of 
fossil fuel and biospheric carbon by human activity. 
Average rates of C02 concentration increase during the 
1980s were 0.4% or 1.5 ppmv/yr. This is equivalent to 
3.2 GtC/yr, approximately 50% of total anthropogenic CO, 
1 The pre-industrial period is defined as the average over several 
centuries before 1750. 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
17 
emissions. On decadal time-scales, the proportion of 
anthropogenic CO-, emissions remaining in the atmosphere 
has stayed remarkably constant (at around 50%). The 
growth rate of atmospheric CO-, concentration slowed 
during 1991 to mid-1993, although recently rates of 
growth have started to rise (Figure 2b). Short-term changes 
in growth rate are common in the past record of CO.,. See 
box on "Variations in the growth rates of CO, and CH4 
concentrations". 
2.2 Sources and Sinks of C0 2 — Our Current 
Knowledge of the Carbon Budget 
Our understanding of the carbon cycle has improved since 
previous IPCC reports, particularly in our knowledge of 
how the removal of CO-, from the atmosphere is 
distributed between the sinks in the ocean and on land, and 
in the preliminary quantification of feedbacks. 
Considerable quantitative uncertainty remains regarding 
the processes which contribute to the sinks on land and in 
the ocean. 
The main anthropogenic sources of CO, are the burning 
of fossil fuels (with additional contributions from cement 
production) and land-use changes. Over the period 1980 to 
1989 the average emissions from fossil fuel burning and 
cement production were 5.5 + 0.5 GtC/yr. 
Land-use changes cause both release and uptake of CO,. 
On average, CO, will be released to the atmosphere if the 
original ecosystem stored more carbon than the modified 
ecosystem which replaces it. Deforestation acts as a CO., 
source. In the current (1980 to 1989) budget, tropical 
deforestation is estimated to result in an average emission 
to the atmosphere of 1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr. However, in 
Northern Hemisphere mid- and high latitudes there are 
> 
E 
c o 
c 
s 
c 
8 
8 
O 
360 
340 
320 
300 
280 
9«n 
1 
1 
1 
(a) 
O D57 
- 
A D47 
• Siple 
« South Pole 
— — Mauna Loa 
— One hundred year 
running mean 
. 
* 
A 
1 
380 
_ 
1 360 
a. 
1 340 
1 
8 320 
8 
(5300 
O 
280 
18 
^*%^( 
A 
i 
I 
> 
I 
i 
I 
.•••••• 
.- / 
t 
•••" 
/ 
•••" 4 
• CP ° 
^fxrf** 
tto-Bfltrfl^ 
50s. 
1900 
1950 
20 
1 
6 ? 
-
4 v) 
• 
g 
1 
o a 
»• 
2 1 
« 
« 
/" 
0 8 
1 
f 
* 
/
• 
iso 
* . 
\ 
Year 
\ 
^P 
\. 
\0 
n*_^4 
%. 
o_>» 
\ 
^s! 
• • 
\ 
800 
1000 
1200 
1400 
Year 
1600 
1800 
2000 
1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 
Figure 2: (a) CO, concentrations over the past 1000 years from 
ice-core records (D47, D57, Siple and South Pole) and (since 
1958) from the Mauna Loa, Hawaii measurement site. The 
smooth curve is based on a hundred year running mean. The 
rapid increase in C02 concentration since the onset of 
industrialisation is evident and has followed closely the increase 
in CO, emissions from fossil fuels (see inset of period from 1850 
onwards), (b) Growth rate of C02 concentration since 1958 in 
ppmv/yr at the Mauna Loa station showing the high growth rates 
of the late 1980s, the decrease in growth rates of the early 1990s, 
and the recent increase. The smooth curve shows the same data 
but filtered to suppress any variations on time-scales less than 
approximately 10 years. 
Year 

iH 
Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change 
ARE THE CO, ABSORPTION BANDS 
SATURATED? 
The greenhouse effect of CO ? is mainly due to its 
absorption bands between wavelengths of 14 jum1 and 
IN /<m. There is a current misconception that, because 
there is already so much CO^ in the atmosphere, 
absorption is saturated and addition of more C 0 2 will 
not increase the greenhouse effect. Infrared absorption 
by CO-, is well understood and over a small part of the 
spectrum, at the wavelength of strongest absorption 
(15 //m), increasing CO-, causes little change in radiative 
forcing because absorption is indeed almost saturated 
there. However, at wavelengths greater and smaller than 
15//m there is considerable capacity for increased 
absorption and an enhancement of the greenhouse 
effect. 
At present concentrations of CO-,, the relationship 
between concentration change and radiative forcing is 
strongly non-linear. For greenhouse gases with much 
smaller atmospheric concentrations the relationship is 
linear. This partly explains why changes in gases such 
as CFCs in the present atmosphere have a larger effect 
on radiative forcing, molecule for molecule, than does 
CO,. The calculation of the radiative effects of C 0 2 
explicitly includes overlap with water vapour (a 
particularly important greenhouse gas) and clouds. 
1 /(m = 1 millionth of a metre. 
areas where forests are regrowing after clearing in the past 
and where sequestration of CO, from the atmosphere is 
now occurring; we estimate a net sink of 0.5 ± 0.5 GtC/yr. 
The latest estimate of net CO, release due to global land-
use changes is 1.1 ± 1.2 GtC/yr. This figure is lower than 
that quoted in IPCC 1990 (1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr) because of the 
inclusion of the estimate for Northern Hemispheric mid-
and high latitude uptake in regrowing forests. 
The oceans are a large sink of anthropogenic C0 2. At 
present net global oceanic uptake cannot be measured 
directly: it is estimated using models which describe the 
exchanges between the surface and deep ocean and the 
atmosphere. Such models can be tested by comparing the 
distribution of radiocarbon (released as a result of atom 
bomb tests in the 1950s and 1960s) from observations with 
model simulations. 
Table 1 shows that summation of the best current 
estimates of C 0 2 sources, sinks and atmospheric storage 
leads to an apparent unattributed terrestrial sink of 1.4 ± 
1.5 GtC/yr. In previous IPCC reports this apparent 
imbalance in the carbon budget was referred to as a 
"missing sink", a term now felt to be inappropriate as sink 
mechanisms have been identified which could account for 
the imbalance. 
CO 2 
fertilisation 
Photosynthesis can be stimulated by increased levels of 
C 0 2 . Studies carried out on small-scale experimental 
stands of vegetation, under optimal conditions of water and 
nutrient 
supply, 
suggest 
potential 
increases 
in 
photosynthesis of 20 to 40% when C 0 2 is doubled. 
However, attempting to quantify the effect on a global 
scale is much more difficult. When the availability of 
water and nutrients is taken into account the fertilisation 
effect is likely to be reduced; several model results suggest 
reduction by around a half. The interaction of C 0 2 
fertilisation with the nitrogen cycle also has to be 
considered; model results of this effect are contradictory. 
During the 1980s C 0 2 fertilisation may have accounted for 
a sink of 0.5 to 2.0 GtC/yr. 
Table I: Annual average anthropogenic carbon budget for 1980 to 1989. C02 sources, sinks and storage in the 
atmosphere are expressed in GtC/yr. 
CO, sources 
(1) (-missions from fossil fuel and cement production 
(2) Net emissions from changes in tropical land-use 
(3) Total anthropogenic emissions = (l)+(2) 
5.5 ± 0.5 
1.6 ±1.0 
7.1 ±1.1 
Partitioning amongst reservoirs 
(4) Storage in the atmosphere 
(5) Ocean uptake 
(o) Uptake by Northern Hemisphere forest regrowth 
(7) Additional terrestrial sinks (CO, fertilisation, nitrogen fertilisation, 
climatic effects) = [(l)+(2)]-[(4)+(5)+(6)] 
3.2 ± 0.2 
2.0 ± 0.8 
0.5 ± 0.5 
1.4 ±1.5 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
CM 
O) 
c 
•p 
I 
DC 
3 _ Direct greenhouse 
Halocarbons 
N20 
CH4 
CO; 
Indirect greenhouse 
Tropospheric 
aerosols 
Direct Indirect 
Solar 
^ 
Tropospheric 
Stratospheric 
ozone 
ozone 
High 
Low 
Confidence level 
Low 
Low 
Very 
low 
Very 
low 
Figure 3: Estimates of the globally averaged radiative forcing due to changes in greenhouse gases and aerosols from pre-industrial 
times to the present day and changes in solar variability from 1850 to the present day. The height of the bar indicates a mid-range 
estimate of the forcing whilst the lines show the possible range of values. An indication of relative confidence in the estimates is given 
below each bar. The contributions of individual greenhouse gases are indicated on the first bar for direct greenhouse gas forcing. The 
major indirect effects are a depletion of stratospheric ozone (caused by the CFCs and other halocarbons) and an increase in the 
concentration of tropospheric ozone. The negative values for aerosols should not necessarily be regarded as an offset against the 
greenhouse gas forcing because of doubts over the applicability of global mean radiative forcing in the case of non-homogeneously 
distributed species such as aerosols and ozone (see Section 1 and Section 7). 
Nitrogen fertilisation 
Ecosystems receive substantial inputs of anthropogenic 
nitrogen, which in many areas can act as a fertiliser and 
could have increased terrestrial carbon storage by 0.2 to 
1.0 GtC/yr in the 1980s. However, high levels of nitrogen 
addition are often associated with acidification and high 
surface ozone concentrations, which in the long term may 
damage ecosystems and possibly reduce carbon storage. 
2.3 C0 2 Concentrations in the Future 
Understanding how C0 2 concentrations will change in the 
future requires adequate knowledge of the relationship 
(including its quantification) between CO-, emissions and 
atmospheric concentration using models of the carbon 
cycle (see the box "Modelling the carbon cycle"). 
Two questions are considered: 
• 
For a given C0 9 emission scenario, how might CCs 
concentrations change in the future? 
For a given CO, concentration profile leading to 
stabilisation of the level of concentration, what 
anthropogenic emissions are implied? 
Results from a range of different carbon cycle models 
are considered in order to assess the sensitivity of 
calculated emission and concentration profiles to model 
formulation. However, model intercomparison alone gives 
an underestimate of uncertainty because the calculations 
performed have the following limitations: 
• 
The carbon cycle models were calibrated to balance 
the contemporary carbon budget according to earlier 
estimates (IPCC 1990 and 1992), rather than the 
budget shown in Table 1 which was not finalised 
until after the model calculations had been 
completed. The differences between the 1990 and 
1992 budgets and the budget in Table 1 are: (i) a 
change in the estimate of atmospheric accumulation 
from 3.4 to 3.2 GtC/yr, and (ii) a reduction in the net 

20 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
MODELLING THE CARBON CYCLE 
Carbon is exchanged between the atmosphere, the oceans, the terrestrial biosphere (Figure 4), and, on geological time-
scales, with sediments and sedimentary rocks. Fossil fuel burning, cement manufacture, and forest harvest and other 
changes of land-use transfer carbon (as C02) to the atmosphere. Although the anthropogenic flux of C0 2 is small 
compared with mean natural fluxes (Figure 4), it is sufficient to perturb the carbon cycle. The additional anthropogenic 
CO-, cycles between the atmosphere, ocean, and marine and terrestrial biospheres. The net uptake of anthropogenic 
CO-,, particularly by the deep ocean, occurs slowly (for the oceans: on a time-scale of centuries), so addition of 
anthropogenic C02 has a long-lasting effect on atmospheric concentration. For example, if C0 2 emissions were held 
constant at present day levels, atmospheric concentrations would continue to rise for at least two centuries. 
Key processes in the carbon cycle include: 
The exchange of CO, between the atmosphere and ocean. 
• 
The exchange of CO, between the surface waters and long-term storage in the deep ocean. 
• 
The net release or uptake of C02 from changes in land-use practices (e.g., deforestation). 
• 
The photosynthetic uptake of C02 by land plants; the transfer of their carbon into long-term storage in wood and 
soils; the response of these processes to changing C0 2 and climate, and the release of C0 2 back to the 
atmosphere through plant and soil respiration. 
To examine the relationship between C0 2 emissions and atmospheric concentration and to calculate future 
concentration levels we need a model of the carbon cycle which explicitly includes all of the above elements. 
However, most carbon cycle models include only simple representations of terrestrial biotic processes. The oceanic 
components vary in complexity from a few simplified equations to spatially explicit, detailed descriptions of ocean 
biology, chemistry, and transport processes. Attempts to model the effect of climate feedbacks on the carbon cycle are 
only just beginning and are not included in most carbon cycle models. The calculation of future C0 2 concentrations 
also requires assumptions regarding future anthropogenic C02 emissions. 
source from changing land-use due to the inclusion 
of a sink (0.5 GtC/yr) in Northern Hemisphere forest 
regrowth. Atmospheric concentration changes 
calculated by models calibrated using the 1990 and 
1992 budgets are lower by as much as 5 to 10% (for 
given emissions) and emissions higher by a similar 
amount (for given concentrations), compared with 
results of models calibrated using the budget in 
Table 1. 
• 
The models include a sink term dependent on CO, 
concentration (i.e., acting like a simple CO-, 
fertilisation effect) in order to balance the 1980 to 
19S9 carbon budget. This is an oversimplification 
because: (i) CO, fertilisation is much more complex 
than this: it depends on water and nutrient 
availability and on the state of the future biosphere 
(for example, deforestation of large areas would 
inevitably lead to a weaker CO, fertilisation effect) 
and (ii) other sink mechanisms exist which are 
currently not modelled, but in reality are likely to 
play a part in the carbon budget (e.g., nitrogen 
fertilisation). 
• 
No attempt is made to model climate feedbacks on 
the carbon cycle (see Section 2.4). 
2.3.1 For a given C02 emission scenario, how might C02 
concentrations change in the future? 
Six greenhouse gas emission scenarios were described in 
IPCC (1992), based on a wide range of future assumptions 
regarding economic, demographic and policy factors. The 
anthropogenic C0 2 emissions for these scenarios are 
shown in Figure 5a. IS92c, which has the lowest C0 2 
emissions, assumes low population growth, low economic 
growth and severe constraints on fossil fuel supplies. The 
highest emission scenario (IS92e) assumes moderate 
population growth, high economic growth, high fossil fuel 
availability and a phase out of nuclear power. Figure 5b 
shows the resulting CO, concentrations. All show 
increases in concentration well above pre-industrial levels 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
21 
Atmosphere 
750 
Fossil fuels and 
cement production 
Figure 4: The global carbon cycle. The numbers in boxes indicate the size in GtC of each reservoir. On each arrow is indicated the 
magnitude of the flux in GtC/yr (DOC = dissolved organic carbon). 
by 2100 (75 to 220% higher). None of the scenarios show 
a stabilisation of concentration before 2100, although 
IS92c produces slow growth in CO-, concentration. IS92a, 
b, e and f all produce a doubling of the pre-industrial CO-, 
concentration before 2070 with rapid rates of concentration 
growth. Neither IS92c nor d results in doubled pre-
industrial CO., concentrations by 2100. 
Stabilisation of current global emissions of CO-, does 
not lead to stabilisation of CO-, concentration by 2100. 
C02 concentrations reach about 500 ppmv by the end of 
the 21st century (Figure 5c) and calculations show that 
concentrations continue to increase slowly for several 
hundred years. 
2.3.2 For a given C02 concentration profile leading to 
stabilisation, what anthropogenic 
emissions are 
implied? 
In the context of the ultimate objective of the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (quoted in the 
preface to Part I of this report), it is important to 
investigate, for all the greenhouse gases, the emission 
profiles which would lead to stabilisation of their 
concentration in the atmosphere. In this section C0 2 is 
considered; because of the complex nature of the lifetime 
of atmospheric CO-,, the calculations for CO, are relatively 
complex and therefore require considerable explanation. 
The stabilisation of other greenhouse gases, CH4 and N-,0, 
for which the calculations are simpler, are considered in 
later sections. 
Carbon cycle models have been used to calculate the 
emissions of CO-, which would lead to stabilisation at a 
number of different concentration levels (i.e., the inverse 
of the type of calculation considered in Section 2.3.1). 
These calculations are designed to illustrate the 
relationship between CO-, concentration and emissions. 
Concentration profiles have been devised (Figure 6) which 
stabilise at CO, concentrations from 350 to 750 ppmv (for 
comparison, the pre-industrial CO-, concentration was 
close to 280 ppmv and the 1993 concentration was 
356 ppmv). 
The calculations which have been made so far are 

22 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
IS92e 
IS92d 
IS92c 
2100 
1950 
Year 
> 
E 
Q. 
n. 
c 
n 
1 
8 
8 
n 
o 
800 
600 
400 
1 
(b) 
— 
"T*""""*^ 
i 
i 
_g<g 
' 
i 
i 
yf-
: < * • 
.i 
i 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
. / / " . ; 
/ .• .<.•• 
/A*r " 
• 
^
^ 
-
, 
IS92e 
: IS92f 
- IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
IS92c 
2000 
2050 
2100 
Year 
implications. Many different stabilisation levels, time-
scales for achieving these levels, and routes to stabilisation 
could have been chosen. Those in Figure 6 give a smooth 
transition from the current rate of CO, concentration 
increase to stabilisation. As a result, the year of 
stabilisation differs with stabilisation level from around 
2150 for 350 ppmv to 2250 for 750 ppmv. 
Figure 7 shows the model-derived profiles of total 
anthropogenic emissions (from fossil fuel use, changes in 
land-use and cement production) that lead to stabilisation 
following the concentration profiles shown in Figure 6. 
Initially emissions rise, followed some decades later by 
quite rapid and large reductions. Stabilisation at any of the 
concentration levels studied (350 to 750 ppmv) is only 
possible if emissions are eventually reduced well below 
1990 levels (Figure 7). For comparison the emissions from 
IS92a, c and e are shown up to 2100 in Figure 7. 
Emissions for all the stabilisation levels studied are lower 
than those for IS92a and e, even in the first few decades of 
the 21st century. Emissions for the IS92c Scenario lie 
between the emissions which in this study achieve 
stabilisation at 450 and 550 ppmv. 
The concentration profiles here are illustrative. 
Stabilisation at the same level, via a different route, would 
produce different curves from those shown in Figure 7. 
> 
E 
a 
c o 
8 
c 
8 
d1 
o 
800 
g 600 
400 
(c) 
Constant projected 
year 2000 emissions 
1950 
2000 
2050 
2100 
Year 
Figure 5: (a) Prescribed anthropogenic emissions of CO, (from 
fossil fuel use, deforestation and cement production) for the IS92 
Scenarios, (b) CO-, concentrations resulting from the IS92 
emission scenarios calculated using the "Bern" model, a mid-
range carbon cycle model (a range of results from different 
models is indicated by the shaded area of the IS92a curve) and 
(c) CO, concentrations resulting from constant projected year 
2000 emissions (using the model of Wigley). 
necessarily limited in their scope and ranges. They are 
designed to illustrate the relationship between CO, 
concentration and emissions. The selection of the range of 
concentrations from 350 ppmv to 750 ppmv was arbitrary 
and should not be construed as having any policy 
Table 2: Emissions of carbon accumulated from 1990 to 
the end of the 21st century leading to stabilisation ofCO? 
concentration at 350, 450, 550, 650, and 750 ppmv. The 
range of uncertainty is derived from the spread of model 
results. For comparison the accumulated emissions are 
also shown for the 1S92 emission scenarios. 
1892emissionscenarios 
e 
f 
a 
b 
d 
c 
Stabilisation Case 
350 ppmv 
450 ppmv 
550 ppmv 
650 ppmv 
750 ppmv 
Accumulated emissions 
from 1990 to 2100 
(GtC) 
2190 
1830 
1500 
1430 
980 
770 
300-430 
640-800 
880-1060 
1000-1240 
1220-1420 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
8 0 0 i i i i i i i i i i i i i i 
% 400 h 
300 -
200 
_L 
i I i 
1900 
1950 
2000 2050 2100 
Year 
2150 2200 2250 2300 
23 
Figure 6: Profiles of atmospheric CO, concentration leading to stabilisation at 350, 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv. Doubled pre-
industrial C02 concentration is 560 ppmv. The radiative forcing resulting from the increase in CO, relative to pre-industrial levels is 
marked on the right-hand axis. Note the non-linear nature of the relationship between CO, concentration change and radiative forcing. 
However, to a first approximation, the total amount of 
emitted carbon accumulated over time (the area under the 
curves in Figure 7), is relatively insensitive to the 
concentration profile used. Stabilisation at a lower 
concentration implies lower accumulated emissions 
(Figure 8). Stabilisation of CO, concentration at or below 
750 ppmv (the highest level studied) would require 
accumulated emissions from 1990 to 2100 lower than 
those occurring under the IS92a, b, e and f Scenarios 
(Table 2) and even lower in the next two centuries. 
Figure 8 also shows the amount of carbon which 
accumulates in the atmosphere (known as the airborne 
fraction). On the century time-scale, the airborne fraction 
depends on the level of stabilisation, ranging from 15-25% 
(for 450 ppmv) to 30-40% (for 750 ppmv) of total 
anthropogenic emissions. 
Although the range of results from different models is 
indicated in Figures 7 and 8, this is an underestimate of 
uncertainty. Changing the assumptions regarding the 
strength of the CO, fertilisation term indicated that future 
atmospheric concentration may vary by about ±15% from 
the stabilisation levels shown in Figure 6. The results in 
Figure 7 and 8 do not account for possible climate 
feedbacks on the carbon cycle (see Section 2.4). Different 
assumptions about land-use changes would give different 
results. For example, if large areas were deforested the 
Figure 7: Illustrative anthropogenic emissions of CO, leading to stabilisation at concentrations of 350, 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv 
following the profiles shown in Figure 6 (using a mid-range carbon cycle model). The range of results from different models is 
indicated on the 450 ppmv profile. The emissions for the lS92a, c and e Scenarios are also shown on the figure. The negative emissions 
for stabilisation at 350 ppmv are an artefact of the particular concentration profile imposed. 

24 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
VARIATIONS IN THE GROWTH RATES OF CARBON DIOXIDE AND METHANE CONCENTRATIONS 
Observations of carbon dioxide (CO,) since the 1950s show regular annual increases in both concentration and rate of 
concentration growth, albeit with year to year variations in the growth rate (Figure 2). During the period 1991 to 1993, 
the rate of increase of C02 per year slowed substantially (to as low as 0.5 ppmv/yr from more than 1.5 ppmv/yr) 
(Figure 2b). There are numerous examples in the record of short periods where growth rates are higher or lower than 
the long-term mean. The most recent observations indicate that growth rates of C02 are now increasing. 
The rate of methane (CH4) concentration increase has declined over the last decade, slowing dramatically in 1991 to 
1992, though with an apparent increase in the growth rate in late 1993 (Figure 9b). The slow down in growth in 1991 
to 1992 was a maximum at high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere, suggesting a drop in emissions as a possible 
explanation. Longer-period variations in the growth rate of CH4 occurred in the 1920s and 1970s as observed from air 
trapped in ice cores. 
At present it is unclear what mechanisms account for these recent variations in the growth rate of CO, and CH4. 
Although the decrease in growth rates of CO, and CH4 occurred during roughly the same period, the decreases may be 
due to independent mechanisms. Further analysis of global observations during the most recent period should allow 
better assessment of the causes of the recent "anomalous" growth rates. Such studies should eventually improve our 
understanding of the global cycles of these important trace gases. 
Because of the variability at the year-to-year time-scale, growth rates averaged on a decadal time-scale should be 
considered when looking at anthropogenic trends. 
capacity of the biosphere to act as a sink would be 
reduced, hence more C02 would remain in the atmosphere. 
Conversely, afforestation efforts could increase the 
capacity of the biosphere, and less C0 2 would remain in 
the atmosphere. While certain robust conclusions emerge 
from the model studies, uncertainties exist and these 
results must be considered a "first look". 
2.4 Climate Feedbacks Associated with the Carbon 
Cycle 
Higher temperatures and precipitation can increase 
photosynthesis and plant growth and hence increase carbon 
storage in living vegetation and litter (a negative 
feedback). The storage of carbon in soil tends to decrease 
with increasing temperature due to increased rates of 
650 
Stabilised concentration (ppmv) 
750 
Figure 8: Anthropogenic CO, emissions shown in Figure 7 accumulated from 1990 to 2200 plotted against the final stabilised 
concentration. For example, accumulated emissions of between 1200 and 1600 GtC lead to stabilisation at a concentration of 550 
ppmv. The figure also shows the amount of CO, (in GtC) remaining in the atmosphere at each stabilisation level. The difference 
between accumulated emissions and atmospheric increase represents the accumulated uptake by the ocean and the marine and 
terrestrial biospheres. The range of results from different models is indicated by the shaded area. 

Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change 
Table 3: A summary of key greenhouse gases affected by human 
activities. 
25 
Pre-industrial 
concentration 
Concentration 
in 1992 
Recent rate of 
concentration 
change per 
year(over 
1980s) 
Atmospheric 
lifetime 
(years) 
co2 
280 ppmv 
355 ppmv 
1.5 
ppmv/yr 
0.4%/yr 
(50-200)tt 
CH4 
700 ppbv 
1,714 ppbv 
13 
ppbv/yr 
0.8%/yr 
(12-17)ttt 
N20 
275 ppbv 
311 ppbv 
0.75 
ppbv/yr 
0.25%/yr 
120 
CFC-12 
zero 
503 pptvf 
18-20 
pptv/yr 
4%/yr 
102 
HCFC-22 
(aCFC 
substitute) 
zero 
105 pptv 
7-8 
pptv/yr 
7%/yr 
13.3 
CF4(a 
perfluoro-
carbon) 
zero 
70 pptv 
1.1-1.3 
pptv/yr 
2%/yr 
50,000 
t 1 pptv = 1 part per trillion (million million) by volume. 
ft No single lifetime for C0 2 can be defined because of the different rates of uptake by different sink processes. 
t t t This has been defined as an adjustment time which takes into account the indirect effect of methane on its own lifetime. 
decomposition (a positive feedback). Soils which are 
flooded can store large amounts of carbon in the form of 
peat. Drying (due to changes in precipitation and/or 
evapotranspiration), and possibly warming, of such regions 
would release additional C0 2. 
Global ecosystem models which include the C 0 9 
fertilisation effect and attempt to model the effect of 
changes in temperature and precipitation on plant growth 
and decomposition are now providing insight into the issue 
of future terrestrial carbon storage. Some models also 
allow for the effect of redistribution of vegetation in 
response to changes in climate. In response to climate 
change resulting from gradually increasing CO^ 
concentration, model results suggest release of carbon due 
to die-back of vegetation of 1 to 4 GtC/yr for a period of 
decades to centuries, followed by carbon accumulation. 
Results suggest increased carbon storage of 100 to 
200 GtC after several centuries. Assumptions about land-
use affect these conclusions, with high rates of simulated 
deforestation leading to reduced storage or even net 
emission of C0 2. 
Climate feedbacks also influence the storage of carbon 
in the ocean through changes in sea surface temperature, 
ocean circulation and the marine biological pump. 
Additional insights into climatic feedbacks come from 
ice core records going back over many thousands of 
years (known as palaeo-records). A clear correlation 
between atmospheric CO-, concentration and global 
temperature (especially during warming periods) is 
evident in much of the palaeo-record over long time-
scales, with increases of about 80 ppmv occurring during 
deglaciations. 
This 
relationship 
between 
C 0 2 
concentration and temperature may carry forward into 
the future, possibly causing a significant positive climate 
feedback on CO-, fluxes. 
3 Methane (CH4) 
Methane is another naturally occurring greenhouse gas 
whose concentration in the atmosphere is growing as a 
result of human activities (rice paddies, animal husbandry, 
landfills, biomass burning and fossil fuel production and 
use) (Figure 9a). Globally, methane increased by 7% over 
the decade from 1983. However, the 1980s were 
characterised by declining growth rates, dropping from 
16 ppbv/yr in 1980 to about 10 ppbv/yr by 1990. Growth 
rates slowed dramatically in 1991 and 1992, although very 
recent data suggest that growth rates started to increase in 
late 1993 (see the box on "Variations in the growth rates of 
C 0 2 and CH4 concentrations"). The magnitudes of sinks 
and, especially, individual sources of methane, are less 
well known than its atmospheric increase (Table 4). 
However, carbon isotope measurements indicate that about 
20% of the total annual methane emissions are related to 
fossil fuel use (e.g., combustion, coal mines, natural gas 
production and distribution, and petroleum industry 
operations). In total, anthropogenic activities are 
responsible for 60-80% of current methane emissions 
(Table 4). The direct radiative forcing due to the increase 
in methane concentration since pre-industrial times is 
about 0.5 Wirf2 (Figure 3). 
CH4 has clearly identified chemical feedbacks. The main 

26 
Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change 
ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY 
While chemical and physical reactions in the lower 
atmosphere have a small impact on carbon dioxide 
(CO-,) concentrations, they control the abundance and 
lifetime of other greenhouse gases. A key process to 
understand is the way these reactions influence the 
concentration and spatial distribution of the hydroxy! 
radical (OH) which has a major role in atmospheric 
chemistry as it is highly reactive and acts to remove a 
number of greenhouse gases from the atmosphere. 
The major sink mechanism for methane (CH4) is 
reaction with OH. Increasing tropospheric methane 
concentrations will lead to decreased OH concentrations 
and to an increased methane lifetime. Reduction in 
tropospheric OH can also indirectly increase the 
abundance of some other greenhouse gases and ozone-
depleting substances. 
CH4 oxidation in the presence of oxides of nitrogen 
(NOx) produces ozone (0 3), another greenhouse gas. 
When NOx is present in low concentrations, the CH4 
oxidation destroys 0_v Overall, methane oxidation is a 
net ozone source. When CH 4 is destroyed in the 
stratosphere, the chlorine and nitrogen cycles that 
destroy O, are suppressed, thus increasing stratospheric 
0} abundances. The destruction process also produces 
stratospheric water vapour which acts as a greenhouse 
gas and plays a role in stratospheric chemistry, tending 
to destroy some O v 
Non-methane hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and 
NOx, while not important greenhouse gases in their own 
right, can have important indirect effects on radiative 
forcing through the production and destruction of 
tropospheric ozone and their influence on OH and 
methane concentrations. There are not enough baseline 
global and regional monitoring data for these species to 
derive the contributions from the different emission 
sources to their respective global distributions. 
removal process for CH4 is reaction with the hydroxy! 
radical (OH). Addition of CH4 to the atmosphere reduces 
the concentration of tropospheric OH concentration which 
can subsequently feed back and reduce the rate of CH4 
removal. A recent analysis has shown that these chemical 
feedbacks result in an adjustment time for the addition of a 
pulse of CH4 to the atmosphere of 14.5 ± 2.5 years, as 
compared with the "budget" lifetime of 10 ± 2 years used 
in previous IPCC reports, when no account was taken of 
the effect of CH4 on its own lifetime. Use of this longer 
adjustment time increases the direct radiative effect, of a 
given emission of CH4; so part of what was previously 
included under the indirect effect of methane is now 
accounted for in the direct effect. This new adjustment 
Table 4: Estimated sources and sinks of methane for 1980 
to 1990. All figures are in TgfiCHJIyr). 
Current global 
burden is 4850 
TgfCH^. 
(a) Observed atmospheric increase, estimated sinks and 
sources derived to balance the budget. 
Individual estimates 
Total 
Atmospheric increase 
Sinks of atmospheric CH4 
tropospheric OH 
stratosphere 
soils 
37 (35-40) 
445 (360-530) 
40 (32-48) 
30 (15-45) 
Total atmospheric sinks 
Implied sources (sinks + 
atmospheric increase) 
515 (430-600) 
552 (465-640) 
(b) Inventory of identified sources. 
Individual estimates 
Total 
Natural sources 
Anthropogenic sources: 
Fossil fuel related 
Total biospheric 
Total anthropogenic sources 
160(110-210) 
100(70-120) 
275 (200-350) 
375(300-450) 
Total identified sources 
535 (410-660) 
t 1 Tg = 1 million million grammes which is equivilent to 1 
million tonnes. 
time has been used when calculating the GWP for methane 
and contributes to a slightly larger value compared with 
the 1990 IPCC report (see Section 9). 
In addition, chemical feedbacks resulting from addition 
of CH4 increase the concentrations of other greenhouse 
gases (in particular, tropospheric 0 3 and stratospheric 
water vapour); these are the indirect effects of CH4 (see the 
box on "Atmospheric chemistry"). 
At present the emission of CH4 (from a combination of 
anthropogenic and natural sources) must exceed the 
removal because the atmospheric abundance is increasing. 
CH4 has a short adjustment time compared with CO, and 
so stabilisation of emissions would lead relatively quickly 
to a stable concentration. If current emissions were held 
constant, CH4 concentrations would stabilise in less than 
50 years at about 1900 ppbv (11% higher than at present). 
A reduction in annual methane emissions to levels about 
35 million tonnes (roughly 10% of anthropogenic 
emissions) below current 
levels would 
stabilise 
concentrations at today's levels. (This calculation assumes 
that natural sources and atmospheric losses of methane are 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
27 
t 
a. 
c o 
s 
8 
0) 
i 
5 
1650 
1550 
1450 
1350 
1250 
1150 
1050 
950 
850 
750 
650 
900 
~i 
1 
1 
r-
o DE08 
o Site J 
• Mizuho 
* Summit (Bern) 
« Summit (Grenoble) 
— Cape Grim 
* • ' „ > * * # ' * 
/ 
§-
0.40 
0.35 
0.30 
0.25 
0.20 
0.15 
0.10 
0.05 
0 
1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 
Year 
I 
o 
8 
5 
1 
1 
1 
r 
Figure 9: (a) CH4 concentration derived from Antarctic ice cores over the past 1000 years. Direct observations of CH4 concentration 
from Cape Grim, Tasmania, are included to demonstrate the smooth transition from ice core to atmospheric measurements. The 
radiative forcing resulting from increases in CH4 relative to the pre-industrial period are indicated on the right-hand axis. The effect of 
overlap with N20 is accounted for according to IPCC (1990). (b) Globally averaged CH4 concentration for 1983 to 1993 showing the 
decline in growth rate during 1992 and 1993. 
not affected by changing climate and atmospheric 
composition over the next century.) 
As for CO,, there are climate feedbacks which involve 
CH4. In particular, methane emissions from northern 
wetlands, permafrost areas and decomposition of methane 
hydrates (clathrates) in continental shelf regions are 
sensitive to changes in temperature and precipitation. 
Measurements show that increases in either temperature or 
duration of water-logging increase methane emissions (a 
positive feedback). Conversely, a lowering of the water 
table in northern wetlands/peat lands may lead to a 
reduction in emissions of methane (a negative feedback). 
Other insights into climate feedbacks come from palaeo-
records which show a clear positive correlation between 
CH4 concentration and global surface temperature on time-
scales of order 10,000 years. CH4 changes are typically 
about 300 ppbv during deglaciations. Recent results have 
also shown CH4 changes of up to about 100 ppbv 
associated with more abrupt temperature fluctuations on 
the century time-scale. These shorter time-scale 
correlations are believed to result from changes in net 
fluxes from wetlands as a rapid response to climate 
change. Therefore the link between CH4 concentration and 
temperature may carry forward into the future, with 
perhaps an additional 
effect 
due to 
clathrate 
decomposition. 
4 Nitrous Oxide (N20) 
There are many small sources of N-,0, both natural and 
anthropogenic, which are difficult to quantify. The main 
anthropogenic sources are from agriculture (especially the 
development of pasture in tropical regions), biomass 
burning, and a number of industrial processes (e.g., adipic 

28 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
315 
295' 
' 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i — i — i — i — i 
1 
1 
i — L . 
78 
'80 
'82 
'84 
'86 
'88 
'90 
'92 
Year 
E 
C 
a 
Figure 10: Globally averaged, annual mean N-,0 concentration (ppbv) from 1977 to 1993 obtained from NOAA-CMDL flask 
sampling network. Pre-industrial N20 concentration was around 275 ppbv. The radiative forcing resulting from increases in N20 
relative to the pre-industrial period is indicated on the right-hand axis. The effect of overlap with CH4 is accounted for according to 
IPCC0990). 
acid and nitric acid production). A best estimate of the 
current (1980s) anthropogenic emission of N20 is 3 to 
S Tg(N)/yr. Natural sources are probably twice as large as 
anthropogenic ones. Although sources/sinks cannot be well 
quantified, atmospheric measurements and evidence from 
ice cores show that the atmospheric abundance of N^O has 
increased since the pre-industrial era, which is most likely 
due to human activities (Figure 10). The average growth 
rate over the past four decades is about 0.25%/yr 
(O.H ppbv/yr). In 1992 atmospheric levels of N-,0 were 
31 I ppbv; pre-industrial levels were about 275 ppbv. The 
radiative forcing due to the change in N-,0 since pre-
industrial times is about 0.1 Wm~2 (Figure 3). 
N-,0, removed mainly by photolysis (breakdown by 
sunlight) in the stratosphere, has a long lifetime (about 120 
years) which has implications for achieving stable 
concentrations. If emissions were held constant at today's 
level, the N-,0 abundance would climb from 311 ppbv to 
about 400 ppbv over several hundred years. In order for 
N-,0 abundances to be stabilised near current levels, 
anthropogenic sources would need to be reduced by more 
than 5{Y'/r. 
5 Halocarbons 
Halocarbons containing fluorine, chlorine and bromine are 
significant greenhouse gases on a per-molecule basis. The 
chlorine and bromine containing species are also involved 
in the depletion of the ozone layer; the emissions of many 
such compounds are controlled by the Montreal Protocol 
and its subsequent amendments and adjustments. 
The tropospheric growth rates of the 
major 
anthropogenic source species for stratospheric chlorine and 
bromine (CFCs, carbon tetrachloride, methylchloroform. 
halons) have slowed significantly (Figure 11), in response 
to substantially reduced emissions, as required by the 
Montreal Protocol and its subsequent amendments and 
adjustments. For example, the 1993 CFC-11 annual growth 
rate was 25 to 30% of that observed in the 1970s and 
1980s. The total amount of organic chlorine in the 
troposphere increased by only 1.6% in 1992, about half of 
the rate of increase (2.9%) in 1989. Peak total 
chlorine/bromine loading in the troposphere is expected to 
occur in 1994, but the stratospheric peak will lag by about 
3 to 5 years, so stratospheric abundances will continue to 
grow for a few more years before declining. 
0.06 
0.05 
> 
0.04 -2 
0.03 
Figure 11: CFC-11 concentration from 1978 to 1992 from the 
ALE-GAGE global sampling network. Monthly mean clean air 
values are shown for three sites: Ireland, Oregon and Tasmania. 
CFCs are entirely of anthropogenic origin and did not exist in the 
atmosphere prior to the 1950s. The radiative forcing resulting 
from increases in CFC-11 relative to the pre-industrial period are 
indicated on the right-hand axis. 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
29 
With phase out dates for the production and 
consumption of CFCs and other ozone-depleting 
substances now fixed by international agreement, several 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluoro-
carbons (MFCs) are being manufactured and used as 
substitutes. The growth in the atmospheric concentration 
of HCFC-22 has been observed for several years and is 
currently about 7% per year. The direct global warming 
potentials of most HCFCs and HFCs are less than those of 
the compounds they replace, although some HFCs have 
substantial global warming potentials. Perfluorocarbons, 
which have been proposed as CFC substitutes in some 
applications and are by-products of some industrial 
processes, have very long atmospheric lifetimes (several 
thousand years) and are extremely powerful greenhouse gases. 
The atmospheric residence times of CFC-11 and 
methylchloroform are now better known. Model studies 
simulating atmospheric abundances using known 
emissions suggest best-estimated lifetimes of 50 years for 
CFC-11 and 5.4 years for methylchloroform, with 
uncertainties of about 10%. These models, calibrated 
against CFC-11 and methylchloroform, are used to 
calculate the lifetimes, and hence GWPs, of other gases 
destroyed only in the stratosphere (other CFCs and nitrous 
oxide) and those which are highly reactive with 
tropospheric OH (HCFCs and HFCs). 
The contribution to direct radiative forcing due to 
increases in the halocarbons since pre-industrial times is 
about 0.3 Wm"2 (the largest contributions come from 
CFC-11, CFC-12 and CFC-113). As well as this positive 
direct effect, the halocarbon induced loss of ozone in the 
lower stratosphere represents an indirect radiative forcing 
which is negative (see Section 6.1). 
6 Ozone (03) 
Ozone is an important greenhouse gas present in both the 
stratosphere and troposphere. Changes in ozone can cause 
radiative forcing by influencing both solar and infrared 
radiation. The net radiative forcing is strongly dependent 
on the vertical distribution of ozone change and is 
particularly sensitive to changes around the tropopause 
level, at which height trends are difficult to estimate due to 
a lack of reliable observations. Estimation of the radiative 
forcing due to changes in ozone is thus more complex than 
for the well-mixed greenhouse gases. 
6.1 Stratospheric Ozone 
Decreases in stratospheric ozone have occurred since the 
1970s. The most obvious feature is the annual appearance 
of the Antarctic ozone hole in September and October. The 
October average total ozone values over Antarctica are 
50-70% lower than those observed in the 1960s. The 
ozone loss occurs at altitudes between about 14 and 24 km 
and is caused by the chlorine and bromine compounds 
released in the stratospheric decomposition of halocarbons 
(principally CFCs and halons). 
Statistically significant losses in total ozone have also 
been observed in the mid-latitudes of both hemispheres. In 
the Northern Hemisphere the trends in the 1980s are larger 
in local winter and spring than in summer or autumn, while 
in the Southern Hemisphere the trends show little seasonal 
variation. At Northern mid-latitudes in winter and spring 
the ozone losses amount to about a 10% decrease since 
around 1970. The weight of recent scientific evidence 
strengthens the conclusion that the mid-latitude ozone loss 
is due largely to anthropogenic chlorine and bromine 
compounds. Little or no downward trend in ozone has 
been observed in the tropics (20°N-20°S). 
A variety of techniques indicates that ozone losses have 
occurred in the lower stratosphere (around 20 km altitude) 
where the bulk of the ozone resides. A statistically 
significant trend is also observed at 40 km, but this makes 
a small contribution to changes in total column ozone and 
has a negligible effect on radiative forcing. 
Record low global ozone levels were measured over the 
past two years. Anomalous ozone decreases were observed 
in the mid-latitudes of both hemispheres, with Northern 
Hemispheric decreases being larger than those in the 
Southern Hemisphere. The Antarctic ozone depletions in 
1992 and 1993 were the most severe on record, with ozone 
losses of more than 99% between 14 and 19 km in October 
1993. The globally averaged ozone values were 1-2% 
lower than would be expected from an extrapolation of the 
trend prior to 1991 and allowing for the natural 
fluctuations resulting from the solar cycle and quasi-
biennial oscillation. The 1994 global ozone levels are 
returning to values close to those expected from the long-
term downward trend. 
Since the stratospheric abundances of halocarbon 
compounds are expected to continue to grow for a few 
more years (see Section 5), continuing global ozone losses 
are expected for the remainder of the decade (other things 
being equal), with a gradual recovery throughout the first 
half of the 21st century. 
A loss of ozone in the lower stratosphere over the past 
15 to 20 years has led to a globally averaged radiative 
forcing of about -0.1 Wm"2. This negative radiative forcing 
represents an indirect effect of CFCs and halons (the 
compounds thought to be largely responsible for the ozone 
loss) which, over the last 15 to 20 years, may have 
partially offset their direct warming effect. However, 
because the pattern of stratospheric ozone loss is not 
spatially uniform (it occurs mainly in mid-latitudes and 
polar regions), offsetting the direct and indirect global 
mean radiative forcing may not correctly reflect the 
climatic response (see Section 1). Prior to the onset of 

30 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
significant ozone depletion, the globally averaged radiative 
forcing caused by the increase in halocarbons was between 
+0.1 and+0.2 Wm"2. 
6.2 Tropospheric Ozone 
In the troposphere ozone is produced from various short-
lived precursor gases (carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen 
oxides (NOx) and non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHC)) 
and as a result of chemical feedbacks involving CH4. 
Ozone can also be transported into the troposphere from 
the stratosphere. Changes in tropospheric ozone 
concentration are highly spatially variable, both regionally 
and vertically, making assessment of global long-term 
trends extremely difficult. Observations show that free 
tropospheric ozone has increased above many locations in 
the Northern Hemisphere over the last 30 years. There is 
also some evidence (from measurements made at high 
mountain sites in Europe) that levels have increased in the 
Northern Hemisphere since the early 1900s. Over the last 
decade, trends were small or non-existent. Model 
simulations and the limited observations together suggest 
that tropospheric ozone may have doubled in the Northern 
Hemisphere since pre-industrial times, an increase of 
around 25 ppbv. In the Southern Hemisphere, a decrease 
has been observed since the mid-1980s at the South Pole; 
in the hemisphere as a whole there are insufficient data to 
draw strong inferences. 
Such changes in ozone have potentially important 
consequences for radiative forcing. Although detailed 
quantification is not possible, due to uncertainties in the 
size and distribution of the ozone change since pre-
industrial times, estimates of the radiative forcing are of order 
a few tenths of a Wm'2 (tentatively put at 0.2 to 0.6 Win"2). 
6.3 The Importance of NOx 
Our identification of the major physical and chemical 
processes affecting ozone in the troposphere is much 
further advanced than our ability to calculate or predict 
ozone concentrations. Uncertainties in the global budget of 
tropospheric ozone are associated primarily with our lack 
of knowledge of the distribution of 0 3 and its short-lived 
precursors (NO,., NMHC and CO). Observations of NOx 
are just beginning to reveal the atmospheric distribution 
and large variability in these ozone-producing species, but 
even with the observed distributions we cannot define the 
importance of anthropogenic sources (e.g., transport of 
surface pollution out of the boundary layer, direct injection 
by aircraft) relative to natural sources (lightning, 
stratospheric air) in controlling the global NOx 
distribution. Current estimates of anthropogenic NOx 
sources attribute 24 Tg(N)/yr to fossil fuel combustion at 
the surface, 0.5 Tg(N)/yr to aircraft emissions. 8 Tg(N)/yr 
to biomass burning and an unknown, but significant 
fraction of the 12 Tg(N)/yr released from soils. 
Anthropogenic emissions dominate natural sources by far, 
but emissions from different sources cannot be directly 
compared and their impact is primarily local or regional. 
Aircraft release NOx directly into the free troposphere. 
Such emissions could increase ozone concentration at 
altitudes where ozone is at its most effective as a 
greenhouse gas. The radiative forcing resulting from such 
emissions could thus be more important than equivalent 
NOx emissions at the surface. Until the various 
contributions to NOx and 0 3 levels in the free troposphere 
can be better quantified, the relative importance of the 
various NOx sources in perturbing 0 3 amounts cannot be 
reliably estimated. However, reasonable upper limits may 
be placed on the radiative forcing due to increased 0-, 
produced by the NOx relative to that from the C09 emitted 
by aircraft. Aircraft emit about 3% of total C02 emissions 
from fossil fuel combustion and a similar fraction of 
anthropogenic NOx. Our current best guess is that the 
positive radiative forcing due to the release of NOx from 
aircraft could be of similar magnitude or smaller than the 
effect of CO, released from aircraft. These estimates are 
preliminary and may well change in future assessments. 
Aircraft also emit carbon monoxide, water vapour, soot 
and other particles, sulphur gases and other trace 
constituents which have the potential to cause radiative 
forcing. The impact of such emissions has not yet been 
properly assessed. 
7 The Effect of Tropospheric Aerosols 
Aerosols are suspensions of particles (diameter range 10"3 
to 10 jum) in the atmosphere. Tropospheric aerosols are 
formed by dispersal of material from the surface (e.g., soil 
dust), by direct emissions of material into the atmosphere 
(e.g., smoke) and by chemical reactions in the troposphere 
which convert gases (such as sulphur dioxide) into 
particles. The release of sulphur dioxide from fossil fuel 
combustion, and organic and elemental carbon, mainly 
from biomass burning, are the main anthropogenic sources 
of aerosols. 
The addition of anthropogenic aerosols to the 
troposphere can influence the radiative balance of the Earth 
in two major ways: (i) through absorption and through 
scattering of solar radiation back to space, known as the 
direct effect and (ii) by acting as nuclei on which cloud 
droplets form, aerosols can influence the formation, 
lifetime and radiative properties of clouds (e.g., increase the 
amount of solar radiation they reflect): the indirect effect. 
There are many uncertainties associated with estimating 
the climatic influence of aerosols. Aerosols are highly 
variable regionally, in both concentration and chemical 
composition, and observations of their spatial distribution 
in the atmosphere (currently and in the past) are lacking. 
Both the direct radiative effect of aerosols and their ability 

Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
31 
to modify cloud properties are strongly influenced by 
particle size and composition. As a result, the radiative 
effects of the anthropogenic component of aerosols cannot 
be related to aerosol mass loading in a simple way. The 
radiative effects of anthropogenic aerosols are relatively 
large compared with their mass contribution because most 
anthropogenic aerosols are in the size range which is most 
radiatively active. 
New estimates of both the direct and indirect effect of 
anthropogenic aerosols in the troposphere have become 
available since IPCC 1992. In order to compare different 
aerosol effects it is useful to express them in terms of 
globally averaged values of radiative forcing. The direct 
radiative forcing due to increases in sulphate aerosol since 
1850, averaged globally, is estimated to lie in the range 
-0.25 to -0.9 Wm"2. The direct effect of aerosol from 
biomass burning is estimated to lie in the range -0.05 to 
-0.6 Wm"2. Calculations of the indirect effect of aerosols 
are at an early stage. Preliminary results suggest that the 
radiative effect of aerosols on cloud radiative properties is 
probably a negative forcing and may be of similar 
magnitude to the direct effect. Note that in the global 
average the total aerosol induced radiative forcing is 
negative, but the absorption of solar radiation by 
carbonaceous aerosols may cause local positive radiative 
forcing. It is interesting to compare these estimates with 
the direct radiative forcing due to increases in greenhouse 
gases since pre-industrial times (+2.1 to +2.8 Wm"2) (see 
Figure 3), although, as pointed out in Section 1, it is 
unlikely to be appropriate to add the negative global 
radiative forcing of aerosols to the positive global radiative 
forcing of greenhouse gases. 
Figure 12 shows the spatial distribution of direct 
radiative forcing due to sulphate aerosols derived from a 
radiative transfer model forced with a model derived 
sulphate distribution. The largest forcing occurs over or 
close to regions of industrial activity. Over the eastern 
USA, central Europe, and eastern China, sulphate forcing 
may have offset much of, or in places been greater than, 
the greenhouse gas forcing. In other areas, particularly the 
Southern Hemisphere, the negative aerosol forcing is much 
weaker and greenhouse gas forcing dominates. However, 
care must be taken when comparing regional radiative 
forcing in this way. For example, a local net forcing of 
zero Wm"2 does not necessarily imply a lack of climate 
change, because climate change over a region can be 
affected by changes in circulation as the atmosphere 
responds to radiative forcing in another region (i.e., local 
forcing does not necessarily govern local response). 
Troposphere aerosols have a lifetime of only a few 
days, unlike most greenhouse gases which have lifetimes 
of tens to hundreds of years. So the atmospheric 
concentration of aerosols responds rapidly to changes in 
emissions. Control of sulphate emissions, motivated by 
other environmental considerations for instance, would 
immediately reduce the amount of aerosols in the 
atmosphere. In contrast, reductions in C02 emissions have 
a much slower effect (see Section 2.3). Emissions of 
aerosols and their precursors therefore create no long-term 
commitment to radiative forcing, in contrast to C0 2 and 
90°N 
45°N 
45°S -
90°S 
90°W 
180° 
Figure 12: Modelled geographic distribution of annual mean direct radiative forcing (Wm"2) from anthropogenic sulphate aerosols in 
the troposphere. The negative radiative forcing is largest over or close to regions of industrial activity. 

32 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
other long-lived greenhouse gas emissions. 
8 What Else Influences Radiative Forcing? 
8.1 Solar Variability 
We know that total solar irradiance varies with an 11-year 
cycle. Space-borne satellite measurements available since 
1978 show that over the most recent sunspot cycle the 
changes in solar irradiance were equivalent to a radiative 
forcing of about 0.2 Wm"2. This may initially seem 
significant, given that it is an appreciable fraction of the 
forcing due to greenhouse gases over the same period. 
However, these changes in solar irradiance are cyclical in 
nature and it is believed that, due to the thermal inertia in 
the climate system, only a small amount of the possible 
temperature change resulting from such transient changes 
in irradiance is realised. In contrast, the changes in 
greenhouse gases represent a sustained and cumulative 
effect over many decades. 
Recent satellite observations show a relationship 
between total solar irradiance and other indicators of solar 
activity which allows a tentative reconstruction of past 
total solar irradiance. Although there is considerable 
uncertainty in estimating solar irradiance before direct 
measurements began, changes in solar irradiance since 
1850 may have contributed a natural radiative forcing of 
around 0.3 Wm"2 (Figure 3). Future forcing due to changes 
in solar irradiance could be negative or positive. 
8.2 Volcanic Activity 
Volcanic eruptions can act to increase the amount of 
aerosol particles in the stratosphere. The dominant 
radiative effect is an increase in scattering of solar 
radiation which reduces the net radiation available to the 
surface/troposphere, thereby leading to cooling. Volcanoes 
have the potential to produce large radiative forcing, but 
the events are transitory. 
The eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines in June 
1991 stands out from a climatic point of view as probably 
the most important eruption this century. The largest 
forcing is calculated to have been about -4 Wm"2 around 
one year after the eruption. This decayed to around -1 Wm"2 
after 2 years. Thus, the radiative forcing resulting from Mt. 
Pinatubo for the first 2 years after the eruption was 
comparable, but of opposite sign, to the greenhouse gas 
forcing this century (+2.1 to +2.8 Wm"2). A cooling of 
global surface temperature observed following the eruption 
reached a maximum of 0.3 to 0.5 °C during 1992. 
Simulation of the climatic effects of Mt. Pinatubo aerosols 
using general circulation models (GCMs) have produced 
results in good agreement with observations, with a 
maximum cooling of 0.4 to 0.6 °C. Such simulations 
increase confidence in the ability of GCMs to respond in a 
realistic way to transient, planetary-scale radiative forcings 
of large magnitude. 
Clearly, individual volcanic eruptions can produce large 
radiative forcing effects, but these effects are transitory. 
An important issue here is whether changes in greenhouse 
gases and aerosols due to human activity are significant 
compared with natural factors. A key question is therefore 
whether there has been any trend in volcanic activity over 
the period since industrialisation; this is unlikely. 
However, variations in the occurrence of climatically 
significant eruptions may be a factor in explaining some 
interannual and interdecadal climate variations. 
9 Global Warming Potential (GWP) — a Tool for 
Policymakers 
Policymakers need some measure of possible future 
commitment to global warming resulting from current 
anthropogenic emissions. The GWP is an attempt to 
provide such a measure. The index is defined as the 
cumulative radiative forcing between the present and some 
chosen later time "horizon" caused by a unit mass of gas 
emitted now, expressed relative to some reference gas 
(here CO-, is used). The future global warming 
commitment of a greenhouse gas over the reference time 
horizon is the appropriate GWP multiplied by the amount 
of gas emitted. For example, GWPs could be used to 
calculate the effect of reducing C02 emissions by a certain 
amount compared with reducing CH4 emissions, for a 
specified time horizon. 
Derivation of GWPs requires knowledge of the fate of 
the emitted gas (typically not well understood) and the 
radiative forcing due to the amount remaining in the 
atmosphere (reasonably well understood). Consequently, 
GWPs encompass the uncertainty associated with all the 
topics discussed in this report. Additionally the choice of 
time horizon will depend on policy considerations. 
The latest estimates of GWPs are given in Table 5. 
Although the GWPs are quoted as single values, the 
typical uncertainty is ±35% relative to the carbon dioxide 
reference. The majority of GWPs are larger than those 
reported in IPCC (1992), typically by 10-30%. These 
increases are largely due to (i) an improved carbon dioxide 
reference and (ii) improved estimates of atmospheric 
lifetimes. Because GWPs are based on the radiative 
forcing concept, they are difficult to apply to radiatively 
important constituents that are unevenly distributed in the 
atmosphere (e.g., aerosols), for the reasons discussed in 
Section 1. No attempt is made to define a GWP for 
aerosols. 
GWPs need to take account of any indirect effects of the 
emitted greenhouse gas, for example, the formation of 
another greenhouse gas, if they are correctly to reflect 
future warming potential. The calculation of many indirect 
GWP components is not currently possible because of 

Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change 
33 
Table 5: Global Warming Potentials, referenced to the absolute GWPfor C02. The typical uncertainty is ±35% relative 
to the CO2 reference. 
Species 
Methanet 
Nitrous oxide 
CFCs 
CFC-11 
CFC-12 
CFC-13 
CFC-113 
CFC-114 
CFC-115 
HCFCs, etc. 
HCFC-22 
HCFC-123 
HCFC-124 
HCFC-141b 
HCFC-142b 
HCFC-225ca 
HCFC-225cb 
Carbon tetrachloride 
Methylchloroform 
Bromocarbons 
H-1301 
Other 
HFC-23 
HFC-32 
HFC-43-10mee 
HFC-125 
HFC-134 
HFC-134a 
HFC-152a 
HFC-143 
HFC-143a 
HFC-227ea 
HFC-236fa 
HFC-245ca 
Chloroform 
Methylene chloride 
Sulphur hexafluoride 
Perfluoromethane 
Perfluoroethane 
Perfluorocyclo-butane 
Perfluorohexane 
Chemical 
Formula 
CH4 
N20 
CFCI3 
CF2C12 
CCIF3 
C2F3C13 
C2F4C12 
C2F5C1 
CF2HC1 
C2F3HC12 
C2F4HC1 
C2FH3C12 
C2F2H3C1 
C3F5HC12 
C3F5HC12 
CC14 
CH3CC13 
CF3Br 
CHF3 
CH2F2 
C
5H2F10 
C2HF5 
CHF2CHF2 
CH2FCF3 
C2H4F2 
CHF2CH2F 
CF3CH3 
C3HF7 
C3H2F6 
C3H3F, 
CHC13 
CH2C12 
SF6 
CF4 
C2F6 
c-C4Fg 
CsFu 
Lifetime 
(yr) 
14.5±2.5tt 
120 
50±5 
102 
640 
85 
300 
1700 
13.3 
1.4 
5.9 
9.4 
19.5 
2.5 
6.6 
42 
5.4+0.6 
65 
250 
6 
20.8 
36.0 
11.9 
14 
1.5 
3.5 
55 
41 
250 
7 
0.55 
0.41 
3200 
50000 
10000 
3200 
3200 
20 years 
62 
290 
5000 
7900 
8100 
5000 
6900 
6200 
4300 
300 
1500 
1800 
4200 
550 
1700 
2000 
360 
6200 
9200 
1800 
3300 
4800 
3100 
3300 
460 
950 
5200 
4500 
6100 
1900 
15 
28 
16500 
4100 
8200 
6000 
4500 
Global Warming Potential 
(Time Horizon) 
100 years 
24.5 
320 
4000 
8500 
11700 
5000 
9300 
9300 
1700 
93 
480 
630 
2000 
170 
530 
1400 
110 
5600 
12100 
580 
1600 
3200 
1200 
1300 
140 
290 
4400 
3300 
8000 
610 
5 
9 
24900 
6300 
12500 
9100 
6800 
500 years 
7.5 
180 
1400 
4200 
13600 
2300 
8300 
13000 
520 
29 
150 
200 
630 
52 
170 
500 
35 
2200 
9900 
180 
520 
1100 
370 
420 
44 
90 
1600 
1100 
6600 
190 
1 
3 
36500 
9800 
19100 
13300 
9900 
t The methane GWP includes the direct effect and those indirect effects due to the production of tropospheric ozone and 
stratospheric water vapour. The indirect effect due to the production of C0 2 is not included. 
t t For methane the adjustment time is given, rather than the lifetime - see Section 3. 

34 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
inadequate characterisation of many of the atmospheric 
processes involved. 
The GWP value for methane in Table 5 includes both the 
direct and indirect components (e.g., the formation of 
tropospheric ozone), as well as the longer adjustment time 
discussed in Section 3. In the 1992 IPCC report, only the 
direct GWP for methane was quoted; no account was taken 
of the effect of methane on its own lifetime and indirect 
effects were not quantified. For the 100 year time horizon, 
the indirect contributions to the total GWP value are: 
tropospheric ozone change 19 ± 12% and stratospheric 
water vapour change about 4%. As the range indicates, there 
is substantial current uncertainty in the methane GWP. 
The GWPs presented in Table 5 were calculated on the 
assumption that present background atmospheric 
composition remains constant indefinitely. An assumption 
of increasing CO-, concentrations, which lowers the 
additional forcing of incremental CO, emissions, would 
increase the GWP of other gases relative to C09. 
The indirect effect of CFCs and batons through 
stratospheric ozone depletion, which tends to reduce the 
GWPs for these gases, is not included in the values in 
Table 5. Some substitutes for CFCs have lower GWPs than 
the compounds they replace (e.g., short-lived gases like 
HFC-152a). On the other hand, other potential substitutes 
like periluorocarbons (such as CF4 and C9Ffi) have very 
long lifetimes and hence extremely large GWPs over long 
time horizons. 
No GWPs are given for atmospheric constituents such 
as NOx and CO, which are not important greenhouse gases 
in their own right (i.e., they have no significant direct 
effect), but which are covered by the IPCC Guidelines for 
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. These gases 
indirectly influence the concentration of some other 
greenhouse gases (e.g., tropospheric ozone) through 
atmospheric chemistry. The indirect effects for these gases 
are complex and depend on when and where they are 
emitted. New techniques will need to be developed to 
assess their influence on radiative forcing. 
Figure 13 shows the future warming potential of current 
emissions of various species (i.e., the GWP multiplied by 
estimated mean annual emissions typical of the 1980s). 
The radiative forcing due to contemporary global 
emissions of anthropogenic greenhouse gases over the next 
century is largest from CO-,. However, the GWP weighted 
emissions of CH4 are also important; over a 20-year time 
horizon they are comparable to those of C09. 
Current emissions of HFCs and perfluorocarbons are 
small, making the present commitment to future radiative 
forcing from these gases much less than for C0 9 and 
methane (Figure 13). However, if emissions were to 
increase in the future, their contribution to future radiative 
forcing would become more important. 
30000 - 
_ 
o 
20000 -
10000 -
< -10000 
1 
C02 
CH4 
NgO 
CH3CCI3, 
SFgand 
CFCs and 
CF4 
halons 
30000 - _ _ 
o 
20000 
I 10000 
-10000 
o 
I 
CO2 
CH4 
N2O 
CH3 CCI3, 
SFg and 
CFCs and 
CF4 
halons 
30000 
20000 
10000 
0 
r 
— . i . 
" 
i 
M 
i 
i 
500 year time horizon 
M 
~'~ 
l-H 
i 
? 
, 
i
,
l
,
i 
o 
C02 
CH4 
N2O 
CH3 CCI3, 
SFeand 
CFCs and 
CF4 
halons 
Figure 13: The product of GWP with estimated annual emissions 
typical of the 1980s for various gases, for time horizons of 20, 
100 and 500 years. The dashed bars indicate the range of possible 
uncertainty considered here in estimating GWPs and total 
anthropogenic emissions. The estimated emissions are 
approximate. The indirect radiative forcing of CFCs and halons 
due to ozone depletion imply that the net GWPs for these gases 
could be negative, but this is presently uncertain. 

1 
C02 and the Carbon Cycle 
D. SCHIMEL, I.G. ENTING, M. HEIMANN, T.M.L. WIGLEY, 
D. RAYNAUD, D. ALVES, U. SIEGENTHALER 
Contributors: 
S. Brown, W. Emanuel, M. Fasham, C. Field, P. Friedlingstein, R. Gifford, 
R. Houghton, A. Janetos, S. Kempe, R. Leemans, E. Maier-Reimer, G. Marland, 
R. McMurtrie, J. Melillo, J-F Minster, P. Monfray, M. Mousseau, D. Ojima, D. Peel, 
D. Skole, E. Sulzman, P. Tans, I. Totterdell, P. Vitousek 
Modellers: 
J. Alcamo, B.H. Braswell, B.C. Cohen, W.R. Emanuel, I.G. Enting, G.D. Farquhar, 
R.A. Goldstein, L.D.D. Harvey, M. Heimann, A. Jain, F. Joos, J. Kaduk, A.A. Keller, 
M. Krol, K. Kurz, K.R. Lassey, C. he Quere, J. Lloyd, E. Meier-Reimer, B. Moore III, 
J. Orr, T.H. Peng, J. Sarmiento, U. Siegenthaler, J.A. Taylor, J. Viecelli, T.M.L. Wigley, 
D. Wuebbles. 


CONTENTS 
Summary 
39 
1.1 Description of the Carbon Cycle 
41 
1.2 Past Record of Atmospheric C0 2 
43 
1.2.1 Atmospheric Measurements since 1958 
43 
1.2.2 Pre-1958 Atmospheric Measurements and 
C02-Ice Core Record over the Last Millennium 43 
1.2.3 The C02 Record over the Last Climatic Cycle 45 
1.3 The Anthropogenic Carbon Budget 
46 
1.3.1 Introduction 
46 
1.3.2 Methods for Calculating the Carbon Budget 46 
1.3.2.1 Classical approaches 
46 
1.3.2.2 New approaches: budget assessment 
based on observations of 13C/12C and 
02/N2 ratios 
46 
1.3.2.3 Constraints from spatial distributions 
48 
1.3.3 Sources and Sinks of Anthropogenic C02 
48 
1.3.3.1 Fossil carbon emissions 
48 
1.3.3.2 Atmospheric increase 
49 
1.3.3.3 Ocean exchanges 
49 
1.3.3.4 Terrestrial exchanges 
51 
1.3.3.4.1 Emissions from changing land 
use 
52 
1.3.3.4.2 Uptake of C0 2 by changing 
land use 
53 
1.3.3.4.3 Other terrestrial sink processes 
53 
1.4 The Influence of Climate and Other Feedbacks 
on the Carbon Cycle 
55 
1.4.1 Introduction 
55 
1.4.2 Feedbacks to Terrestrial Carbon Storage 
56 
1.4.3 Feedbacks on Oceanic Carbon Storage 
57 
1.5 Modelling Future Concentrations of 
Atmospheric C0 2 
58 
1.5.1 Introduction 
58 
1.5.2 Calculations of Concentrations for Specified 
Emissions 
60 
1.5.3 Stabilisation Calculations 
60 
1.5.4 Assessment of Uncertainties 
62 
References 
66 


SUMMARY 
Interest in the carbon cycle has increased because of the 
observed increase in levels of atmospheric C0 2 (from 
-280 ppmv in 1800 to -315 ppmv in 1957 to -356 ppmv 
in 1993) and because the signing of the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change has forced nations to 
assess their contributions to sources and sinks of C02, and 
to evaluate the processes that control C09 accumulation in 
the atmosphere. Over the last few years, our knowledge of 
the carbon cycle has increased, particularly in the 
quantification and identification of mechanisms for 
terrestrial exchanges, and in the preliminary quantification 
of feedbacks. 
The increase in atmospheric COz concentration since 
pre-industrial times 
Atmospheric levels of C0 2 have been measured directly 
since 1957. The concentration and isotope records prior to 
that time consist of evidence from ice cores, moss cores, 
packrat middens, tree rings, and the isotopic measurements 
of planktonic and benthic foraminifera. Ice cores serve as 
the primary data source because they provide a fairly direct 
and continuous record of past atmospheric composition. 
The ice cores indicate that an increase in C0 2 level of 
about 80 ppmv paralleled the last interglacial warming. 
There is uncertainty over whether changes in CCs levels as 
rapid as those of the 20th century have occurred in the 
past. However, there is essentially no uncertainty that for 
approximately the last 18,000 years, C02 concentrations in 
the atmosphere have fluctuated around 280 ppmv, and that 
the recent increase to a concentration of -356 ppmv, with a 
current rate of increase of -1.5 ppmv/yr, is due to 
combustion of fossil fuel, cement production, and land use 
conversion. 
The carbon budget 
The major components of the anthropogenic perturbation 
to the atmospheric carbon budget are anthropogenic 
emissions, the atmospheric increase, ocean exchanges, and 
terrestrial exchanges. Emissions from fossil fuels and 
cement production averaged 5.5 ± 0.5 GtC/yr over the 
decade of the 1980s (estimated statistically). The measured 
average annual rate of atmospheric increase in the 1980s 
was 3.2 ± 0.2 GtC/yr. Average ocean uptake during the 
decade has been estimated by a combination of modelling 
and isotopic measurements to be 2.0 ± 0.8 GtC/yr. 
Averaged over the 1980s, terrestrial exchanges include a 
tropical source of 1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr from ongoing changes 
in land use, based on land clearing rates, biomass 
inventories, and modelled forest regrowth. Recent satellite 
data have reduced uncertainties in the rate of deforestation 
for the Amazon, but rates for the rest of the tropics remain 
poorly quantified. For the tropics as a whole, there is 
incomplete information on initial biomass and rates of 
regrowth. Potential terrestrial sinks may be the result of 
several processes, including the regrowth of mid-latitude 
and high latitude Northern Hemisphere forests (0.5 ± 0.5 
GtC/yr), enhanced forest growth due to CO-, fertilisation 
(0.5-2.0 GtC/yr) and nitrogen deposition (0.2-1.0 GtC/yr), 
and, possibly, response to climatic anomalies (0-1.0 
GtC/yr). Partitioning the sink among these processes is 
difficult, but it is likely that all components are involved. 
While the CO, fertilisation effect is the most commonly 
cited terrestrial uptake mechanism, existing model studies 
indicate that the magnitude of contributions from each 
process are comparable, within large ranges of uncertainty. 
For example, some model-based evidence suggests that the 
magnitude of the CO., fertilisation effect is limited by 
interactions with nutrients and other ecological processes. 
Experimental confirmation from ecosystem-level studies, 
however, is lacking. As a result, the role of the terrestrial 
biosphere in controlling future atmospheric CO, 
concentrations is difficult to predict. 
Future atmospheric C0 2 concentrations 
Modelling groups from many countries were asked to use 
published carbon cycle models to evaluate the degree to 
which CO, concentrations in the atmosphere might be 
expected to change over the next several centuries, given a 
standard set of emission scenarios (including changes in 
land use). Models were constrained to balance the carbon 
budget and match the atmospheric record of the 1980s via 
C02 fertilisation of the terrestrial biosphere. 
Stabilisation of atmospheric C0 2 concentrations 
Modelling groups carried out stabilisation analyses to 
explore the relationships between anthropogenic emissions 
and atmospheric concentrations. The analyses assumed 
arbitrary concentration profiles (i.e., routes to stabilisation) 

40 
CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
and final stable CO, concentration; the models were then 
used to perform a series of inverse calculations (i.e., to 
derive CO, emissions given CO-, concentrations). These 
calculations did three things: (I) assessed the total amount 
of fossil carbon that has been released (because land use 
was prescribed), (2) determined the partitioning of this 
carbon between the ocean and the terrestrial biosphere, and 
(3) ascertained what the time course of carbon emissions 
from fossil fuel combustion must have been to arrive at the 
selected arbitrary atmospheric C09 concentrations while 
still matching the atmospheric record through the 1980s. 
Results suggest that in order for atmospheric 
concentrations to stabilise below 750 ppmv, anthropogenic 
emissions must eventually decline relative to today's 
levels. All emissions curves derived from the inverse 
calculations show periods of increasing anthropogenic 
emissions, followed by reductions to about a third of 
today's levels (i.e., to ~2 GtC/yr) for stabilisation at 450 
ppmv by the year 2100, and to about half of current levels 
(i.e.. ~3 GtC/yr) for stabilisation at 650 ppmv by the year 
2200. Additionally, the models indicated that if 
anthropogenic emissions are held constant at 1990 levels, 
modelled atmospheric concentrations of CO-, will continue 
to increase over the next century. 
Among models the range of emission levels that were 
estimated to result in the hypothesised stabilisation levels 
is about 30%. In addition, the range of uncertainty 
associated with the parametrization of C0 2 fertilisation 
(evaluated with one of the models) varied between ±10% 
for low stabilisation values and ±15% for higher 
stabilisation values. The use of C02 fertilisation to control 
terrestrial carbon storage, when in fact other ecological 
mechanisms are likely involved, results in an 
underestimate of concentrations (for given emissions) of 5 
to 10% or an overestimate of emissions by a similar 
amount (for given concentrations). 
Feedbacks to the carbon cycle 
Climate and other feedbacks via the oceans and terrestrial 
biosphere have the potential to be significant in the future. 
The effects of temperature on chemical and biological 
processes in the ocean are thought to be small (tens of 
ppmv changes in the atmosphere), but the effects of 
climate on ocean circulation could be larger, with possible 
repercussions for atmospheric concentration of ±100-200 
ppmv. Effects of changing precipitation, temperature and 
atmospheric CO^ can also have effects on the terrestrial 
biosphere, resulting in feedbacks to the atmosphere. 
Models suggest transient losses of about 200 GtC from 
terrestrial ecosystems as temperatures warm, with a 
potential for long-term increases in carbon storage above 
present levels by a few hundred gigatons. Patterns of 
changing land-use will have a substantial effect on 
terrestrial carbon storage and decrease the potential of 
terrestrial systems to store carbon in response to C0 2 and 
climate. Representation of feedbacks on the carbon cycle 
through oceanic and terrestrial mechanisms need to be 
improved in subsequent analyses of future changes to C02. 

CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
41 
1.1 Description of the Carbon Cycle 
Atmospheric CO^ provides a link between biological, 
physical, and anthropogenic processes. Carbon is exchanged 
between the atmosphere, the oceans, the terrestrial 
biosphere, and, more slowly, with sediments and 
sedimentary rocks. The faster components of the cycle are 
shown in Figure 1.1. In the absence of anthropogenic CO., 
inputs, the carbon cycle had periods of millennia in which 
large carbon exchanges were in near balance, implying 
nearly constant reservoir contents. Human activities have 
disturbed this balance through the use of fossil carbon and 
disruption of terrestrial ecosystems. The consequent 
accumulation of C0 2 in the atmosphere has caused a 
number of carbon cycle exchanges to become unbalanced. 
Fossil fuel burning and cement manufacture, together 
with forest harvest and other changes of land use, all 
transfer carbon (mainly as CO-,) to the atmosphere. This 
anthropogenic carbon then cycles between the atmosphere, 
oceans, and the terrestrial biosphere. Because the cycling 
of carbon in the terrestrial and ocean biosphere occurs 
slowly, on time-scales of decades to millennia, the 
effect of additional fossil and biomass carbon injected into 
the atmosphere is a long-lasting disturbance of the carbon 
cycle. The relationships between concentration changes 
and emissions of CO-, are examined through use of models 
that simulate, in a simplified manner, the major processes 
of the carbon cycle. The terrestrial and oceanic components 
of carbon cycle models vary in complexity from a few key 
equations to spatially explicit, detailed descriptions of 
ocean and terrestrial biology, chemistry, and transport 
Atmosphere 
750 
Fossil fuels and 
cement production 
Figure 1.1: The global carbon cycle, showing the reservoirs (in GtC) and fluxes (GtC/yr) relevant to the anthropogenic perturbation as 
annual averages over the period 1980 to 1989 (Eswaran et al., 1993; Potter et al., 1993; Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993). The 
component cycles are simplified and subject to considerable uncertainty. In addition, this figure presents average values. The riverine 
flux, particularly the anthropogenic portion, is currently very poorly quantified and so is not shown here (see text). While the surface 
sediment storage is approximately 150 Gt, the amount of sediment in the bioturbated and potentially active layer is of order 400 Gt. 
Evidence is accumulating that many of the key fluxes can fluctuate significantly from year to year (terrestrial sinks and sources: INPF, 
1992; Ciais et al., submitted; export from the marine biota: Wong et al., 1993). In contrast to the static view conveyed by figures such 
as this one, the carbon system is clearly dynamic and coupled to the climate system on seasonal, interannual and decadal time-scales 
(Schimel and Sulzman, 1994; Keeling and Whorf. 1994). 

42 
CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
RECENT ANOMALIES 
The last few decades have been characterised by a number of observed changes in the carbon cycle: 
The early 1980s were characterised by a period of relatively constant or slightly declining fossil carbon 
emissions. After 1985, emissions again exceeded the 1979 level; each year's release during the latter half of 
the 1980s was 0.1 to 0.2 GtC above that for the previous year (Boden et al., 1991). 
• 
Direct measurements and ice core data have revealed a general decrease in atmospheric levels of 13C relative 
to 12C by about \%o over the last century (Friedli et al., 1986; Keeling et al, 1989a; Leuenberger et al, 1992). 
This decrease is expected from the addition of fossil and/or terrestrial biospheric carbon, both of which are 
poor in l3C relative to the atmosphere. In contrast, the atmospheric 13C/12C ratio remained nearly constant 
from 1988 to 1993. This constant ratio must reflect changes in the fluxes between the ocean, terrestrial 
biosphere, and atmosphere which currently are not quantified. The atmospheric record of 13C shows a 
decrease of ~0.4%e between the first measurements in 1978 and the present time. The ice core record provides 
information on the changing l3C levels over the past few hundred years (Friedli et al., 1986; Leuenberger et 
a/., 1992). 
• 
Relative to the long-term average rate of atmospheric C07 concentration increase (-1.5 ppmv/yr), the years 
1988 to 1989 had relatively high CO, concentration growth rates (-2.0 ppmv/yr) while subsequent years 
(1991 to 1992) had very low growth rates (0.5 ppmv/yr) (Boden et al., 1991). The magnitude of the 1988 to 
1989 anomaly depends on what is defined as "normal" for the long-term trend. At Mauna Loa, Hawaii, the 
1988 to 1989 increase was similar to a variation which occurred in 1973 to 1974 (see Figure 1.2). The 
subsequent decrease exceeds any previous anomaly since the Mauna Loa record began in 1958. Data for 1993 
indicate a higher growth rate than that for 1991 to 1992. 
• 
The CO, record exhibits a seasonal cycle, with small peak-to-peak amplitude (about 1 ppmv) in the Southern 
Hemisphere but increasing northward to about 15 ppmv in the boreal forest zone (55-65°N). This cycle is 
mainly caused by the seasonal uptake and release of atmospheric CO, by terrestrial ecosystems. Part of the 
seasonal signal is driven by oceanic processes (Heimann et al., 1989). The amplitude of the seasonal 
atmospheric CO-, cycle varies with time. For instance, at Mauna Loa (see Figure 1.3; Keeling et al., 1989a), it 
was roughly constant at 5.2 ppmv (peak-to-trough) from the beginning of the Mauna Loa measurements in 
1958 until the mid-1970s. It then increased over the late 1970s to reach 5.8 ppmv for most of the 1980s. The 
most recent data indicate a further increase. Because the trend is not well-correlated with the CO, 
concentration increase (Thompson et al., 1986; Enting, 1987; Manning, 1993), it provides at best weak 
evidence for CO, fertilisation of terrestrial vegetation, in contrast with interpretations that claimed strong 
evidence (e.g., Idso and Kimball, 1993). The variation in amplitude does indicate changes in terrestrial 
metabolism, but not necessarily increased photosynthesis or storage. 
processes. The simpler models, in general, are designed to 
reproduce observed behaviour while the more complex 
models are aimed at incorporating the processes that cause 
the observed behaviour. The latter are thus potentially 
more likely to yield realistic projections of changes in 
storage under conditions different from the present (e.g., 
changing climate). 
Time-scales 
Because CO, added to the atmosphere by anthropogenic 
processes is exchanged between reservoirs having a range 
of turnover times, it is not possible to define a single 
atmospheric "lifetime". This is in contrast with other 
anthropogenic compounds such as N,0 and the halogens 
that are destroyed chemically in the atmosphere. Because 
the time-scales involved in the CO, exchanges range from 
annual to millennial (thousands of years), the 
consequences of anthropogenic perturbations will be long-
lived. In this regard, the "turnover time" of about 5 years 
for atmospheric CO, deduced from the rate of bomb 14CO, 
removal is relevant to the initial response of 
the carbon system, but it does not characterise the 
much slower, long-term response of atmospheric 
concentrations to the anthropogenic perturbation. 
The remainder of this chapter reviews what is known 
about the carbon cycle as a basis for understanding past 
changes and relationships between future emissions and 

CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
43 
concentrations. We do not attempt to make specific 
predictions of likely future changes in CO-, concentration -
rather, we assess the sensitivity of the system to particular 
scenarios of future emissions and concentrations. We also 
analyse key areas in which quantitative understanding is 
deficient. The final section of the chapter presents the 
results of a set of calculations relating future CO? 
concentrations and future C 0 2 emissions. These 
calculations, produced by modelling groups from many 
countries following an agreed set of specifications, 
explored various aspects of uncertainty. 
1.2 Past Record of Atmospheric C0 2 
1.2.1 Atmospheric Measurements since 1958 
Precise, direct measurements of atmospheric CO-, started 
in 1957 at the South Pole, and in 1958 at Mauna Loa, 
Hawaii. At this time the atmospheric concentration was 
about 315 ppmv and the rate of increase was -0.6 ppmv/yr. 
The growth rate of atmospheric concentrations at Mauna 
Loa has generally been increasing since 1958. It averaged 
0.83 ppmv/yr during the 1960s, 1.28 ppmv/yr during the 
1970s, and 1.53 ppmv/yr during the 1980s. In 1992, the 
atmospheric level of C0 2 at Mauna Loa was 355 ppmv 
(Figure 1.3) and the growth rate fell to 0.5 ppmv/yr (see 
"Recent Anomalies" box). Data from the Mauna Loa 
station are close to, but not the same as, the global mean. 
Atmospheric concentrations of C02 have been monitored 
for shorter periods at a large number of atmospheric stations 
around the world (e.g., Boden et al., 1991). Measurement 
sites are distributed globally and include sites in Antarctica, 
1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 
Year 
Figure 1.2: The growth rate of C02 concentrations since 1958 
(from the Mauna Loa record). The high growth rates of the late 
1980s, the extremely low growth rates of the early 1990s, and the 
recent increase in the growth rate are all evident. The smooth 
curve shows the same data but filtered to suppress any variations 
on time-scales less than approximately 10 years. 
58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 
Year 
Figure 1.3: CO-, concentrations measured at Mauna Loa, Hawaii 
since 1958 showing trends and seasonal cycle. 
Australia, several maritime islands, and high northern 
latitude sites, but, at present, nowhere on the continents of 
Africa or South America. The reliability and high precision 
of the post-1957 record is guaranteed by comparing the 
measured concentration of C09 in air with the concentration 
of reference gas mixtures calibrated by a constant volume 
column manometer. The increase shown by the atmospheric 
record since 1957 can be attributed largely to anthropogenic 
emissions of CO,, although considerable uncertainty exists 
as to the mechanisms involved. The record itself provides 
important insights that support anthropogenic emissions as a 
source of the observed increase. For example, when 
seasonal and short-term interannual variations in 
concentrations are neglected, the rise in atmospheric CO-, is 
about 50% of anthropogenic emissions (Keeling et al., 
1989b) with the inter-hemispheric difference growing in 
parallel to the growth of fossil emissions (Keeling et al., 
1989a; Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993; Figure 1.4). 
1.2.2 Pre-1958 Atmospheric Measurements and C02-Ice 
Core Record over the Last Millennium 
While several sets of relatively precise atmospheric 
measurements of C0 2 were carried out as early as the 
1870s (e.g., Brown and Escombe, 1905), they did not 
T 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1
-
South Pole 
_J 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
L 
58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 
Year 
Figure 1.4: Trends in C02 concentration and the growing 
difference in concentration between the Northern and Southern 
Hemispheres. 

44 
CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
allow assessment of concentration trends, as they were 
neither adequately calibrated nor temporally continuous. 
Measurements of CO? concentration from air extracted 
from polar ice cores are presently the best means to extend 
the CO-, record through the geologically recent past. The 
transformation of snow into ice traps air bubbles which are 
used to determine the CO? concentration. Providing certain 
conditions are met, which include no fracturing of the ice 
samples, absence of seasonal melting at the surface, no 
chemical alteration of the initial concentrations, and 
appropriate gas extraction methods, the ice record provides 
reliable 
information 
on past atmospheric 
CO? 
concentrations (Raynaud et al., 1993). It has been 
suggested 
that, 
under 
certain 
meteorological 
circumstances, the CO? data from Greenland ice cores may 
be contaminated, apparently influenced by varying levels 
of carbonate dust interacting with acid (Delmas, 1993) or 
organic matter deposition onto the ice sheet. Antarctic ice, 
however, has been uniformly acidic throughout the 
complete range of climate regimes of the last climatic 
cycle, and the available evidence suggests that these data 
are reliable throughout the entire record. Data from 
appropriate sites with unfractured ice are reliable to within 
±3-5 ppmv (Raynaud et al., 1993). The recent ice core 
record is validated by comparison with direct atmospheric 
measurements (Neftel et al, 1985; Friedli et al, 1986; 
Keeling etui, 1989a). 
Several high resolution Antarctic ice cores have recently 
become available in addition to the Siple core (Neftel et 
al., 1985; Friedli et al., 1986) for documenting both the 
"industrial era" CO? levels and the pre-industrial levels 
over the last millennium (Figure 1.5). The main results are: 
The ice core record can be used in combination with 
the direct atmospheric record to estimate, in 
conjunction with an oceanic model, the net changes 
in CO? flux between terrestrial ecosystems and the 
atmosphere (Siegenthaler and Oeschger, 1987). 
The pre-industrial level over the last 1000 years 
shows fluctuations up to 10 ppmv around an average 
value of 280 ppmv. The largest of these, which 
occurred roughly between AD 1200 and 1400, was 
small compared to the 75 ppmv increase during the 
industrial era (Barnola et al., in press, and Figure 
1.5). Short-term climatic variability is believed to 
have caused the pre-industrial fluctuations through 
effects on oceanic and/or terrestrial ecosystems. 
Finally, an important indicator of anthropogenically-
induced atmospheric change is provided by the 14C levels 
preserved in materials such as tree rings and corals. The 
14C concentration measured in tree rings decreased by 
about 2% during the period 1800 to 1950. This isotopic 
380 
8 
360-
340 
I 
8 S 
o 
° 
D57 
E 360 
a D47 
& 
• Siple 
• 
South Pole 
- - Mauna Loa 
Fossil C02 emissions 8 320 • 
One hundred year 
o 
running mean 
™ 3 0 0 
t 320 
300 
280 
260 
800 
2000 
Figure 1.5: CO-, concentrations over the past 1000 years from the recent ice core record and (since 1958) from the Mauna Loa 
measurement site. The inset shows the period from 1850 in more detail including CO? emissions from fossil fuel. Data sources: D47 
and D57 (Barnola et al.. in press): Siple (Neftel et al., 1985 and Friedli et al., 1986) and South Pole (Siegenthaler et al., 1988). The 
smooth curve is based on a lOOyr running mean. All ice core measurements were taken in Antarctica. 

CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
45 
decrease, known as the Suess effect (Suess, 1955), 
provides one of the most clear demonstrations that the 
increase in atmospheric C0 2 is due to fossil inputs. 
1.2.3 The C02 Record over the Last Climatic Cycle 
Although the magnitude and rate of climate changes 
observed in the palaeo-record covering the last climatic 
cycle may differ from those involved in any future 
greenhouse warming, these records provide an important 
perspective for recent and potential future changes. The 
glacial-interglacial amplitudes of temperature change are 
of similar order to the high estimate of equilibrium 
temperature shifts predicted for a doubling of C02 levels 
(Mitchell et al., 1990), although the shifts of the past took 
thousands of years. 
The close association between CO-, and temperature 
changes during glacial-interglacial transitions was first 
revealed by data from the ice core record. Samples from 
Greenland and Antarctica representing the last glacial 
maximum (about 18,000 years before present) indicate that 
C02 
concentrations at that time were 190-200 ppmv, i.e., 
about 70% of the pre-industrial level (Delmas et al, 1980; 
Neftel et al, 1982). Thus, an increase of about 80 ppmv 
0 
5 0 
1 0 0 
1 5 0 
2 0 0 
_ 
3 0 0 
- | — ' — ' — i — ' — I — i — ' — i — i — I — i — i — i — i — I — i — i — i — i — I — 
" 1 
' 
' 
" ' 
1 
> 
> 
1 " 
1 — ' 
' 
1 
1 1 
1 ' 
' ' 
1
— 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
Age (kyr BP) 
Figure 1.6: Temperature anomalies and methane and CO^ 
concentrations over the past 220,000 years as derived from the 
ice core record at Vostok, Antarctica. 
occurred in parallel with the warming starting at the end of 
the glacial period, when the estimated glacial-interglacial 
rise of the mean surface temperature of the Earth rose by 
4°C over about 10,000 years (Crowley and North, 1991). 
These discoveries have since been confirmed by detailed 
measurements of the Antarctic Byrd core for the 8,000 to 
50,000 year BP period (Neftel et al., 1988). Analyses of 
ice cores from Vostok, Antarctica, have provided new data 
on natural variations of CO, levels over the last 220,000 
years (Barnola et al., 1987; 1991; Jouzel et al., 1993). The 
record shows a marked correlation between Antarctic 
temperature, as deduced from the isotopic composition of 
the ice, and the CO, profile (Figure 1.6). 
Clear correlations between CO-, and global mean 
temperature are evident in much of the glacial-interglacial 
palaeo-record. This relationship of CO-, concentration and 
temperature may carry forward into the future, possibly 
causing a significant positive climatic feedback on CO-, 
fluxes. Information about leads and lags between climatic 
variations and changes in radiatively active trace gas 
concentrations is contained in polar ice and deep sea 
sediment records (Raynaud and Siegenthaler, 1993). There 
is no evidence that CO, changes ever significantly (> 1 
kyr) preceded the Antarctic temperature signal. In contrast, 
C02 
changes clearly lag behind the Antarctic cooling at 
the end of the last interglacial. As temperature changes in 
the South generally preceded temperature changes in the 
North (CLIMAP Project Members, 1984), it cannot be 
assumed that CO, changes never led northern temperature 
changes. Comparison of atmospheric CO, concentration 
and continental ice volume suggests that CO, started to 
change ahead of any significant melting of continental ice. 
It is possible that CO, changes may have been caused by 
changes in climate, and that CO, and other trace gases 
acted to amplify palaeoclimatic changes. 
Changes in climate on time-scales of decades to 
centuries have occurred in the past. The question remains 
whether these changes have been accompanied by changes 
in greenhouse trace gas concentrations. The Greenland ice 
cores (Johnsen et al., 1992; Grootes et al., 1993) show that 
during the last ice age and the last glacial-interglacial 
transition, there was a series of rapid (over decades to a 
century) and apparently large climatic changes in the 
North Atlantic region (~5 to 7°C in Central Greenland: 
Johnsen et al., 1992; Dansgaard et al., 1993). These 
changes may have been global in scale: the methane record 
suggests the potential for parallel changes in the tropics 
(Chappellaz et al., 1993). Evidence for rapid climate 
oscillations during the last interglacial has also recently 
been reported (GRIP Project Members, 1993). However, 
because the details were not confirmed by a second core 
retrieved from the same area (Grootes et al., 1993), the 
possibility that these features were caused by ice-flow 
perturbations cannot be discounted. The Dye 3 ice core 

46 
CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
from Greenland indicates that CO, concentration shifts of 
~5() ppmv occurred within less than 100 years during the 
last glacial period (Stauffer et ai, 1984). These changes in 
CO, were paralleled by abrupt and drastic climatic events 
in this region. Such large and rapid CO-, changes have not 
been identified in Antarctica, even after accounting for the 
lower time resolution of the Antarctic core (Neftel et al., 
1988). It is possible that impurities have introduced 
artefacts into the Greenland C0 2 record (Delmas, 1993; 
Barnola et al., in press), and that these features do not 
represent real atmospheric C0 9 changes. Nevertheless, 
taken together with independent support from isotopic 
studies of mosses (White et al., 1994), rapid C02 events 
recorded during the past cannot be disregarded. 
1.3 The Anthropogenic Carbon Budget 
1.3.1 Introduction 
The phrase "carbon budget" refers to the balance between 
sources and sinks of CO., in the atmosphere, expressed in 
terms of anthropogenic emissions and fluxes between the 
main reservoirs - the oceans, the atmosphere, the 
terrestrial carbon pool - and the build-up of C02 in the 
atmosphere. Because of the relative stability of 
atmospheric CO, concentrations over several thousand 
years prior to AD 1800, it is assumed that the net fluxes 
among carbon reservoirs were close to zero prior to 
anthropogenic disturbance. The data described in Section 
1.2 provide the essential background for understanding the 
carbon budget's changes over time. Several approaches are 
used to quantify the components of this budget (other than 
atmospheric mass build-up, which can be measured 
directly), often in combination. 
(a) direct determination of rates of change of the carbon 
content in atmospheric, oceanic, and terrestrial carbon 
pools, either by observations of local inventory changes or 
by local flux measurements, extrapolated globally; 
(b) indirect assessment of the atmosphere-ocean and 
atmosphere-terrestrial biosphere fluxes by means of carbon 
cycle model simulations, either calibrated or partially 
validated using analogue tracers of CO,, such as bomb 
radiocarbon or tritium, or with use of chlorofluorocarbons; 
(c) interpretation of tracers or other substances that are 
coupled to the carbon cycle (14C/12C and 13C/12C ratios 
and atmospheric oxygen). 
The heterogeneity of some aspects of the oceanic and 
terrestrial carbon systems makes reliable extrapolation of 
flux measurements to the entire globe dependent on high 
resolution geographic information and accurate modelling 
of processes. Because of this, method (a) is used only for 
atmospheric carbon and for estimating effects of land use, 
and estimates of other carbon reservoirs are based 
primarily on methods (b) and (c). 
1.3.2 Methods for Calculating the Carbon Budget 
1.3.2.1 Classical approaches 
The calculated ocean uptake rate, together with the 
estimated fossil emissions and the observed atmospheric 
inventory change, allows inference of the net terrestrial 
biospheric balance. Figure 1.7 shows the results of a time-
series rate of change calculation for the atmospheric 
carbon mass, the oceanic component, fossil emissions, and 
the residual of the first three terms. In this calculation, the 
time history of fossil plus cement emissions was deduced 
from statistics (Keeling, 1973; Marland and Rotty, 1984; 
WEC, 1993; Andres et al., 
1994), atmospheric 
accumulation was determined from the observational and 
ice core record (e.g., Barnola et al., 1991; Boden et al., 
1991), and ocean uptake was modelled with the GFDL 
ocean general circulation model (Sarmiento et al, 1992). 
Ocean carbon uptake was determined by forcing the ocean 
chemistry with the time history of atmospheric 
concentrations to obtain uptake as a function of the non-
linear chemistry of carbon dioxide in the ocean. This 
calculation illustrates the classic means by which the 
carbon budget is calculated. Figure 1.8 shows the balance 
of the terrestrial biosphere, now introducing the time 
history of land use effects together with a calculation of 
the inferred terrestrial sink over time. This calculation 
illustrates the classic estimation of a "missing sink", in 
which a residual sink arises because the sum of 
anthropogenic emissions (fossil, cement, changing land 
use) is greater than the sum of ocean uptake and 
atmospheric accumulation. Note that this approach is quite 
different from the estimation of sources and sinks from the 
spatial distribution of atmospheric concentrations and 
isotopic composition, discussed in Section 1.3.2.3 (Keeling 
et al, 1989b; Tans et al., 1990; Enting and Mansbridge, 
1991). 
1.3.2.2 New approaches: budget assessment based on 
observations of 13C/,2C and 02IN2 ratios 
Several promising approaches have recently been proposed 
to assess the current global carbon budget with less 
dependence on models. Included are observations of 
13C/12C and 02/N2, both of which are strongly influenced 
by the anthropogenic perturbation of the carbon cycle. 
The methods based on 13C exploit the fact that the 
13C/12C ratio in fossil fuels and terrestrial biomass is less 
than that in the atmosphere. There has been a decline in the 
13C/12C ratio of atmospheric CO, over the last century 
(Keeling et al., 1989a). This atmospheric 13C/12C ratio 

CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
47 
Industrial Carbon Emissions and Global Reservoir Changes 
Balance of Biosphere 
« 
o 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
Fossil carbon 
. 
Atmosphere 
- • - Ocean 
Net terrestrial 
(fossil carbon 
emissions 
biosphere: 
emissions - [atmosphere+ocean]) / 
^ x * v ' " ' ' 
/ v \ % > / 
« . ' -
- ^ . - - - - . • r ' 
/ " 
s' 
1840 
1860 
1880 1900 1920 
1940 1960 
1980 
Year 
Figure 1.7: Fossil carbon emissions (based on statistics of fossil 
fuel and cement production), and representative calculations of 
global reservoir changes: atmosphere (deduced from direct 
observations and ice core measurements), ocean (calculated with 
the GFDL ocean carbon model), and net terrestrial biosphere 
(calculated as remaining imbalance). The calculation implies that 
the terrestrial biosphere represented a net source to the 
atmosphere prior to 1940 (negative values) and a net sink since 
about 1960. 
2 -
1 -
§ 
•••• Annual terrestrial biosphere reservoir 
changes (from Figure 1.7) 
— Emissions from land-use changes 
— Sum of terrestrial sink processes implied 
by conservation of carbon 
"'. 
1840 
1860 
1880 1900 1920 
1940 1960 
1980 
Year 
Figure 1.8: The carbon balance of the terrestrial biosphere. 
Annual terrestrial biosphere reservoir changes (from Figure 1.7), 
land use flux (plotted negative because it represents a loss of 
biospheric carbon) and the sum of the terrestrial sink processes 
(e.g., Northern Hemisphere regrowth, CO, and nitrogen 
fertilization, climate effects) as implied by conservation of carbon 
mass. 
change propagates through the global carbon cycle, 
causing isotopic ratio changes in the ocean and the 
terrestrial carbon reservoirs. 
Quay et al. (1992) proposed a method to determine the 
global budget from repeated measurements of vertical 
profiles of the 13C/12C ratio in oceanic dissolved inorganic 
carbon. In principle, these observations allow us to 
determine the rate of change of the oceanic l3C/12C ratio 
which, together with the observed changes in the 
atmospheric 13C/I2C ratio, provide another constraint on 
the global carbon balance. The ratio permits discrimination 
between oceanic and terrestrial biospheric sinks because 
terrestrial uptake (photosynthesis) discriminates against the 
heavy isotope (13C) much more strongly than does ocean 
uptake. A preliminary analysis based on a data set from 
seven stations in the Pacific Ocean (sampled in the early 
1970s and again in 1990) yielded a mean oceanic sink of 
2.1 ± 0.8 GtC/yr (Quay etal, 
1992). 
Additional information for constraining the oceanic 
carbon budget may be provided by the l 3C/ l 2C isotopic 
disequilibrium between the air and the sea (Tans et al.. 
1993). The disequilibrium reflects the isotopic adjustment 
of the ocean to the atmospheric perturbation and can be 
used to assess the atmospheric balances of l3C and C0 2, 
thereby discriminating between oceanic and biospheric 
components. Tans et al. (1993) used this method to 
estimate the net air-sea flux of CO-, for the period 1970 to 
1990, which they found to be less than 0.4 GtC/yr, with 
unspecified error ranges. 
Relative to achievable measurement precision, the 
anthropogenic perturbation has a greater effect on isotopic 
composition of dissolved organic carbon than on its 
concentration, because the former is not affected by 
chemical buffering reactions. The required analytical 
quality of the isotopic measurements is still high. The 
uncertainty range of the current oceanic sink, as estimated 
by the methods employing isotope measurements, may be 
reduced substantially if an extended measurement 
programme is vigorously pursued (Heimann and Maier-
Reimer. submitted). 
The trend in atmospheric oxygen, as revealed by 
measurements of the oxygen to nitrogen ratio, can also be 
used to assess the global carbon budget (Keeling and 
Shertz. 1992: Bender et al.. 1994). Oxygen in many 
respects is complementary to carbon. It is consumed 
during combustion and respiration and is released during 
biotic carbon uptake via photosynthesis. The crucial 
difference compared to carbon is that, owing to low 
solubility of O, in water, the magnitude of the oceanic 
oxygen pool is negligible and can be ignored in the global 
oxygen balance. Therefore, measurements of the temporal 
trend in atmospheric oxygen together with the known 0:C 
stoichiometric relations during combustion, respiration, 
and photosynthesis, permit establishment of global oxygen 
and carbon balances, although interannual variations in 
marine photosynthesis and respiration may complicate the 
interpretation of 0:C data (Keeling and Severinghaus, 
1994). Data are limited, as measurements of the 
oxygen/nitrogen ratio have been reported for only two 
years. Within 10 years it is possible that an accurate, 
model-independent estimate of the oceanic carbon budget 
will be achieved by this method. The atmospheric oxygen 

48 
CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
trend during the last several decades can also be 
reconstructed from measurements of CO., and the 0-,/N-, 
ratio in glacial surface layers (firn) as a function of depth. 
Preliminary results indicate past ocean CO-, uptake rates 
were large (> 3 GtC/yr), but associated uncertainty ranges 
are also large (Bender et al., 1994). 
Despite high uncertainty, these new approaches provide 
a different, model-independent means of assessing the 
global carbon budget. They provide only estimates of the 
oceanic uptake rate, however. The information gained can 
help reduce the uncertainty in the net terrestrial sink 
quantified by differencing, but to partition the uptake into 
land use fluxes and terrestrial sinks requires other 
approaches. 
1.3.2.3 Constraints from spatial distributions 
The different spatial patterns of sources and sinks of 
atmospheric CO-, create gradients in the concentration that 
vary inversely with the strength of atmospheric transport. 
These spatial distributions of concentration can be 
interpreted quantitatively using models of atmospheric 
transport to match observed concentration distributions. 
This process is known as "inversion". 
The problem of deducing sources and sinks of trace 
gases from observations of surface concentrations presents 
a considerable technical challenge. This is partly because 
the small-scale features of the spatial distribution of 
sources and sinks are blurred by atmospheric mixing. The 
"reconstruction" process amplifies the small-scale details, 
but the errors and uncertainties introduced along the way 
are similarly amplified. Hence, there is a trade-off between 
the spatial resolution sought and the accuracy of the 
estimates obtained. Consequently, only a small number of 
independent source/sink components can be reliably 
determined from the data, and, in general, only the largest 
spatial scales can be resolved (Enting, 1993). This 
explains, in part, the range of interpretations obtained in 
different studies. The uncertainty analysis of Enting et al. 
(1994a), indicates that such analyses cannot, on their own, 
estimate global totals of net fluxes more accurately than 
the classical approach to carbon budget analysis. Thus, at 
present, the constraints from the spatial distribution of CO-, 
act mainly as consistency checks with budgets derived 
from analyses of individual budget components. 
Synthesis inversions include additional information 
beyond atmospheric concentration and transport, and can 
suppress unwanted amplification of small-scale variations 
either by restricting the number of source components 
considered, or through the use of additional constraints 
such as incorporation of independent estimates of source 
strengths. Inversions using two-dimensional atmospheric 
transport models have been presented by Tans et al. (1989) 
and Enting and Mansbridge (1989; 1991). Three-
dimensional modelling studies of source and sink 
distributions have been presented by Keeling et al. 
(1989b), Tans et al. (1990) and Enting et al. (1994a). 
The main results that have been obtained from inverse 
calculations using atmospheric transport modelling are: 
• 
Northern Hemisphere source. Inversion calculations 
reveal a strong Northern Hemisphere release, as 
expected from increased use of fossil fuels. This 
source is so strong that it tends to obscure other 
details of the source-sink distribution and is 
additional confirmation of the role of fossil fuel 
emissions in atmospheric concentration change. 
• 
Northern Hemisphere sink. After subtracting the 
fossil source, there is a strong net sink in the 
Northern Hemisphere which may involve both 
marine and terrestrial components (e.g., Tans et al., 
1990). The partitioning remains controversial 
(Keeling et al, 1989b; Ciais et al, submitted), but 
recent isotopic analyses suggest an appreciable 
terrestrial component (Ciais et al., submitted). A 
Northern Hemisphere sink, as estimated by inverse 
calculations, is consistent with results from terrestrial 
studies that suggest sinks are the result of changing 
land use (e.g., Dixon et al., 1994) and nitrogen 
deposition (largely confined to the industrialised 
Northern Hemisphere) (e.g., Schindler and Bayley, 
1993). 
• 
Indirect evidence of the existence of a tropical biotic 
sink. The net equatorial source from oceanic 
outgassing and changes in tropical land use is 
smaller than expected based on other estimates (see 
Sections 1.3.3.3 and 1.3.3.4), consistent with a role 
for nutrient and CO-, fertilisation and forest 
regrowth. 
• 
Southern Ocean source. Most studies indicate a 
source (probably oceanic) at high southern latitudes. 
Southern Hemisphere 
sink. The net Southern 
Hemisphere sink (which is presumably oceanic, 
given the small proportion of Southern Hemisphere 
land) is weaker than expected in comparison with 
northern ocean sinks. 
1.3.3 Sources and Sinks of Anthropogenic C02 
1.3.3.1 Fossil carbon emissions 
The dominant anthropogenic CO-, source is that generated 
by the use of fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas, etc.) and 
production of cement. The total emissions of CO, from the 

CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
49 
use of fossil carbon can be estimated based on documented 
statistics of fossil fuel and cement production (Keeling, 
1973; Marland and Rotty, 1984; WEC, 1993; Andres et al., 
1994). Average (1980 to 1989) fossil emissions were 
estimated to be 5.5 GtC/yr (Andres et al., 1994). During 
1991, the reported emissions totalled 6.2 GtC (Andres et 
al., 1994). The cumulative input since the beginning of 
the industrial revolution (1751 to 1991) is estimated to 
be approximately 230 GtC (Andres et al., 1994). 
Uncertainties associated with these estimates are less than 
10% for the decade of the 1980s (at the 90% confidence 
level) based on the methods presented in Marland and 
Rotty (1984). 
1.3.3.2 Atmospheric increase 
The globally averaged CO-, concentration, as determined 
through analysis of NOAA/CMDL data (Boden et al., 
1991; Conway et al, 1994), increased by 1.53 ± 0.1 
ppmv/yr over the period 1980 to 1989. This corresponds to 
an annual average rate of change in atmospheric carbon of 
3.2 ± 0.2 GtC/yr. Other carbon-containing compounds like 
methane, carbon monoxide, and larger hydrocarbons, 
contain - 1 % of the carbon stored in the atmosphere and 
can therefore be neglected in the atmospheric carbon 
budget. 
1.3.3.3 Ocean exchanges 
The ocean contains more than 50 times as much carbon as 
the atmosphere. Over 95% of the oceanic carbon is in the 
form of inorganic dissolved carbon (bicarbonate and 
carbonate ions); the remainder is comprised of various 
forms of organic carbon (living organic matter, particulate 
and dissolved organic carbon) (Druffel et al., 1992). 
The role of the oceans in the global carbon cycle is 
twofold: first, it represents a passive reservoir which 
absorbs excess atmospheric CO?. It is this role that is 
discussed in this section. Second, changes in the physical 
state of the ocean (temperature, circulation) and the marine 
biota may affect the rate of air-sea exchange, and thus 
future atmospheric C02. This second role, subsumed under 
"feedbacks", is addressed in Section 1.4.3. 
The oceanic uptake of excess C0 2 proceeds by (1) 
transfer of the CO, gas through the air-sea interface, (2) 
chemical interactions with the oceanic dissolved inorganic 
carbon, and (3) transport into the thermocline and deep 
waters by means of water mass transport and mixing 
processes. Though there are large geographical and 
seasonal variations of the surface ocean partial pressure of 
C09, averaged globally and annually, the surface water 
value is close to that for equilibrium with the atmosphere. 
Therefore, processes (2) and (3) are the main factors 
limiting the capacity of the ocean to serve as a sink on 
decadal and centennial time-scales. The chemical buffering 
reactions between dissolved CO, and the HCO,~ and 
CO^" ions reduce the rate of oceanic CO, uptake. At 
equilibrium, an atmospheric increase in CO-, concentration 
of 10% is associated with an oceanic increase of dissolved 
inorganic carbon of merely 1%. This potential uptake 
occurs only in those parts of the ocean that are mixed with 
surface waters on decadal time-scales. Therefore, on time-
scales of decades to centuries, the ocean is not as large a 
sink for excess CO-, as it might seem from comparison of 
the relative sizes of the main carbon reservoirs (Figure 
1.1). While carbon chemistry is known in sufficient detail 
to perform accurate calculations, oceanic transport and 
mixing processes remain the primary uncertainties in the 
determination of the oceanic uptake of excess CO,. 
The marine biota, if in steady state, are believed to play 
a minor role, if any at all, in the uptake of excess 
anthropogenic CO,. The marine biota, however, play a 
crucial role in maintaining the steady-state level of 
atmospheric CO,. About three-quarters of the vertical 
gradient in dissolved inorganic carbon is generated by the 
export of newly produced carbon from the surface ocean 
and its regeneration at depth (a process referred to as 
"biological pump"). In the open ocean, however, this 
process is believed to be limited by the availability of 
nutrients, light, or by phytoplantkon population control via 
grazing, and not by the abundance of carbon (Falkowski 
and Wilson, 1992). Therefore, a direct effect of increased 
dissolved inorganic carbon (less than 2.5% since prc-
industrial times) on carbon fixation and export is unlikely, 
although a recent study by Riebesell et al. (1993) 
suggested that under particular conditions the rate of 
photosynthesis and hence phytoplankton growth might 
indeed be limited by the availability of CO, as a dissolved 
gas. The global significance of this effect, however, 
remains to be assessed. (See Section 1.4.3 for a discussion 
of the potential indirect effects of increased dissolved 
inorganic carbon.) 
Flux of carbon from the terrestrial biosphere to the 
oceans takes place via river transport. Global river 
discharge of carbon in organic and inorganic forms may be 
-1.2-1.4 GtC/yr (Schlesinger and Melack, 1981; Degens et 
al., 1991; Maybeck, 1993). A substantial fraction of this 
transport (up to 0.8 GtC/yr), however, reflects the natural 
geochemical cycling of carbon and thus does not affect the 
global budget of the anthropogenic C0 2 perturbation 
(Sarmiento and Sundquist, 1992). Furthermore, the 
anthropogenically induced river carbon fluxes reflect, to a 
large extent, increased soil erosion and not a removal of 
excess atmospheric CO,. 
The role of coastal seas in the global carbon budget is 
poorly understood. Up to 30% of total ocean productivity 
is attributed to marine productivity in the coastal seas, 
which comprise only -8% of the oceanic surface area. 

50 
CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
Here, discharge of excess nutrients by rivers might have 
significantly stimulated carbon fixation (up to 0.5-1.0 
GtC/yr). At present, however, it is not known how much of 
this excess organic carbon is simply reoxidised, and how 
much is permanently sequestered by export to the deep 
ocean, or in sediments on the shelves and shallow seas. 
Because of the limited surface area, a burial rate 
significantly exceeding 0.5 GtC/yr is not very likely, as it 
would require all coastal seas to be under-saturated in 
partial pressure of C02 by more than 50 //atrn on annual 
average, in order to supply the carbon from the 
atmosphere. Such 
under-saturations 
have 
been 
documented, e.g., in the North Sea (Kempe and Pegler, 
1991), but these measurements are unlikely to be 
representative of all coastal oceans. Based on the above 
considerations, the role of the coastal ocean is judged most 
likely to be small, but, at present, cannot be accurately 
assessed and so is neglected in the budget presented in this 
chapter (Table 1.3). 
Exchanges of carbon between the atmosphere and the 
oceans (net air-sea fluxes) can be deduced from 
measurements of the partial pressure difference of CO-, 
between the air and surface waters. This calculation also 
requires knowledge of the local gas-exchange coefficient, 
which is a relatively poorly known quantity (Watson, 
1993). Furthermore, while the globally and seasonally 
averaged partial pressure of surface waters is close to the 
value for equilibrium with the atmosphere, large 
geographical and seasonal variations exist, induced both 
by physical processes (upwelling, vertical mixing, sea 
surface temperature fluctuations) and by the activity of the 
marine biota. Representative estimates of the seasonally 
and regionally averaged net air-sea carbon transfer thus 
necessitates sampling with high spatial and temporal 
resolution (Garcon et al., 1992). Estimates of the regional 
net air-sea carbon fluxes have been obtained, albeit with 
considerable error margins. However, the global oceanic 
carbon balance is more difficult to deduce by this method, 
as it represents a small residual computed from summing 
up the relatively large emissions from super-saturated and 
uptake in under-saturated regions (Tans et al., 1990; 
Takahashi et al., 1993; Wong et al., 1993; Fung and 
Takahashi. 1994). The World Ocean Circulation 
Experiment 
(WOCE) 
survey 
has 
nevertheless 
demonstrated the feasibility of direct measurement 
programmes, and the importance of measurements as a 
cross-check for other approaches should not be underrated. 
The oceanic contribution to the global carbon budget 
can also be assessed by direct observations of changes in 
the oceanic carbon content. This approach also suffers 
from the problem of determining a very small signal 
against large spatial and temporal background variability. 
Model estimates of the rate of change induced by the 
anthropogenic perturbation are of the order of 1 part in 
2000/yr. Therefore, on a 10-year time-scale, variations in 
dissolved inorganic carbon would have to be measured 
with an accuracy of better than 1% in order to determine 
the carbon balance in a particular oceanic region. While 
such accuracy can be obtained, a substantial sampling 
effort is required (Keeling, 1993). Determination of the 
global oceanic budget by this approach does not appear 
feasible in the near future. However, repeated 
observational surveys might reveal regional carbon 
inventory changes, and thus might provide a cross-check 
for other approaches. 
Model results 
The present-day oceanic uptake of excess C02 is estimated 
using ocean carbon model simulation experiments, with 
observed atmospheric CO? concentration as a prescribed 
boundary condition. It is only necessary to model the 
transport and mixing of the excess carbon perturbation if 
the marine biota are assumed to remain on an annual 
average in a steady state, as excess C0 2 will disperse 
within the ocean like a passive tracer, independent of the 
background natural distribution of dissolved inorganic 
carbon. In particular, the perturbation excludes a natural 
cycle of carbon transported by rivers, outgassed by the 
oceans and then taken up by the terrestrial biota. 
Until recently, most models of the oceanic uptake of 
anthropogenic C02 consisted of a series of well-mixed or 
diffusive reservoirs ("boxes") representing the major 
oceanic water masses, connected by exchange of water 
(Oeschger et al., 1975). Global transport characteristics of 
these models were obtained from simulation studies of the 
oceanic penetration of bomb radiocarbon (14C) validated 
by comparison with observations (Broecker et al., 1985). 
Bomb radiocarbon, however, does not accurately track the 
oceanic invasion of anthropogenic carbon, because oceanic 
concentration changes of carbon isotopes depend on the 
full time history of those inputs and 14C entered the ocean 
with an atmospheric history different from that of natural 
CO-,. Furthermore, CO-, uptake depends on chemical 
interactions with dissolved inorganic C, while uptake of 
14C does not. Nevertheless, bomb radiocarbon provides a 
powerful constraint on ocean carbon models, a constraint 
which may be supplemented by analyses of other steady 
state and transient tracers, such as halocarbons, tritium 
from nuclear weapon testing, and possibly 13C. 
Recently, three-dimensional oceanic general circulation 
models (OGCMs) have been used for modelling CO^ 
uptake by the oceans (Maier-Reimer and Hasselmann, 
1987; Sarmiento et al., 1992; Orr, 1993). These models 
calculate oceanic circulation on the basis of the physics of 
fluid dynamics, and the few adjustable model parameters 
are primarily tuned to reproduce the relatively well-known 
large-scale patterns of ocean temperature and salinity. It is 

CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
51 
known that the OGCMs used in published global carbon 
cycle studies show significant and similar deficiencies 
(e.g., too weak a surface circulation, inaccurate deep 
convection, absence of high resolution features). 
Simulation of transient tracers, bomb radiocarbon in 
particular, provides an important validation test. 
The average of modelled rates of oceanic carbon uptake 
is 2.0 GtC/yr over the decade 1980 to 1989 (Orr, 1993; 
Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993). This value is 
corroborated by model experiments projecting future 
concentrations of atmospheric C0 9 (see Section 1.5, and 
Enting et al., 1994b) and by a simulation with a newly-
developed two-dimensional global ocean model (Table 
1.1; Stocker et al., 1994). The spread of the modelled 
uptake rates corresponds to a statistical uncertainty of only 
about ± 0.5 GtC/yr (at the 90% confidence level). 
However, recent assessments of the global radiocarbon 
balance (Broecker and Peng, 1994; Hesshaimer et al., 
1994) suggest that the oceanic carbon uptake estimates of 
box models tuned by bomb radiocarbon might have to be 
revised downwards by up to 25%. Furthermore, the spread 
of the OGCM results listed in Table 1.1 might be 
fortuitously small in view of the similar deficiencies in 
these models. Based on these considerations we do not 
change the estimate of the uncertainty of the ocean uptake 
from the value of + 0.8 GtC/yr as given by IPCC in 1990 
(Watson et al, 1990) and in 1992 (Watson et al., 1992). 
1.3.3.4 Terrestrial exchanges 
In previous assessments (IPCC, 1990; 1992), the 
remaining intact terrestrial biosphere has often been 
assumed to be a significant sink for carbon dioxide, 
balancing or exceeding emissions derived from changing 
land use. The calculated imbalance, which has been a 
persistent feature of global carbon cycle calculations 
(Broecker et al., 1979), arises from the difference between 
measured atmospheric changes, statistically derived fossil 
fuel and cement emissions, modelled ocean uptake, and 
estimated emissions from changing land use. In this 
assessment, part of the previously calculated imbalance is 
accounted for by effects of changing land use in the middle 
and high latitudes (0.5 ± 0.5 GtC/yr: Table 1.3). Several 
processes may contribute to increased terrestrial carbon 
storage (Table 1.2), but the problem of detecting these 
increases is troublesome. 
Difficulty in quantifying the role of the terrestrial 
biosphere in the global carbon cycle arises because of the 
complex biology underlying carbon storage, the great 
heterogeneity of vegetation and soils, and the effects of 
human land use and land management. We consider the 
following issues: 
Deforestation 
and change in land use. CO, is 
emitted to the atmosphere as a result of land use 
changes such as biomass burning and forest harvest 
through the oxidation of vegetation and soil carbon. 
These "emissions from changing land use" are 
currently largest in the tropics, but prior to the 1950s, 
the middle latitudes were a larger source than were 
the tropics. 
• 
Forest regrowth. Carbon is absorbed by regrowing 
forests following harvest. This absorption is included 
as a factor in the calculation of net emissions from 
disturbed regions. In the tropics, emissions are 
Table 1.1: Excess C02 uptake rates (average 1980 to 1989) calculated by various ocean carbon cycle models. 
Model 
Ocean uptake (GtC/yr) 
Reference 
Bomb radiocarbon-based box models 
Box-diffusion model 
HILDA model ("Bern model") 
Three-dimensional ocean general circulation models 
Hamburg Ocean Carbon Cycle Model (HAMOCC-3) 
GFDL Ocean General Circulation Model 
LODYC Ocean General Circulation Model 
Two-dimensional ocean circulation models 
AVERAGE of all models 
2.32 
2.15 
1.47 
1.81 
2.10 
2.1 
2.0 
Siegenthaler & Sarmiento (1993) 
Siegenthaler & Joos (1992) 
Maier-Reimer (1993) 
Sarmiento et al. (1992) 
Orr (1993) 
Stocker et al. (1994) 

52 
CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
Table 1.2: Processes leading to increased 
terrestrial 
storage and their magnitudes (GtC/yr): average for the 
1980s. 
Processes 
Mid-/high latitude forest regrowth 
0.5 ± 0.5 
CO; fertilisation 
0.5-2.0 
Nitrogen deposition 
0.2-1.0 
Climatic effects 
0-1.0 
thought to exceed the uptake by secondary growth 
following forest harvest, but uptake from regrowth in 
the middle and high latitudes apparently results in a 
net sink for atmospheric C 0 2 (see below). 
Fertilisation by carbon dioxide. As atmospheric CO-, 
increases, plants increase their uptake of carbon, 
potentially increasing carbon storage in the terrestrial 
biosphere. This mechanism 
has often 
been 
hypothesised to account for the calculated imbalance 
in the global carbon budget (the "missing sink"). 
There is strong physiological 
evidence 
for 
photosynthetic increase with C01 fertilisation (e.g., 
Woodward, 1992), but interspecific differences in 
the magnitude of effects on photosynthesis and 
growth range from marked enhancement 
to 
negligible and even negative responses. Considerable 
uncertainty exists as to how to translate laboratory 
and field results into a global estimate of changing 
biospheric carbon storage, as ecosystem feedbacks 
and constraints are numerous (see Section 1.4.2). 
Nitrogen fertilisation. 
Most terrestrial ecosystems 
are limited by nitrogen, as evidenced by increased 
carbon storage after nitrogen fertilisation. Additions 
of nitrogen to the terrestrial biosphere through both 
intentional fertilisation of agricultural land and 
deposition of nitrogen arising from fossil fuel 
combustion and other anthropogenic processes can 
result in increased terrestrial storage of carbon. 
Climate. The processes of terrestrial carbon uptake 
(photosynthesis) and release (respiration of vegetation 
and soils) are influenced by climate. Decadal time-
scale variations in climate may have caused natural 
changes in carbon storage by the terrestrial 
biosphere, acting in conjunction with or even counter 
to the anthropogenic effects described above. This 
effect on storage is separate from the potential future 
changes in carbon storage which might arise from 
greenhouse gas-induced changes of climate. 
• 
Interactions. The processes mentioned above are not 
independent, 
and their magnitudes are 
not 
necessarily additive. For example, much of the 
anthropogenic nitrogen has been deposited by the 
atmosphere on regrowing forests of the middle and 
high latitudes, thereby potentially enhancing carbon 
storage in these regions. Recent measurements of 
mid-latitude and high latitude forest regrowth may 
therefore reflect the combined effects of nitrogen 
deposition, elevated C 0 2 concentrations, and climate 
variability. Also, CO, fertilisation can affect the 
nitrogen cycle and vice versa (see Section 1.4.2). It 
is possible that nitrogen deposition will enhance the 
effectiveness of carbon storage by offsetting the 
increased plant demand for nitrogen caused by 
increased concentrations of C0 2. Interactive effects 
with air pollutants such as tropospheric ozone may 
also be important. 
1.3.3.4.1 Emissions from changing land use 
Deforestation and other changes in land use (including 
land management) cause significant exchanges of CO^ 
between the land and atmosphere. Changes in land use 
from 1850 to 1990 resulted in cumulative emissions of 122 
± 40 GtC (Houghton, 1994a). From the last century 
through the 1940s, expansion of agriculture and forestry in 
the middle and high latitudes dominated carbon emissions 
from the terrestrial biosphere (Houghton and Skole, 1990). 
Since then, conversion of temperate forests for agricultural 
use has diminished and forests are regrowing in previously 
logged forests and on abandoned agricultural lands 
(Melillo et al., 1988; Birdsey et al., 1993; Dixon et al., 
1994). Emissions from the tropics have generally been 
increasing since the 1950s. Estimates for 1980 range from 
0.4 to 2.5 GtC (Houghton et al., 1987; Detwiler and Hall, 
1988; Watson ef a/., 1990). 
While uncertainties in the estimated rate of tropical 
deforestation are large (FAO, 1993), estimation of 
deforestation rates and area of regrowing forests have 
improved recently through the use of remote sensing. For 
example, satellite imagery has reduced estimated rates of 
deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon (INPE, 1992; Skole 
and Tucker, 1993). The lack of satellite analyses for other 
tropical areas may mean that the flux from the tropics as a 
whole has been overestimated. 
While there is considerable uncertainty in estimated 
emissions from changing land use, the most recent 
compilations (Dixon et al., 1994; Houghton, 1994b) agree 
that tropical emissions averaged 1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr in the 
1980s. These analyses take into account the changing 
estimates of deforestation rates (INPE, 1992; Skole and 
Tucker, 1993) as well as other new data. The uncertainty 
estimate reflects the controversy over quantity and 

C01 and the Carbon Cycle 
53 
distribution of biomass (e.g., Brown and Lugo, 1992; 
Fearnside, 1992) as well as the errors associated within 
and between individual studies. At this writing, 
considerable work is in progress; it is possible that the 
estimate of emissions from changing land use in the tropics 
may be modified in the near future. Of particular concern 
is the currently poor evaluation of effects of changing land 
use in the drier, open canopy forests of the seasonal tropics 
(FAO, 1993), and poor knowledge of carbon accumulation 
in regrowing forests. 
1.3.3.4.2 Uptake ofC02 by changing land use 
Several recent analyses suggest a sink of carbon in 
regrowing Northern Hemisphere forests. Estimates for the 
magnitude of this term range from essentially zero to 0.74 
GtC/yr (Melillo et al., 1988; Houghton, 1993; Dixon et al., 
1994). It is difficult to assess the magnitude of this sink for 
two reasons. The first is the wide disparity in published 
regional estimates (e.g., a Russian sink of 0.01-0.06 GtC/yr 
(Melillo et al, 1988; Krankina and Dixon, 1994) versus 
0.3-0.5 GtC/yr (Dixon et al, 1994)). 
A more fundamental problem is the confusion of carbon 
uptake via forest growth versus forest regrowth. As a basis 
for understanding how fluxes might change in the future, 
we seek in this report to separate increases in forest carbon 
storage that result from the regrowth of previously 
harvested forests versus storage due to processes such as 
C02 fertilisation, nitrogen deposition, and changes in fire 
frequency, management practices, or climate, all of which 
can affect forest growth. Inventory-based estimates of 
forest carbon storage are made by multiplying the age 
distribution of forest stands (rates of carbon accumulation 
generally decrease as stands age) by age-specific rates of 
carbon accumulation, estimated from observations. 
However, as forest carbon accumulation has been 
measured during the period of changing CO-, and nitrogen 
deposition, and possibly climate, forest inventories cannot 
distinguish the amount of accumulation attributable to 
individual processes. 
The confusion of mechanisms is not important when 
inventory data are used to corroborate the results of inverse 
modelling (e.g., Tans et al., 1990; Enting and Mansbridge, 
1991; Ciais et al., in press), but separation of carbon 
storage mechanisms is essential for projections of future 
changes in carbon storage. Estimates of carbon storage due 
to nitrogen deposition or CO^ fertilisation (Peterson and 
Melillo, 1985; Schindler and Bayley, 1993; Gifford, 1994) 
cannot be added to inventory-based land use sinks ( Dixon 
et al., 1994; Houghton, 1994b). Moreover, inventory data 
are ill-suited for the task of projecting future carbon uptake 
because the inventory-based method does not distinguish 
between demographic effects such as forest harvest, 
agricultural abandonment, and natural disturbance such as 
fire and wind (Kolchugina and Vinson, 1993). The 
problem of quantifying the contribution of individual 
mechanisms to total carbon storage is even greater in the 
tropics, where few demographic data exist. Thus, it is 
inappropriate to rely entirely on inventory-based 
measurements for initialisation of terrestrial carbon 
models. 
In addition to changes on forested lands, the decline in 
soil carbon storage in agricultural lands may have been 
reversed in the middle latitudes. Best management 
practices may even lead to storage increases in the future 
(Metherell, 1992). While the world-wide extent of 
management changes and their effect on carbon balance is 
poorly known, a recent assessment of carbon storage in 
USA croplands suggests possible increases over the 
coming few decades of 0.02-0.05 GtC/yr; the authors note 
that similar changes are likely to have occurred over the 
past few decades (Donigian et al., 1994). In terms of the 
global C budget, increases in soil storage are small 
(Schlesinger, 1990), although they may be significant at 
the regional, or even national, scale. 
1.3.3.4.3 Other terrestrial sink processes 
While little has been done to increase understanding of 
potential sinks in tropical forests, analyses based on 
models of forest growth, age distribution data, and the age-
growth relationship suggest carbon accumulation in 
Northern Hemisphere forests may be as high as ~1 GtC/yr 
(Dixon et al., 1994). Analyses based on observed 
atmospheric CO, and 13CO-, suggest a strong Northern 
Hemisphere terrestrial sink. While various pieces of 
evidence support a substantial terrestrial sink in the 
Northern Hemisphere, direct observations to confirm the 
hypothesis and to establish the processes responsible for 
increasing carbon storage are lacking. For example, tree 
ring studies of contemporary and pre-industrial forest 
growth rates are contradictory. These studies have revealed 
enhanced growth in subalpine conifers (LaMarche et al., 
1984), no growth enhancement beyond that explained by 
climatic variability (Graumlich, 1991; D'Arrigo and 
Jacoby, 1993), and both positive and negative changes in 
growth rate dependent upon species and location (Briffa et 
al., 1990). Models and observational data to confirm 
tropical sinks are even more deficient (e.g., Brown and 
Lugo, 1984; 1992; Fearnside, 1992; Skole and Tucker, 
1993; Dixon et al., 1994). Improved observations for 
identifying terrestrial sinks is necessary for the 
improvement of models capable of projecting future states 
of the carbon cycle, and also for quantifying regional 
contributions to terrestrial sources and sinks. Processes 
that may contribute to a terrestrial sink are explored below 
(see Table 1.2). 

54 
CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
C0 2 fertilisation 
Experimental studies of agricultural and wild plant species 
have shown growth responses of typically 20-40% higher 
growth under doubled C0 2 conditions (ranging from 
negligible or negative responses in some wild plants to 
responses of 100% in some crop species (Korner and 
Arnone, 1992; Rochefort and Bazzaz, 1992; Coleman et 
al., 1993; Idso and Kimball, 1993; Owensby et a!., 1993; 
Policy et al., 1993; Idso and Idso, 1994)). The majority of 
these studies were short-term and were conducted with 
potted plants (Idso and Idso, 1994). The effect of increased 
growth under elevated CO-, conditions, known as the CO, 
fertilisation effect, is often assumed to be the primary 
mechanism underlying the imbalance in the global carbon 
budget. This assumption implies a terrestrial sink that 
increases as CO-, increases, acting as a strong negative 
feedback. However, while the potential effect of CO-, in 
experimental and some field studies is relatively strong 
(e.g., Drake, 1992; Idso and Kimball, 1993; see also 
review by Idso and Idso, 1994), natural ecosystems may be 
less responsive to increased levels of atmospheric CO.,. 
Evidence that the effects of CO-, on long-term carbon 
storage may be less than is suggested by short-term pot 
studies of photosynthesis or plant growth includes: 
(1) Field studies showing reduced responses over time 
(Oechel et al., 1993) and zero, small, or statistically 
insignificant responses (Norby et al., 1992; Jenkinson et 
al., 1994); 
(2) Evidence that plants with low intrinsic growth rates, a 
common trait in native plants, are less responsive to CO, 
increases than are rapidly growing plants, such as most 
crop species (Poorter, 1993); 
(3) Results of model simulations which suggest that 
increases in carbon storage eventually become nutrient-
limited (Comins and McMurtrie, 1993; Melillo et al., 
1994; reviewed in Schimel, 1995). (Long-term nutrient 
limitation is different from the short-term nutrient 
limitation of photosynthesis and plant growth observed in 
experimental studies; it reflects the need for nutrients in 
addition to carbon to increase organic matter production.) 
There is also evidence that while water- or temperature-
stressed plants are more responsive to CO, increase than 
are unstressed plants (because CO, increases water-use 
efficiency (Policy et al., 1993)), nitrogen-limited plants are 
less sensitive to CO-, level (Bazzaz and Fajer, 1992; 
Comins and McMurtrie, 1993: Diaz et al., 1993; Melillo et 
al.. 1993; Ojima et al., 1993: Idso and Idso, 1994). The 
reduction in response of short-term photosynthesis and 
plant growth to CO, caused by nitrogen limitation is 
highly variable and may on the whole be small (Idso and 
Idso, 1994), but as all organic matter contains nitrogen, 
carbon storage increases should eventually become limited 
by the stoichiometric relationships of carbon and other 
nutrients in organic matter (Comins and McMurtrie, 1993; 
Diaz et al., 1993; Schimel, 1995). 
While current models assume that nitrogen inputs are 
not affected by CO, fertilisation, this may not be true 
(Thomas et al., 1991; Gifford, 1993; Idso and Idso, 1994). 
C0 2 fertilisation could stimulate biological nitrogen 
fixation, because nitrogen-fixing organisms have high 
energy (organic carbon) requirements. If nitrogen inputs 
are stimulated by increasing CO,, acclimation of carbon 
storage to higher C02 levels could be temporarily offset. 
However, evidence from native ecosystems suggests that 
other nutrients, such as phosphorus, may be more limiting 
to nitrogen fixation than is energy (Cole and Heil, 1981; 
Eisele et al., 1989; Vitousek and Howarth, 1991). 
As a sensitivity analysis, the effects of C02 enrichment 
was varied in one model over the plausible range of values 
(by the equivalent of 10, 25 and 40% increases in plant 
growth at doubled CO,). The results indicate terrestrial 
carbon storage rates (increased net ecosystem production: 
NEP) due to C02 fertilisation were 0.5, 2.0 and 4.0 GtC/yr 
during the 1980s (Gifford, 1993). A modelling experiment 
by Rotmans and den Elzen (1993) indicated the strength of 
C09 fertilisation might be -1.2 GtC/yr. Overall, it is likely 
that C02 fertilisation plays a role in the current terrestrial 
carbon budget, and may have amounted to storage of 0.5 to 
2.0 GtC/yr during the 1980s. 
Nitrogen fertilisation 
Many terrestrial ecosystems are nitrogen limited: added 
fertiliser will produce a growth response and additional 
carbon storage (e.g., Vitousek and Howarth, 1991: 
Schimel, 1995). Nitrogen deposition from fertilisers and 
oxides of nitrogen released from the burning of fossil fuel 
during the 1980s is estimated to amount to a global total, 
but spatially concentrated, 0.05-0.06 GtN/yr (Peterson and 
Melillo, 1985; Duce et al., 1991). The carbon sequestration 
which results from this added nitrogen is estimated to be of 
the order 0.2-1.0 GtC/yr (Peterson and Melillo, 1985; 
Schindler and Bayley, 1993; Schlesinger, 1993). 
depending on assumptions about the proportion of nitrogen 
that remains in ecosystems. Estimates significantly higher 
than 1 GtC/yr are unrealistic because they assume that all 
of the N would be stored in forms with high carbon-to-
nitrogen ratios, while much atmospheric nitrogen is in 
reality deposited on grasslands and agricultural lands 
where storage occurs in soils with low average carbon to 
nitrogen ratios. Uptake of carbon due to long-term 
increases in nitrogen deposition could increase as nitrogen 
pollution increases; but possibly to a threshold, after which 
additional nitrogen may result in ecosystem degradation 

CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
55 
(e.g., Aber et al., 1989; Schulze et al., 1989). Because 
most deposition of anthropogenic nitrogen occurs in the 
middle latitudes, some of the effect of added nitrogen may 
already be accounted for in measurement-based estimates 
of mid-latitude carbon accumulation (discussed above). 
However, existing analyses do not allow identification of 
the fraction of measured forest growth that is due to 
nitrogen addition or effects of C02. 
Climate effects 
Climate affects carbon storage in terrestrial ecosystems 
because temperature, moisture, and radiation influence 
both ecosystem carbon gain (photosynthesis) and loss 
(respiration) (Houghton and Woodwell, 1989; Schimel et 
al., 1994). While a number of compensatory processes are 
possible, warming is thought to reduce carbon storage by 
increasing respiration, especially of soils (Houghton and 
Woodwell, 1989; Shaver et al., 1992; Townsend et al., 
1992; Oechel et al., 1993; Schimel et al., 1994). 
Conversely, cooling would be expected to increase carbon 
storage. In nutrient-limited forests, however, warming may 
increase carbon storage by "mineralising" soil organic 
nutrients, which are generally stored in nutrient-rich, or 
low carbon-to-nutrient ratio forms, thereby allowing 
increased uptake by trees, which store nutrients in high 
carbon-to-nutrient forms (Shaver et al., 1992). This is not 
true in nutrient-limited tundra ecosystems, where recent 
warming has resulted in a local CCs source (Oechel et al., 
1993). Increases in precipitation will generally increase 
carbon storage by increasing plant growth, although in 
some ecosystems compensatory increases in soil 
decomposition may reduce or offset this effect (Ojima et 
al., 1993). While these effects have been discussed as 
components of future responses of ecosystems to climate 
change, climate variations during the past century may 
have influenced the terrestrial carbon budget. In a 
provocative paper, Dai and Fung (1993) suggested that 
climate variations over the past decades could have 
resulted in a substantial sink. Ciais et al. (in press) 
suggested that cooling arising from the effects of Mt. 
Pinatubo may have increased terrestrial carbon storage and 
contributed to the observed reduction in the atmospheric 
growth rate during the 1991 to 1992 period. Palaeoclimate 
modelling studies likewise suggest major changes in 
terrestrial carbon storage with climate (Prentice and Fung, 
1990; Friedlingstein et al., 1992). Modelling and 
observations of ecosystem responses to climate and 
climate anomalies will be important tools for validating 
predictions of future changes; meanwhile, investigations of 
the effects of climate on carbon storage remain suggestive 
rather than definitive. 
1.3.4 Budget Summary 
In Table 1.3 we present an estimated budget of carbon 
perturbations for the 1980s, shown as annual average 
values. 
The budgetary inclusion of a Northern Hemisphere sink 
in forest regrowth reduces the unaccounted-for sink 
compared with earlier budgets (IPCC, 1990; 1992) by 
assigning a portion of this sink to forest regrowth. The 
remaining imbalance in this budget implies additional net 
terrestrial sinks of 1.4 + 1.5 GtC/yr. 
1.4 The Influence of Climate and Other Feedbacks on 
the Carbon Cycle 
1.4.1 Introduction 
The description of the carbon cycle in the previous 
sections addressed the budget of anthropogenic CO-,, 
without emphasising the possibility of more complex 
interactions within the system. There are, however, a 
number of processes that can produce feedback loops. One 
important distinction (see Enting, 1994) is between carbon 
cycle feedbacks and C02-climate feedbacks. The only 
direct carbon cycle feedback is the C0 2 fertilisation 
process described in Section 1.3.3.4.3. In contrast, C02-
climate feedbacks involve the effect of climate change 
(potentially induced by CO^ concentration changes) on the 
components of the carbon cycle. For terrestrial 
components, the most important effects are likely to be 
Table 1.3: Average annual budget of CO 2 perturbations 
for 1980 to 1989. Fluxes and reservoir changes of carbon 
are expressed in GtC/yr, error limits correspond to an 
estimated 90% confidence interval. 
CO-, sources 
(1) Emissions from fossil fuel combustion 
5.5 ± 0.5 
and cement production 
(2) Net emissions from changes in tropical 
1.6 ± 1.0 
land use 
(3) Total anthropogenic emissions (l)+(2) 
7.1 ± 1.1 
Partitioning among reservoirs 
(4) Storage in the atmosphere 
3.2 ± 0.2 
(5) Oceanic uptake 
2.0 ± 0.8 
(6) Uptake by Northern Hemisphere forest 
0.5 ± 0.5* 
regrowth 
(7) Additional terrestrial sinks (C02 fertilisation, 
1.4 ± 1.5 
nitrogen fertilisation, climatic effects) 
[(l) + (2)]-[(4) + (5) + (6)] 
* from Table 1.2 

56 
CO? and the Carbon Cycle 
those involving temperature, precipitation, and radiation 
changes (through changes in cloudiness) on net primary 
production and decomposition (including effects resulting 
from changes in species composition). For marine systems, 
the primary effects to be expected arise through climatic 
influences on ocean circulation and chemistry. Such 
changes would affect the physical and biological aspects of 
carbon distribution in the oceans including physical fluxes 
of inorganic carbon within the ocean and changes in 
nutrient cycling (Manabe and Stouffer, 1993). The 
feedbacks may also include changes in the species 
composition of the ocean biota, which determines the 
location and magnitude of oceanic C02 uptake. 
Factors with a strong influence on the global carbon 
cycle that are similar to and/or modify feedback loops also 
exist. Among such factors are the effects of increased UV 
on terrestrial and marine ecosystems and the anthropogenic 
toxification and eutrophication of these ecosystems. While 
significant effects of possible changes in mid-latitude and 
high latitude UV radiation, tropospheric ozone and other 
pollutants have been documented in experimental studies, 
there is little basis for credible global extrapolation of 
these studies (Chameides et al., 1994). They will not be 
discussed further, but should be addressed in subsequent 
assessments as more data become available. 
1.4.2 Feedbacks to Terrestrial Carbon Storage 
The responses of terrestrial carbon to climate are complex, 
with rates of biological activity generally increasing with 
warmer temperatures and increasing moisture. Because 
photosynthesis and plant growth increase with warmer 
temperatures, longer growing seasons and more available 
water, storage of carbon in living vegetation generally 
increases as well (Melillo et al., 1993). Storage of carbon 
in soils generally increases along a gradient from low to 
high latitudes, reflecting slower decomposition of dead 
plant material in colder environments (Post et al., 1985; 
Schimel ct al.. 1994). Flooded soils, where oxygen 
becomes depleted, have extremely low rates of 
decomposition and may accumulate large amounts of 
organic matter as peat. Global ecosystem models based on 
an understanding of underlying mechanisms are designed 
to capture these patterns, and have been used to simulate 
the responses of terrestrial carbon storage to changing 
climate. Some models also include the effect of changes in 
land use. Model results suggest that future effects of 
changing climate, atmospheric CO-,, and changing land use 
on carbon storage may be quite large (Vloedbeld and 
Leemans, 1993). 
Effects of temperature and C0 2 concentration 
Ecosystem models have been used to simulate the response 
of the terrestrial biosphere to changes in climate, rate of 
change of climate ("transient" changes), effects of 
changing CO,, and the effects of changing land use. 
Models may consider only the response of plant growth 
and decomposition, or they may also allow movement of 
vegetation "types" such as forests and grasslands. The 
simplest case, involving a general circulation model-
(GCM-) simulated climate change and stationary 
vegetation patterns projected losses of terrestrial carbon of 
about 200 Gt over an implicit time period of a few hundred 
years (Melillo et al., 1993). When vegetation types were 
allowed to migrate, models projected a long-term increase 
in terrestrial carbon storage: 60-90 GtC over 100-200 years 
(Cramer and Solomon, 1993; Smith and Shugart, 1993). In 
Smith and Shugart's (1993) model, climate change and 
vegetation redistribution led to a transient release of CO, 
from die back before regrowth (-200 GtC over -100 
years), followed by an eventual accumulation of -90 GtC. 
This study, like those mentioned above, did not 
incorporate the effects of CO, fertilisation. The TEM 
model of Melillo et al. (1993) was also used to assess the 
response of ecosystem carbon storage to C02 fertilisation 
under a scenario of climate change resulting from an 
instantaneous doubling of C0 2. The results of this 
experiment showed that, over the period of CO, doubling, 
uptake of carbon only occurred when the C02 fertilisation 
effect was included (loss of -200 GtC without the 
fertilisation effect, and a gain of -250 GtC when the effect 
was included: Melillo et al., 1994). Rotmans and den 
Elzen (1993) used the IMAGE model to assess the effects 
of including CO, fertilisation and temperature feedbacks 
on their modelled carbon budget. Estimated biospheric 
uptake increased by 1.2 GtC/yr over the decade of the 
1980s when CO, and temperature feedbacks were 
included. The most complex assessment of the interactive 
effects on carbon storage are carried out with models of 
transient changes in climate that include C02 fertilisation. 
Esser (1990) simulated an increase of 170 GtC over 200 
years with transient changes of climate and CO, 
fertilisation (this model does not take vegetation 
redistribution into account). Alcamo et al. (1994b) 
performed a similar experiment, but included redistribution 
of vegetation. Their results revealed eventual increased 
carbon storage of -200-250 Gt, depending on assumptions 
of future land use. Results from ecosystem models suggest 
that changes in climate associated with C02 doubling are 
likely to lead to a significant transient release of carbon 
(1-4 GtC/yr) over a period of decades to more than a 
century (Smith and Shugart, 1993; Dixon et al., 1994). 
Effects of land use 
Several of these studies also included the effects of 
changing land use. For example, Esser (1990) simulated a 

CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
57 
gain of 170 GtC due to the effects of climate and CO-, 
change, but losses of 322 GtC when he assumed areal 
reduction of global forests by 50% by the year 2300, 
emphasising the importance of maintaining forest 
ecosystems for terrestrial carbon storage. In the Cramer 
and Solomon (1993) study, inclusion of dense land 
clearing also substantially reduced simulated C storage (by 
up to 152 GtC). In the Alcamo et al. (1994b) study, global 
scenarios that required additional land for agriculture and 
biomass energy production resulted in lower carbon 
storage. 
While the results from global terrestrial models range 
widely, all suggest that the terrestrial biosphere could 
eventually take up 100-300 GtC in response to warming, 
albeit after a significant transient loss (e.g., Smith and 
Shugart, 1993). While existing simulations have a number 
of shortcomings, including the lack of agreed-upon climate 
and land use scenarios that would allow rigorous 
comparison of results, they suggest possible exchanges 
between the atmosphere and the terrestrial biosphere of the 
order of 100s of GtC over decades to a few centuries (e.g., 
Alcamo et al, 1994a). 
Soil feedbacks 
Because soil carbon is released with increasing 
temperature, it has been suggested that global warming 
would result in a large positive feedback (Houghton and 
Woodwell, 1989; Townsend et al., 1992; Oechel et al., 
1993). In order to evaluate this, the sensitivity of carbon 
storage to temperature was assessed using a number of 
models (Schimel et al., 1994). Inter-comparison of model 
results revealed rates of global soil carbon loss of 11-34 
GtC per degree warming. Vegetation growth and C storage 
are stimulated in many of these models because as soil 
carbon is lost, soil nitrogen is made available to the 
modelled vegetation. This fertilisation effect can 
ameliorate or even reverse the overall loss of carbon 
(Shaver et al., 1992; Gifford, 1994; Schimel et al., 1994). 
In the Century ecosystem model, the nitrogen feedback 
reduces the effect of warming on soil carbon loss by 50% 
(Schimel et al., 1994). 
Nutrient limitation of CO, fertilisation 
The temperature feedback on nitrogen availability may 
interact with C0 2 fertilisation. C02-fertilised foliage is 
typically lower in nitrogen than foliage grown under 
current concentrations of C02 (e.g., Coleman and Bazzaz, 
1992). As dead foliage from high-CO-, conditions works its 
way through the decomposition process, soil decomposer 
organisms require additional nitrogen (Diaz et al., 1993), 
and, as a result, vegetation may become more nitrogen 
limited (attenuating but not eliminating the effects of CO, 
fertilisation (Comins and McMurtrie, 1993; Schimel, 
1995)). Additional nitrogen released by warming, as 
described above, can alleviate the nitrogen stress induced 
by high-CO, foliage: this interaction between warming and 
CO, fertilisation is responsible for the large estimated 
effect of CO, on carbon storage in Melillo et al. (1993). 
Deposition of atmospheric nitrogen could also influence 
the effectiveness of CO, fertilisation (Gifford, 1994), 
although some modelling studies suggest the effect may be 
modest (Rastetter et al., 1992; Comins and McMurtrie, 
1993). Empirical studies are few, but a recent analysis by 
Jenkinson et al. (1994) revealed no measurable change in 
hay yield over the past 100 years despite substantial 
increases in nitrogen inputs via precipitation and a 21% 
increase in atmospheric CO, concentration during the 
period of study. Nutrient feedbacks clearly influence the 
response of terrestrial ecosystems to the interactive effects 
of climate and CO,. 
1.4.3 Feedbacks on Oceanic Carbon Storage 
Climate feedbacks influence the storage of carbon in the 
ocean through physical, chemical and biological processes. 
Changes in sea surface temperature affect oceanic CO, 
solubility and carbon chemistry. At equilibrium, a global 
increase in sea surface temperature of 1°C is associated 
with an increase of the partial pressure of atmospheric C0 2 
of approximately 10 ppmv (Heinze et al., 1991), serving as 
a weak positive feedback between temperature and 
atmospheric C02. During a transient climate change on 
time-scales of decades to centuries this temperature 
feedback would be even weaker (Maclntyre, 1978). 
Changes in temperature might also affect the 
remineralisation of dissolved organic carbon. Climatically 
driven changes in its turnover time are not expected to result 
in significant variations in atmospheric CO,, as the quantity 
of dissolved organic carbon in the surface ocean is less than 
700-750 Gt (Figure 1.1). Earlier suggestions (Sugimura and 
Suzuki, 1988) that this pool might be much larger than 
previously thought (i.e., about twice the value shown in 
Figure 1.1) are now generally discounted (Suzuki, 1993). 
Changes in the oceanic circulation and their effects on 
the oceanic carbon cycle are more difficult to assess. 
Simulation studies of the transient behaviour of the ocean-
atmosphere system using coupled GCMs (Cubasch et al., 
1992; Manabe and Stouffer, 1993) indicate a strong 
reduction of the deep thermohaline circulation, which is 
driven by cooling and sinking of surface water at high 
latitudes, especially in the North Atlantic. Smaller effects 
are expected on the wind-driven features of the oceanic 
general circulation: the shallow upwelling cells at the 
equator and the eastern boundaries of the warm sub-
tropical gyres and in the cyclonic areas in higher latitudes. 
A reduction of the vertical water exchange processes 

5,H 
would impact the oceanic carbon cycle in several ways: 
First, the downward transport of surface waters in 
contact with the atmosphere and thus enriched with excess 
CO, would be reduced, thereby leading to a smaller 
oceanic excess CO-, uptake capacity. 
Second, changes in the vertical water mass transports 
would affect the marine biological pump. This would 
reduce the flux of nutrients transported to the surface and, 
in nutrient-limited regions, result in reduced marine 
production. This effect would constitute a weakening of 
the marine biological pump (i.e., less export of carbon to 
depth), and could potentially lead to an increase in 
dissolved inorganic carbon and partial pressure of CO, at 
the surface. Conversely, smaller vertical water mass 
transports imply a reduced upward transport of deeper 
waters enriched in dissolved inorganic carbon. The two 
effects result from the same process, but affect the surface 
concentration of dissolved inorganic carbon, and hence the 
partial pressure and the air-sea flux of CO,, in opposite 
directions. The latter of the two effects dominates in 
models that use constant carbon to nutrient ratios to 
describe the marine biosphere (Bacastow and Maier-
Reimer, 1990; Keir, 1994). These models project a small 
increase in oceanic carbon storage as a result of the 
reduction of oceanic circulation and vertical mixing. 
Initial model results suggest that the effects of predicted 
changes in circulation on the ocean carbon cycle are not 
large (10s rather than l()()s of ppmv in the atmosphere). 
However, exploration of the long-term impacts of warming 
on circulation patterns has just begun; hence, analyses of 
impacts on the carbon cycle must be viewed as 
preliminary. For example, changes in the oceanic 
environment (temperature and circulation) have the 
potential to change the composition of marine ecosystems 
in ways not yet included in global models. This could lead 
to changes in carbon to nutrient ratios, which are assumed 
constant in present models, or to changes in the 
relationship between organic and inorganic carbon 
fixation, and/or change the efficiency by which marine 
organisms utilise available nutrients. Furthermore, the 
remineralisation depths of nutrients and carbon might be 
affected differently (Evans and Fasham, 1993). An 
extreme lower bound may be estimated by assuming 
complete utilisation of the oceanic surface nutrients which 
would reduce atmospheric CO, by 120 ppmv. Similarly, an 
upper bound is given by assuming extinction of all marine 
life, increasing atmospheric CO, by almost 170 ppmv 
(Bacastow and Maier-Reimer, 1990: Shaffer. 1993; Keir, 
1994). Such large effects, however, are very unlikely to 
occur. Indeed, the oceanic carbon system appears to be 
rather stable as evidenced by the very small fluctuations of 
the atmospheric CO, concentration prior to anthropogenic 
perturbation. It has also proven very difficult to account 
CO, and the Carbon Cycle 
for the lower atmospheric CO, concentration in glacial 
times (i.e., by 80 ppmv) merely by changing biospheric 
parameters within current three-dimensional ocean carbon 
models (Heinze et ah, 1991; Archer and Maier-Reimer, 
1994). 
In areas of excess nutrients (e.g., in the equatorial and 
subarctic Pacific and in some parts of the Southern Ocean) 
the micronutrient iron appears to limit marine primary 
production (Martin, 1990). Changes in atmospheric iron 
loading thus potentially could affect the biological pump 
and impact atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Modelling 
studies have shown, however, that even excessive "iron 
fertilisation" of these oceanic areas would have a relatively 
small impact on atmospheric CO, levels (Joos et «/., 
1991a; Peng and Broecker, 1991; Sarmiento and Orr, 
1991; Kurz and Maier-Reimer, 1993). Therefore, at least 
during the past 200 years, it is very unlikely that iron 
loading had a significant impact on the present day carbon 
balance. 
External impacts on the oceanic carbon system not 
directly related to global warming must also be considered. 
Increased ultraviolet radiation (UV-B, corresponding to 
light wavelengths of 280-320 nm) resulting from the 
depletion of stratospheric ozone could affect marine life 
and thus influence marine carbon storage. However, model 
simulation studies show that even a complete cessation of 
marine productivity in high latitudes, where increases in 
UV-B are expected to occur, would result in an 
atmospheric CO, increase of less than 40 ppmv (Sarmiento 
and Siegenthaler, 1992). Increased input of anthropogenic 
nitrogen or other limiting nutrients might also affect the 
oceanic biota. The global effects on atmospheric CO, are 
most likely much smaller than the extreme bounds 
discussed above. 
1.5 Modelling Future Concentrations of Atmospheric 
CO; 
7.5./ Introduction 
The clear historical relationship between CO, emissions 
and changing atmospheric concentrations implies that 
continuing fossil fuel, cement, and land-use-related 
emissions of CO, at or above current rates will result in 
increasing atmospheric concentrations of this greenhouse 
gas. Understanding how CO, concentrations will change in 
the future requires quantification of the relationship 
between CO, emissions and atmospheric concentration 
using models of the carbon cycle. This section presents the 
results of a set of standardised calculations, carried out b\ 
modelling groups from many countries, that analyse the 
relationships between emissions and concentrations in a 
number of ways (see Enting et al., 1994b for full 
documentation of the modelling exercise). 

C01 and the Carbon Cycle 
59 
Two questions are considered: 
• 
For a given C02 emission scenario, how might CO, 
concentrations change in the future? 
• 
For a given C0 2 concentration profile leading to 
stabilisation, what anthropogenic emissions are 
implied? 
As an initial condition, it was required that all 
models have a balanced carbon budget in which the 
components matched, within satisfactory limits, a 
prescribed 1980s-mean budget based on Watson et al. 
(1992). Modelling groups were provided with prescribed 
future land use fluxes, and a variety of time-series of 
concentrations and fossil-plus-cement emissions. Because 
the model intercomparison was conducted simultaneously 
with the rest of the assessment, the prescribed budget 
differs from the budget presented in this chapter (Table 
1.3) in that: 
• 
(i) the 1980s mean concentration growth rate used 
(1.59 ppmv/yr or 3.4 GtC/yr) was higher than the 
current estimate (1.53 ppmv/yr or 3.2 GtC/yr); 
• 
(ii) the net flux from changing land use was set at 1.6 
GtC/yr rather than the current estimate of 1.1 GtC/yr; 
• 
(iii) the only mechanism used in the models to 
simulate terrestrial uptake was CO, fertilisation, 
whereas we suggest that several other mechanisms 
may be important (Table 1.2). 
Modellers were required to continue whatever processes 
were used to balance the 1980s budget into the future. 
The approach used in balancing the budget probably 
biases the modelling exercise for this chapter towards 
lower concentrations when emission profiles were 
employed and higher anthropogenic emissions when 
concentrations were prescribed. There are two reasons for 
this. First, the effect of forest regrowth and nitrogen 
deposition result in changing terrestrial carbon storage 
which need not increase with increasing 
CO, 
concentrations as is required by the CO, fertilisation 
effect. Second, as noted in previous IPCC reports (Watson 
et al., 1990; 1992) climate-related feedbacks may result in 
additional transient releases of C02 to the atmosphere. In 
contrast, most of the calculations employed in the 1990 
IPCC assessment (Watson et al., 1990) assumed constant 
terrestrial carbon content after 1990 and probably resulted 
in biases in the other direction. Revisions to the 1980s 
budget used in model initialisation for this report, 
however, are in a direction that would lead to higher 
concentrations by 5 to 10% (for given emissions) and 
lower emissions by a similar amount (for given 
concentrations). 
Results from a range of different carbon cycle models 
are considered in order to assess the sensitivity of 
calculated emission and concentration profiles to model 
formulation. The complexity of the models employed 
varies considerably. The most detailed was a model 
coupling a three-dimensional ocean circulation and 
chemistry model to a terrestrial biosphere model 
incorporating a full geographical representation of 
ecological processes; but, as with other complex models, 
only a small set of calculations could be performed. The 
simplest models were designed to simulate only critical 
processes and represent terrestrial and oceanic carbon 
uptake with a minimum number of equations. Because 
most of the models employed incorporate some 
representation of terrestrial processes, they tended to have 
initially higher rates of CO, uptake from the atmosphere 
and produced lower estimates for the effective lifetime of 
CO, than the models used in the 1990 IPCC report (Moore 
and Braswell, 1994). Thus, the GWPs presented in Chapter 
5 of this volume are higher for other trace gases than those 
of earlier assessments (Watson et al., 1990; Chapter 5, this 
volume). 
We chose one model, the "Bern model", for a number of 
important illustrative calculations, because its results were 
generally near the mid-point of the results obtained with all 
models, and because complete descriptions exist in the 
literature (Joos et al., 1991a; Siegenthaler and Joos, 1992). 
Selected sensitivity analyses from the model of Wigley 
(1993) were also used as the configuration of that model 
allowed for ready modification to consider certain issues. 
Both the Bern and Wigley models have a balanced carbon 
cycle consisting of a well-mixed atmosphere linked to 
oceanic and terrestrial biospheric compartments. In the 
Bern model, the ocean is represented by the HILDA 
model, which is a box-diffusion model with an additional 
advective component. It was tuned to observed values of 
natural and bomb radiocarbon (Joos et al., 1991a, b; 
Siegenthaler and Joos, 1992) and validated with CFCs and 
Argon-39 (Joos, 1992). The Wigley model uses a 
representation of the ocean based on the ocean general 
circulation carbon cycle model of Maier-Reimer and 
Hasselmann (1987). Both the models have similar 
terrestrial components, with representations of ground 
vegetation, wood, detritus, and soil (Siegenthaler and 
Oeschger, 1987; Wigley, 1993). A possible enhancement 
of plant growth due to elevated C0 2 levels is taken into 
account by a logarithmic dependency between additional 
photosynthesis and atmospheric CO,, which, in the Bern 
model, probably overestimates biological storage at high 
CO, concentrations. The Bern model was chosen for 
illustrative purposes in discussions where presentation of 
multiple results would be confusing (and where all models 
produced similar patterns). This model was also used to 
define the reference case for the GWPs presented in 

60 
CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
Chapter 5 of this volume. Neither model is recommended 
nor endorsed by the IPCC or the authors of this chapter as 
having higher credibility than other models. 
1.5.2 Calculations of Concentrations for Specified 
Emissions 
Six greenhouse gas emissions scenarios were described in 
the 1992 IPCC report (Leggett et al, 1992), based on a 
wide range of assumptions regarding future economic, 
demographic, and policy factors. The anthropogenic C0 2 
emissions for these scenarios are shown in Figure 1.9a. 
Scenario IS92c, which has the lowest CO-, emissions, 
assumes an eventual decrease in population, low economic 
growth, and severe constraints on the availability of fossil 
fuel supplies. The highest emission scenario (IS92e) 
assumes moderate population growth, high economic 
growth, high fossil fuel availability, and a phase-out of 
nuclear power. Concentration estimates for these scenarios 
have previously been published (e.g., Wigley, 1993). 
Figure 1.9b shows concentration results from the Bern 
model that typify the responses of the wide range of 
models used for the full analysis. This and the other 
models show strong increases in concentration to well 
above pre-industrial levels by 2100 (75 to 220% higher). 
None of the six scenarios leads to stabilisation of 
concentration before 2100, although IS92c leads to a very 
slow growth in CO, concentration after 2050. IS92a, b, e, 
and f all produce a doubling of the pre-industrial C0 2 
concentration before 2070, with rapid rates of 
concentration growth. Scenarios developed by the World 
Energy Council show a similar range of results (Figures 
1.11a, b). 
In addition to the IS92 emissions cases, three arbitrarily 
chosen "science" emissions profiles and the newly 
produced World Energy Council (WEC) Scenarios were 
also examined. In the former, fossil emissions followed 
lS92a to the year 2000 and then either stabilised (DEC0%) 
or decreased at 1% or 2%/yr (see Figure 1.10). For the 
WEC Scenarios, where only energy-related CO-, emissions 
were originally given (WEC, 1993), estimates of gas-
flaring and cement production emissions were added (M. 
Jefferson and G. Marland, personal communications) to 
ensure consistency with the 1S92 Scenarios. Total fossil 
emissions are given in Figure 1.11a. In all cases net land 
use emissions were assumed to follow IS92a to 2075. For 
the WEC cases, IS92a was followed to 2100. For the 
science scenarios, land use emissions dropped to zero in 
2100 and remained zero thereafter. Concentration results 
are shown in Figures 1.10 and 1.11. Perhaps the most 
important result (which could be anticipated from the 
lS92c case) is that stabilisation of ehiissions at 2000 levels 
does not lead to stabilisation of CO-, concentration by 
2100: in fact, the calculations show that concentrations 
40 
II" 
1 1 10 -
< « 
.(a) 
' 
-
i 
i 
i 
i 
^£ S 
i 
i 
/ 
/ 
-
S 
.. 
. / 
.- " 
i 
i 
i 
IS92e 
. IS92f 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
1950 
2000 
2050 
Year 
2100 
Q. 
Q. 
C 
o 
c 
0) 
o 
c 
8 
o 
O 
800 
600 
400 
(b) 
-
•—•"7""^ 
I 
-| 
^
^ 
' 
' 
1 
1 
' 
./ 
' 
i 
IS92e 
IS92I 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
IS92c 
1950 
2000 
2050 
Year 
2100 
Figure 1.9: (a) Anthropogenic C02 emissions for the IS92 
Scenarios, (b) Atmospheric C02 concentrations calculated from 
the scenarios IS92a-f (Leggett et al., 1992) using the Bern model 
(Siegenthaler and Joos; 1992). The typical range of results from 
different carbon cycle models is indicated by the shaded area. 
continue to increase slowly for at least several hundred 
years. The lowest of the WEC Scenarios, where emissions 
were based on policies driven by "ecological" 
considerations (see WEC, 1993), gives an idea of the sort 
of emissions profile that could lead to concentration 
stabilisation. 
1.5.3 Stabilisation Calculations 
The calculations presented in this section illustrate 
additional aspects of what may be required to achieve 
stabilisation of atmospheric CO-, concentrations. The 
exercise was motivated by the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (United Nations, 1992), which states: 
"The ultimate objective of this Convention and any 
related legal instruments that the Conference of the 
Parties may adopt is to achieve, in accordance with the 
relevant provisions of the Convention, stabilisation of 
greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a 

CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
61 
$ 
(') 
c u 
F 
0> 
ow 
u 
m 
o 
t-
g 
8 
7 
fi 
h 
4 
3 
2 
1 
•ia) 
\ \ 
\ 
•. \ 
\ \ w 
DEC 0% 
2000 
" ' " - % % ^ : \ _ _ , 
J 
I 
I 
I 
t • • - , , J , . 
I 
2100 
2200 
2300 
Year 
2400 
2500 
20 
O 
15 
5 
| 
1 
10 
-i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
r 
T 
1 
1 
r 
(a) 
WEC scenario A 
WEC scenario B 
WEC scenario C 
1950 
_i 
I 
I 
L 
_J 
I 
I 
I 
I 
L_ 
2000 
Year 
2050 
2100 
300 
700 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
Year 
2400 
2500 
Figure 1.10: (a) Anthropogenic C0 2 emissions calculated by 
following the IS92a Scenario to the year 2000 and then either 
fixed fossil fuel emissions (DEC 0%) or emissions declining at 
1%/yr (DEC 1%) or 2%/yr (DEC 2%). Land-use emissions 
followed the modified IS92a scenario (see Section 1.5.2). (b) 
Atmospheric C02 concentrations resulting from DEC 0%, DEC 
1% and DEC 2% emissions. Curves are for the model of Wigley 
(1993). 
300 
1950 
2000 
2050 
2100 
Year 
Figure 1.11: (a) Emission scenarios from the World Energy 
Council (WEC) modified by including gas flaring and cement 
production, (b) Atmospheric C0 2 concentrations calculated from 
the WEC Scenarios using the model of Wigley (1993). 
Concentrations resulting from the fixed emissions case (DEC 
0%) (see Figure 1.10) using the same model are included for 
comparison. 
level that would prevent dangerous 
anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system. Such a level should 
be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow 
ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to 
ensure that food production is not threatened and to 
enable economic development to proceed in a 
sustainable 
manner." 
In the context of this objective it is important to 
investigate a range of emission profiles of greenhouse 
gases which might lead to atmospheric stabilisation. It is 
not our purpose here to consider the climate response (this 
will be done in the 1995 IPCC Scientific Assessment 
report), nor to define what might constitute "dangerous 
interference", nor to make any judgement about the rates 
of change that would meet the criteria of the objective. In 
this chapter only C 0 2 is considered; the stabilisation of 
other greenhouse gas concentrations is discussed in 
Chapter 2. 
Several carbon cycle models have been used to calculate 
the emissions of C 0 2 that would lead to stabilisation at a 
range of different concentration levels. These calculations 
are designed to illustrate the relationship between C 0 2 
concentration and emissions. Concentration profiles have 
been devised (Figure 1.12) in which C 0 2 concentrations 
stabilise at levels from 350 to 750 ppmv (for comparison, 
the pre-industrial C 0 2 concentration was close to 280 
ppmv and the 1990 concentration was -355 ppmv). Many 
different stabilisation levels and routes to stabilisation 
could have been chosen. Those in Figure 1.12 give a 
smooth transition from the 1990 rate of C 0 2 concentration 
increase to stabilisation. As a result, the year of 
stabilisation differs with stabilisation levels from around 
2150 for 350 ppmv to 2250 for 750 ppmv. Further details 
on the concentration profiles, and the implied emissions 
results are given in Enting el al. (1994b). 

62 
CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
800 
700 -
I 
U 500 
I 
% 400 
<D 
1 
1 
Double pre-
" industrial 
-
' 
i i i i i i i i i 1 i 
i i i 
| i i i i i 
i i i i i i i 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
S750 
S650 
S550 
S450 
S350 
' • ' I 
— 
-
-
1 
300 
200 
1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 2150 2200 2250 2300 
Year 
Figure 1.12: C02 concentration profiles leading to stabilisation at 350, 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv. These are the profiles prescribed 
for carbon cycle model calculations in which the corresponding emission pathways (shown in Figure 1.13) were determined. 
Figure 1.13 shows the model-derived profiles of total 
anthropogenic emissions (i.e., the sum of fossil fuel use, 
changes in land use, and cement production) that lead to 
stabilisation following the concentration profiles shown in 
Figure 1.12. Initially emissions rise, followed some 
decades later by quite rapid and large reductions. 
Stabilisation at any of the concentration levels studied 
(350-750 ppmv) is only possible if emissions are 
eventually reduced well below 1990 levels (Figure 1.13). 
For comparison, the emissions corresponding to IS92a, c, 
and e are also shown up to 2100 in Figure 1.13. Emissions 
for all the stabilisation levels studied are lower than those 
for IS92a and e, even in the first few decades of the 21st 
century. For the IS92c Scenario, emissions lie between 
those which in this study eventually achieve stabilisation 
between 450 and 550 ppmv. 
The concentration profiles here are illustrative. 
Stabilisation at the same level, via a different route, would 
produce different curves from those shown in Figure 1.13. 
However, the total amount of emitted carbon accumulated 
over time (the area under the curves in Figure 1.13), is less 
sensitive to the concentration profile than to the 
stabilisation level. Cumulative emissions and carbon 
storage amounts over the period 1990 to 2200 are shown in 
Figure 1.14. The separate model results are not shown, but 
the maximum and minimum estimates are indicated, along 
with the results from the Bern model, identified as a near-
average model. Stabilisation at a lower concentration 
implies lower accumulated emissions (Figure 1.14). 
The spread in results is large, in part because the problem 
of deducing sources given concentrations is inherently less 
stable than deducing concentrations from sources, 
analogous to the inverse problems described in Section 
1.3.2.3. Any inferences regarding emissions strategies 
drawn from these results should take into account the 
inherent uncertainties in the projections and the limitations 
imposed by assumptions made to derive them (see Section 
1.5.4 and Enting et al., 1994b), and allow response to 
knowledge gained through continuing observation of future 
trends in emissions and concentrations. 
1.5.4 Assessment of Uncertainties 
Two types of uncertainty analysis have been performed for 
the emission-concentration modelling studies. First, 
because the models used in the intercomparison 
incorporate model components of differing structure and 
levels of complexity to calculate terrestrial and ocean 
uptake, the range of results provides a view of 
uncertainties arising from different scientific approaches. 
While this is a useful view, it probably underestimates the 
overall uncertainty because the experiments were 
constrained to have a specific value for the flux arising 
from changing land use during the 1980s, and a terrestrial 
sink due solely to CO, fertilisation. Because ocean sink 
magnitudes were not constrained, models with smaller 
atmosphere-to-ocean fluxes have correspondingly (and 
possibly unrealistically) larger terrestrial sinks. None of 
the models used for the terrestrial sink process adequately 
accounted for the complexities of terrestrial uptake 
discussed in Section 1.3.3.4. Because the models were 
constrained to match a particular carbon budget during the 

C02 and the Carbon Cycle 
63 
£ 
y 
O 1b 
0) 
c I 
a 10 
8 
.9 
k 
H' 5 
Q. 
O 
.C 
c < 
0 
' 
-
-
_L 
I 1 I I 1 
(a) 
1 1 | 1 M 
l-l 1 1 M | 1 1 1 I I 
<Z) • 
P> • 
@/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/,' 
./ 
/ 3 ^ \ ^ 
Jn^\ ^% 
t ^ \ 
r 
\L. 
\ 
• ' I 
11111ii 11 
1 • ' i 
S350 
i ' ' i 
1 
-
-
-
_ 
: 
i 
20 
i - r r i i i i [ i i i i-i i i i i-| r r i n i i i i | i i i i i i i i i 
/ <$/ 
S450 : 
3 / 
/• 
(b) 
i 
i i i 
i i i i i i i 11 i i 
1900 
2000 
2100 
Year 
2200 
2300 
1900 
2000 
2100 
Year 
2200 
2300 
£ 
y 
O 16 
? 
1 
F 
» 10 
CM 
o 
o 
.a 
c 
(D 
R1 9 
D. 
o 
.c 
c < 
0 
- (c) 
-
' I ' l l ' 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 -1 1 1 1 1 '1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
CO- 
Q>. 
3/ 
/' 
/ 
/ 
/ / 
.'/ 
/ ^ J ^ ^ > ^ 
/ / ' P ^ ^ S O s X 
r^^ 
• i l l 
i 
• ' ' i 
' ' ' 
S550 . 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
20 
i i 
i i i i i i i | 
i i i i .1 i i i i •( 
i i i i i r i i 
i | 
i i i i i i 
r \ 
i 
(d) 
S650 
1 I I I I I I I } I I 
I 
I I I I 
1900 
2000 
2100 
Year 
2200 
2300 
1900 
2000 
2100 
Year 
2200 
2300 
•J* 
u 
O 1b 
<n 
c 1 
.2 
F 
» 10 
CM 
8 
c 
CD 
o 5 
a o 
.c 
c < 
0 
1 
-
--
. i 
(e) 
1 1 | 
1 1 1 1 -1 1 1 1 1 | 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
^ / 
^ 
/ / 
/ A ^ ^ ^ ^ . 
/yf 
^ v ^ \ 
tr^ 
\^ 
^ 
^ 
^ 
i l l 
1 
I l 
1 | 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
S750 . 
--
-
1 1 
1 1 
i 
1900 
2000 
2100 
Year 
2200 
2300 
Figure 1.13: Anthropogenic C0 2 emissions leading to stabilisation at concentrations of 350, 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv, via the 
specified concentration profiles shown in Figure 1.12, for a range of different carbon cycle models. The bold line indicates emissions 
calculated using the Bern model. 

64 
CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
I 
350 
450 
550 
650 
Stabilised C0 2 concentration (ppmv) 
750 
Figure 1.14: Accumulated anthropogenic C0 2 emissions over the period 1990 to 2200 (GtC) plotted against the final stabilised 
concentration level. Also shown are the accumulated ocean uptake and the increase of C0 2 in the atmosphere. The curves for 
accumulated anthropogenic emissions and ocean uptake were calculated using the model of Siegenthaler and Joos (1992). The shaded 
areas show the spread of results from a range of carbon cycle model calculations. The difference (i.e., the accumulated anthropogenic 
emissions minus the total of the atmospheric increase and the accumulated ocean uptake) gives the cumulative change in terrestrial 
biomass. 
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 
Year 
Figure 1.15: Concentration uncertainties associated with the C02 fertilisation effect for the IS92a emission scenario. The central curve 
shows the concentration projection using "best guess" model parameters using the model of Wigley (1993), which is similar to 
projections using other models. For the upper and lower curves the C02 fertilisation effect was decreased to 10% NPP enhancement 
(from 2b% for the "best guess" simulation) and increased to 40% NPP enhancement for a CO, doubling from 340 ppmv to 680 ppmv 
As explained in Wigley (1993), this assessment also captures some of the uncertainties arising from ocean flux uncertainties, through 
the need to balance the contemporary carbon budget within realistic limits. 

CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
65 
1980s, the model's future projections were closer together 
than if the experiment had been less constrained. In 
addition, fossil fuel and cement emissions were prescribed 
for the 1980s; had the uncertainty in those numbers (about 
10%) been allowed for, there would have been a wider 
range of model parameters for ocean and biospheric 
processes. Moreover, the results in Figures 1.13 and 1.14 
do not account for possible climate feedbacks on the 
carbon cycle (see Section 1.4). 
Although a complete assessment of model sensitivity 
and uncertainties (e.g., following Gardner and Trabalka, 
1985) was outside the scope of the initial exercise carried 
out for this assessment, several specific model sensitivities 
have been studied. Figure 1.15 shows the sensitivity of 
future concentrations under emission scenario IS92a to 
varied strength of biospheric uptake. In this experiment 
(Wigley, 1993), the effectiveness of CO, fertilisation was 
varied across the range thought to be reasonable (10-40% 
enhancements of plant growth for a doubling of CO-,). 
Significant changes in projected concentrations occur 
depending upon the CO, fertilisation factor used, by 
approximately ± 14% over 1990 to 2100. Figure 1.16a 
shows an uncertainty assessment for the emissions 
corresponding to the S450 and S650 stabilisation cases, 
using the model of Wigley (1993). The effectiveness of 
CO, fertilisation was varied from 10% to 40% NPP 
enhancement for a CO, doubling (compared with the 
baseline case for this model of 26%), leading to lower and 
higher emissions, respectively, by up to ±1.4 GtC/yr for 
S650 and ±1.1 GtC/yr for S450. Figure 1.16b shows a 
similar assessment of uncertainty associated with 
concentrations corresponding to the S450 and S650 
stabilisation profiles that result when the strength of 
terrestrial uptake of CO, (via fertilisation of plant growth) 
is varied. 
While the sensitivity of the global carbon budget to the 
strength of CO, fertilisation does not appear great, if 
biospheric release were to exceed uptake in the future as a 
result of climate feedbacks (e.g., Smith and Shugart, 1993) 
or land use emissions (e.g., Esser, 1990), atmospheric 
concentrations could be significantly greater than those 
shown here: effects of changing land use could add 100s of 
GtC to the atmosphere (for comparison see Figure 1.14), 
over the next one to several centuries. Different 
assumptions about land use changes would produce 
different results. For example, if large areas were 
deforested, in the absence of substantial regrowth the 
capacity of the terrestrial biosphere to act as a sink would 
be reduced; hence, more CO, would remain in the 
atmosphere. 
The effects of varying land use practices have not been 
assessed directly in the stabilisation exercise to date, but 
the changes in biospheric carbon storage from alternate 
land use scenarios, mitigation efforts, and climatic effects 
>• 
9 
o 
0) 
o 
in 
P 
0) 
"ro 
m 
_5 
T) 
— 
15 
14 
13 
12 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 
R 
b 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
I ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' ' I 
(a) 
40% NPP enhancement 
26% NPP enhancement 
— — 10% NPP enhancement 
I i i i i I 
I i i i i 
2000 
2050 
2100 
2150 
2200 
2250 
2300 
Year 
o 
O 
800 
750 
700 
650 
600 
550 
500 
450 
400 
350 
- 1 — 
"(b) 
-
-
-
-
' 
i — 
i 
i 
i 
. 
i 
— — 10% NPP enhancement 
26% NPP enhancement 
40% NPP enhancement 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ -
/ 
/ 
/ 
/
.
-
•
• 
/ / . 
/ / 
W " 
" 
//• 
'ft 
• 
' 
-
. 
-
-
-
-
, 
S650 
'S450 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
Year 
2400 
2500 
Figure 1.16: (a) Industrial emission uncertainties for 
concentration stabilisation profiles S450 and S650 associated 
with the CO, fertilisation effect, obtained using the model of 
Wigley (1993). The baseline emissions results are shown by the 
bold full lines. These correspond to a CO, fertilisation parameter 
equivalent to an increase in NPP of 26% for a C 0 2 doubling. For 
the upper and lower (dashed) curves, the CO, fertilisation effect 
was increased to 40% NPP enhancement and decreased to 10% 
NPP enhancement, respectively. Note that it is the relative effects 
that are important here and that the baseline case is only one of 
the range of results presented in Figure 1.13. (b) Concentration 
uncertainties for stabilization profiles S450 and S650 associated 
with the CO, fertilisation effect. The baseline concentration 
profiles are shown as bold full lines. The dashed curves bounding 
these represent the range of uncertainty associated with 
uncertainties in terrestrial sink processes. They were constructed 
by first estimating the industrial emissions using "best guess" 
carbon cycle model parameters, which include a 1980s-mean 
ocean flux of 2.0 Gt C/yr and a CO, fertilization parameter 
equivalent to an increase in NPP of 26%, for a CO, doubling. The 
fertilization parameter was then decreased to 10%, and increased 
to 40% to obtain the higher and lower concentration projections. 
Essentially, this answers the question: what if we devise an 
industrial emissions poliey based on a particular fertilization 
effect, and this happens to be either too high or too low? Model 
results were obtained using the model of Wigley (1993) 

66 
CO, and the Carbon Cycle 
(e.g., Esser, 1990; Smith and Shugart, 1993; Vloedbeld 
and Leemans, 1993) discussed in Section 1.4.2 are large 
enough to influence integrated emissions for a given 
concentration profile (Figure 1.14) substantially. 
References 
Aber, J.D., J.K. Nadlchoffer, PA. Steadier and J.M. Melillo, 
1989: Nitrogen saturation in northern forest ecosystems -
hypotheses and implications. BioScience, 39, 378-386. 
Alcamo, J., G.J.J. Kreileman, M. Krol and G. Zuidema, 1994a: 
Modeling the global society-biosphere-climate system. Part 1: 
model description and testing. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 
76, 1-35. 
Alcamo, J., G.J. Van den Born, A.F. Bouwman, B. de Haan, K. 
Klein-Goldewijk, O. Klepper, R. Leemans, J.A. Oliver, B. de 
Vries, II. van der Woerd and R. van den Wijngaard, 1994b: 
Modelling the global society-biosphere-climate system. Part 2: 
computed scenarios. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 76, 37-78. 
Andres. R.J., G. Marland, T. Boden and S. Bischoff, 1994: 
Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel consumption and 
cement manufacture 1751 to 1991 and an estimate for their 
isotopic composition and latitudinal distribution. In: The 
Carbon Cycle. T.M.L. Wigley and D. Schimel (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Stanford, CA. (In press) 
Archer, I), and E. Maier-Reimer, 1994: Effect of deep-sea 
sedimentary calcite preservation on atmospheric CO, 
concentration. Nature, 367, 260-263. 
Bacastow, R. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1990: Ocean-circulation 
model of the carbon cycle. Climate Dynamics, 4, 95-125. 
Barnola. J-M., D. Raynaud, Y.S. Korotkevitch and C. Lorius, 
1487: Vostok ice core provides 160,000 year record of 
atmospheric CO,. Nature, 329, 408-414. 
Barnola. J-M., P. Pimienta, D. Raynaud and T.S. Korotkevich, 
1991: CO,-climate relationship as deduced from the Vostok 
ice core: a re-examination based on new measurement and on a 
re-evaluation of the air dating. Tellus, 43B, 83-90. 
Barnola. J-M., M. Anklin, J. Porcheron, D. Raynaud, J. 
Schwander and B. Stauffer, 1994: CO^ evolution during the 
last millenium as recorded by Antarctic and Greenland ice. 
Tellus. (In press) 
Bazzaz. I .A. and ED. Fajer. 1992: Plant life in a CO,-rich 
world. Scientific American, 266, 68-74. 
Bender. M.L.. T. Sowers, J-M. Barnola and J. Chappellaz, 1994: 
Changes in the 0-,/N-, ratio of the atmosphere during recent 
decades reflected in the composition of air in the firn at Vostok 
Station, Antarctica. Geophyx. Res. Lett., 21, 189-192. 
Birdsey. R.A.. A.J. Plantiga and L.S. Heath, 1993: Past and 
prospective carbon storage in United States forests. Forest 
Ecology Management, 58. 33-40. 
Boden. T.A.. R.J. Sepanski and F.W. Stoss, 1991: Trends '91: A 
compendium of data on global change. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, ORNL/CDIAC-46. 
Briffa. K.R.. T.S. Bartholin. D. Eckstein. P.O. Jones. W. Karlen. 
III. Schweingruber and P. Zetterberg, 1990: A 1,400 tree-ring 
record of summer temperatures in Fennoscandia. Nature, 346, 
434-439. 
Broecker. W.S. and T-H. Peng. 1994: Stratospheric contribution 
to the global bomb radiocarbon inventory: Model versus 
observation. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 8, 377-384. 
Broecker, W.S., T. Takahashi, H.J. Simpson and T-H. Peng, 
1979: Fate of fossil fuel carbon dioxide and the global carbon 
budget. Science, 206, 409-418. 
Broecker, W.S., T-H. Peng, G. Ostlund and M. Stuiver, 1985: 
The distribution of bomb radiocarbon in the ocean. J. Geophys. 
Res. 90, 6953-6970. 
Brown, H.T. and F. Escombe, 1905: On the variations in the 
amount of carbon dioxide in the air of Kew during the years 
1893-1901. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 
Biology, 76, 118-121. 
Brown, S. and A.E. Lugo, 1984: Biomass of tropical forests: a 
new estimate based on forest volumes. Science, 223, 1290-
1293. 
Brown, S. and A.E. Lugo, 1992: Aboveground biomass estimates 
for tropical moist forests of the Brazilian Amazon. 
Interciencia, 17, 8-18. 
Chameides, W.L., PS. Kasibhatla, J. Yienger and H. Levy II. 
1994: Growth of continental-scale metro-agro-plexes. regional 
ozone production, and world food production. Science, 264, 
74-77. 
Chappellaz, J., T. Blunier and D. Raynaud, 1993: Synchronous 
changes in atmospheric CH4 and Greenland climate between 
40 and 8 kyr BP. Nature, 366, 443-445. 
Ciais, P., P. Tans, J.W. White, M. Trolier, R. Francey, J. Berry. 
D. Randall, P. Sellers, J.G. Collatz and D. Schimel, 1994: 
Partitioning of ocean and land uptake of CO, as inferred by 
513 measurements from the NOAA/CMDL global air sampling 
network. J. Geophys. Res. (In press) 
CLIMAP Project Members, 1984: The last interglacial ocean. 
Quaternary Research, 21, 123-224. 
Cole, C.V. and R.D. Heil, 1981: Phosphorus effects on terrestrial 
nitrogen cycling. In: Terrestrial Nitrogen Cycles, F.E. Clark 
and T. Rosswall (eds.), Ecological Bulletin, Swedish Natural 
Science Research Council, Stockholm, pp. 363-374. 
Coleman, J.S. and F.A. Bazzaz, 1992: Effects of CO, and 
temperature on growth and resource use of co-occurring C, 
and C4 annuals. Ecology, 73, 1244-1259. 
Coleman, J.S., K.D.M. McConnaughay and F.A. Bazzaz, 1993: 
Elevated CO, and plant nitrogen use: is reduced tissue nitrogen 
concentration size-dependent? Oecologia, 93, 195-200. 
Comins, H.N. and R.E. McMurtrie, 1993: Long-term response of 
nutrient limited forests to CO, enrichment: equilibrium 
behavior of plant-soil models. Ecological Applications, 3, 666-
681. 
Conway, T.J., P. Tans, L.S. Waterman, K.W. Thoning, D.R. 
Buanerkitzis, K.A. Maserie and N. Zhang, 1994: Evidence for 
interannual variability of the carbon cycle from the 
NOAA/CMDL global air sampling network. J. Geophys. Res.. 
99D, 22, 831-22, 855. 
Cramer, W.P. and A.M. Solomon, 1993: Climate classification 
and future global redistribution of agricultural land. Climau-
Research, 3, 97-110. 
Cubasch, U., K. Hasselmann, H. Hoeck, E. Maier-Reimer. I . 
Mikolajewicz, B.D. Santer and R. Sausen, 1992: Time 
dependent greenhouse warming computations with a coupkJ 
ocean-atmosphere model. Climate Dynamics, 8, 55-69. 
Dai. A. and I.Y. Fung, 1993: Can climate variability contribute : > 

CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
67 
the "missing" CO-, sink? Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 1, 
599-609. 
Dansgaard, W., S.J. Johnson, H.B. Clausen, D. Dahl-Jensen, 
N.S. Gunderstrup, C.U. Hammer, J.P. Steffensen, A. 
Sveinbjornsdoltir, J. Jouzel and G. Bond, 1993: Evidence for 
general instability of past climate from a 250-kyr ice-core 
record. Nature, 364, 218-220. 
D'Arrigo, R.D. and G.C. Jacoby, 1993: Tree growth-climate 
relationships at the northern boreal forest tree line of North 
America: evaluation of potential response to increasing carbon 
dioxide. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 7, 525-535. 
Degens, E.T., S. Kempe and J.E. Richey, 1991: Summary: 
biogeochemistry of major world rivers. In: Biogeochemistry of 
Major World Rivers, E.T. Degens, S. Kempe and J.E. Richey 
(eds.), SCOPE Report 42, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 
pp.323-347. 
Delmas, R.J., 1993: A natural artefact in Greenland ice-core C0 2 
measurements. Tellus, 45B, 391-396. 
Delmas, R.J., J.M. Ascencio and M. Legrand, 1980: Polar ice 
evidence that atmospheric CO, 20,000 yr B.P. was 50% of 
present. Nature, 284, 155-157. 
Detwiler, R.P. and C.A.S. Hall, 1988: Tropical forests and the 
global carbon cycle. Science, 239, 42-47. 
Diaz, S., J.P. Grime, J. Harris and E. McPherson, 1993: Evidence 
of a feedback mechanism limiting plant response to elevated 
carbon dioxide. Nature, 364, 616-617. 
Dixon, R.K., S.A. Brown, R.A. Houghton, A.M. Solomon, M.C. 
Trexler and J. Wisniewski, 1994: Carbon pools and flux of 
global forest ecosystems. Science, 263, 185-190. 
Donigian, A.S., Jr., TO. Barnwell Jr., R.B. Jackson IV, A.S. 
Patwardhan, K.B. Weinrich, A.L. Rowell, R.V. Chinnaswamy 
and C.V. Cole, 1994: Assessment of alternative management 
practices and policies affecting soil carbon in agroecosystems 
of the Central United States. Environmental Protection 
Agency, EPA/600/R-94/067. 
Drake, E.G., 1992: The impact of rising CO-, on ecosystem 
production. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 64, 25-44. 
Druffel, E.R.M., P.M. Williams, J.E. Bauer and J.R. Ertel, 1992: 
Cycling of dissolved particulate organic matter in the open 
ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 97C, 15,639-15,659. 
Duce, R.A., PS. Liss, J.T. Merrill, E.L. Atlas, P. Buat-Mcnard, 
B.B. Hicks, J.M. Miller, J.M. Prospero, R. Arimoto, T.M. 
Church, W. Ellis, J.N. Galloway, L. Hansen, T.D. Jickells, 
A.H. Knap, K.H. Reinhardt, B. Schneider, A. Soudine, J.J. 
Tokos, S. Tsunogai, R. Wollast and M. Zhou, 1991: The 
atmospheric input of trace species to the world ocean. Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles, 5, 193-259. 
Eisele, K.A., D.S. Schimel, L.A. Kapustka and W.J. Parton, 
1989: Effects of available P and N:P ratios on non-symbiotic 
dinitrogen fixation in tallgrass prairie soils. Oecologia, 79, 
471-474. 
Enting, I.G. 1987: The interannual variation in the seasonal cycle 
of carbon dioxide concentration at Mauna Loa. J. Geophys. 
Res., 92(D), 5497-5504. 
Enting, I.G., 1993: Inverse problems in atmospheric constituent 
studies. III. Estimating errors in surface sources. Inverse 
Problems, 9, 649-665. 
Enting, I.G., 1994: CO,-climate feedbacks: aspects of detection. 
In: Feedbacks in the Global Climate System, G.M. Woodwell 
(ed.). Oxford University Press. New York. (In press) 
Enting, I.G. and J.V. Mansbridge, 1989: Seasonal sources and 
sinks of atmospheric CO,: direct inversion of filtered data. 
Tellus, 41, 111-126. 
Enting, I.G. and J.V. Mansbridge, 1991: Latitudinal distribution 
of sources and sinks of CO,: results of an inversion study. 
Tellus, 43, 156-170. 
Enting, I.G., R.J. Francey and CM. Trudinger, 1994a: Synthesis 
study of the atmospheric CO, and 13C02 budgets. Tellus (In 
press) 
Enting, I.G., T.M.L. Wigley and M. Heimann, 1994b: Future 
emissions and concentrations of carbon dioxide: key 
ocean/atmosphere/land analyses. CSIRO Division of 
Atmospheric Research Technical Paper No. 31. 
Esser, G., 1990: Modeling global terrestrial sources and sinks of 
CO., with special reference to soil organic matter. In: Soils and 
the Greenhouse Effect, A.F. Bouwman (ed.), John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, pp.247-262. 
Eswaran, H., E. Van den Berg and P. Reich, 1993: Organic 
carbon in soils of the world. Soil Science Society of America 
Journal, 57, 192-194. 
Evans, G.T. and M.J.R. Fasham (eds.), 1993: Towards a Model 
of Ocean Biogeochemical 
Processes. 
NATO Workshop, 
Springer-Vcrlag, New York, 350 pp. 
Falkowski, P C . and C. Wilson, 1992: Phytoplankton 
productivity in the North Pacific ocean since 1990 and 
implications for absorption of anthropogenic C0 2. Nature, 
358,741-743. 
FAO (United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation), 1993: 
Forest Resources Assessment 1990: Tropical Countries. FAO 
Forestry Paper No. 112, Rome, Italy. 
Fearnside, P.M., 1992: Forest biomass in Brazilian Amazonia: 
comments on the estimate by Brown and Lugo. Interciencia, 
17, 19-27. 
Friedli, H., H. Loetscher, H. Oeschger, U. Siegenthaler and B. 
Stauffer, 1986: Ice core record of the 13C/12C ratio of 
atmospheric CO, in the past two centuries. Nature, 324, 237-
2%. 
Friedlingstein, P., C. Delire, J-F. Miiller and J-C. Gerard, 1992: 
The climate induced variation of the continental biosphere: a 
model simulation of the Last Glacial Maximum. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 19, 897-900. 
Fung, I.Y. and T. Takahashi, 1994: A re-evaluation of empirical 
estimates of the oceanic sink of anthropogenic C02. In: The 
Carbon Cycle, T.M.L. Wigley and D. Schimel (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Stanford, CA. (In press) 
Garcon, V., F. Thomas, C.S. Wong and J.F. Minster, 1992: 
Gaining insight into the seasonal variability of C 0 2 at 
O.W.S.P. using an upper ocean model. Deep Sea Research, 30, 
921-938. 
Gardner, R.H. and JR. Trabalka, 1985: Methods of Uncertainty 
Analysis for a Global Carbon Dioxide Model, US Department 
of Energy, Carbon Dioxide Research Division, Technical 
Report TR024, 41 pp. 
Gifford, R.M., 1993: Implications of CO, effects on vegetation 
for the global carbon budget. In: The Global Carbon Cycle, 
M. Heimann (ed.). Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study 
Institute, II Ciocco, Italy, September 8-20, 1991, pp. 165-205. 
Gifford, R.M., 1994: The global carbon cycle: a viewpoint on the 

6% 
CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
missing sink. Australian Journal ofPlant Physiology, 21, 1-15. 
Graumiich, L.J., 1991: Subalpine tree growth, climate, and 
increasing CO,: an assessment of recent growth trends. 
Ecology, 72, 1-11. 
GRIP Project Members, 1993: Climatic instability during the 
last interglacial period revealed in the Greenland summit ice-
core. Nature, 364, 203-207. 
Grootes, P.M., M. Stuvier, J.W.C. White, S. Johnsen and J. 
Jouzel, 1993: Comparison of oxygen isotope records from 
GISP2 and GRIP Greenland ice cores. Nature, 366, 552-554. 
Heimann, M. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1994: On the relations 
between the uptake of CO, and its isotopes by the ocean. 
Global Hiogeochemical Cycles. (Submitted) 
Heimann, M., CD. Keeling and C.J. Tucker, 1989: A three 
dimensional model of atmospheric CO, transport based on 
observed winds: 3. Seasonal cycle and synoptic time-scale 
variations. In: Aspects of Climate Variability in the Pacific 
and the Western Americas, D.H. Peterson (ed.), American 
Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, pp. 277-303. 
Heinze, C, E. Maier-Reimer and K. Winn, 1991: Glacial pCO, 
reduction by the world ocean: experiments with the Hamburg 
carbon cycle model. Paleoceanography, 6, 395-430. 
Hesshaimer, V., M. Heimann and I. Levin, 1994: Radiocarbon 
evidence suggesting a smaller oceanic CO, sink than hitherto 
assumed. Nature, 370, 201-203. 
Houghton, R.A., 1993: Is carbon accumulating in the northern 
temperate /one. Global Riogeochemical Cycles, 7, 611-617. 
Houghton, R.A., 1994a: Emissions of carbon from land-use 
change. In: The Carbon Cycle, T.M.L. Wigley and D. Schimel 
(eds.), Cambridge University Press, Stanford, CA. (In press) 
Houghton, R.A., 1994b: Effects of land-use change, surface 
temperature and CO, concentration on terrestrial stores of 
carbon. In: Riotic Feedbacks in the Global Climate System: 
Will the Warming Speed the Warming?, G.M. Woodwcll and 
F.T. Mackenzie (eds.), Oxford University Press, Oxford. (In 
press) 
Houghton, R.A. and G.M. Woodwcll. 1989: Global climatic 
change. Scientific American, 260. 36-47. 
Houghton. R.A. and D.L. Skole, 1990: Carbon. In: The Earth as 
Transformed by Hitman Action, B.L. Turner II, W.C. Clark, 
R.W. Kales. .I.E. Richards, J.T. Mathews and W.B. Meyer 
(eds). Cambridge University Press. New York. pp. 393-408. 
Houghton. R.A., R.D. Boone, JR. Fruci, J.E. Hobbie, J.M. 
Melillo, CA. Palm, B.J. Peterson, G.R. Shaver, G.M. 
Woodwcll, B. Moore, D.L. Skole and N. Myers, 1987: The 
flux of carbon from terrestrial ecosystems to the atmosphere in 
1980 due to changes in land use: geographic distribution of the 
global flux. Tellus. 39B, 122-139. 
Idso. K.E. and SB. Idso. 1994: Plant responses to atmospheric 
CO, enrichment in the face of environmental constraints: a 
review of the last 10 years' research. Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology. 69, 153-203. 
Idso. SB. and B.A. Kimball. 1993: Tree growth in carbon 
dioxide enriched air and its implications for global carbon 
cycling and maximum levels of atmospheric CO,. Global 
Hiogeochemical Cycles. 7. 537-555. 
1NPE. 1992: Deforestation in Brazilian Amazonia. Institute 
Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais. Sao Paulo, Brazil. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1990: 
Climate Change: the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, 
J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, B.A. 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.). Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK. 200 pp. 
Jenkinson, D.S., J.M. Potts, J.N. Perry, V. Barnett, K. Coleman 
and A.E. Johnston, 1994: Trends in herbage yields over the last 
century on the Rothamsted long-term continuous hay 
experiment. Journal of Agricultural Science, 122, 365-374. 
Johnsen, S.J., H.B. Clausen, W. Dansgaard, K. Furher, N. 
Gundestrup, C.U. Hammer, P. Iverson, J. Jouzel, B. Stauffer 
and J.P. Steffensen, 1992: Irregular glacial interstadials 
recorded in a new Greenland ice core. Nature, 359, 311-313. 
Joos, F., 1992: Modellierung und verteilung von spurenstoffen 
im ozean und des globalen kohlenstoffkreislaufes. Ph.D. 
Thesis, University of Bern, Bern. 
Joos, F., J.L. Sarmiento and U. Siegenthaler, 1991a: Estimates of 
the effect of Southern Ocean iron fertilization on atmospheric 
CO, concentrations. Nature, 349, 772-774. 
Joos, F., U. Siegenthaler and J.L. Sarmiento, 1991b: Possible 
effects of iron fertilization in the Southern Ocean on 
atmospheric CO, concentration. Global 
Biogeochemical 
Cycles, 5, 135-15o". 
Jouzel, J., N.I. Barkov, J-M. Barnola, M. Bender, J. Chappellaz, 
C. Genthon, V.M. Kotlyakov, V. Lipenkov, C. Lorius, J.R. 
Petit, 0. Raynaud, G. Raisbeck, C. Ritz, T. Sowers, M. 
Stievenard, F. Yiou and P. Yiou, 1993: Extending the Vostok 
ice-core record of paleoclimate to the penultimate glacial 
period. Nature, 364, 407-412. 
Keeling, CD., 1973: Industrial production of carbon dioxide 
from fossil fuels and limestone. Tellus, 25, 174-198. 
Keeling, CD., 1993: Surface ocean CO,. In: The Global Carbon 
Cycle, M. Heimann (ed.), Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg. 
pp.413-429. 
Keeling, CD. and T.P. Whorf, 1994: Decadal oscillations in 
global temperature and atmospheric carbon dioxide. In: 
Natural Variability of Climate on Decade-to-Century Time 
Scales, W.A. Sprigg (ed.), National Academy of Sciences. 
Washington, DC. (In press) 
Keeling, CD., R.B. Bacastow, A.F. Carter, S.C Piper, T.P. 
Whorf, M. Heimann. W.G. Mook and H. Roeloffzen, 1989a: A 
three-dimensional model of atmospheric CO, transport based 
on observed winds: 1. Analysis and observational data. In: 
Aspects of Climate Variability in the Pacific and Western 
Americas. Geophysical Monograph 55, D.H. Peterson (ed). 
American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, pp.165-236. 
Keeling, CD., S.C. Piper and M. Heimann, 1989b: A three-
dimensional model of atmospheric CO, transport based on 
observed winds: 4. Mean annual gradients and interannual 
variations. In: Aspects of Climate Variability in the Pacific and 
Western Americas. Geophysical Monograph 55, D.H. Peterson 
(ed.), American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC pp.3(l5-
363. 
Keeling, R.F. and R. Shcrtz, 1992: Seasonal and intcrannu.il 
variations in atmospheric oxygen and implications for the 
global carbon cycle. Nature, 358, 723-727. 
Keeling, R.F. and J. Sevcringhaus. 1994: Atmospheric oxygen 

C07 and the Carbon Cycle 
69 
measurements and the carbon cycle. In: The Carbon Cycle, 
T.M.L. Wigley and D. Schimel (eds.), Cambridge University 
Press, Stanford, CA. (In press) 
Keir, R.S., 1994: Effects of ocean circulation changes and their 
effects on C02. In: The Carbon Cycle. T.M.L. Wigley and D. 
Schimel (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Stanford, CA. (In 
press) 
Kempe, S. and K. Pegler, 1991: Sinks and sources of CO, in 
coastal seas: the North Sea. Tellus, 43, 224-235. 
Kolchugina, T.P. and T.S. Vinson, 1993: Carbon sources and 
sinks in forest biomes of the former Soviet Union. Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles, 7, 291-304. 
Korner, C. and J.A. Arnone III, 1992: Responses to elevated 
carbon dioxide in artificial tropical ecosystems. Science, 257, 
1672-1675. 
Krankina, O.N. and R.K. Dixon, 1994: Forest management 
options to conserve and sequester terrestrial carbon in the 
Russian Federation. World Resources Review, 6, 88-101. 
Kurz, K.D. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1993: Iron fertilization of the 
austral ocean - a Hamburg model assessment. Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles, 7, 229-244. 
LaMarche, V.C.J., D.A. Graybill and M.R. Rose, 1984: 
Increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide: tree ring evidence for 
growth enhancement in natural vegetation. Science, 225, 1019-
1021. 
Leggett, J., W.J. Pepper and R.J. Swart, 1992: Emissions 
scenarios for IPCC: an update. In: Climate Change 1992: The 
Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.),Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. pp.69-95. 
Leuenberger, M., U. Siegenthaler and C.C. Langway, 1992: 
Carbon isotope composition of atmospheric CO-, during the 
last ice age from an Antarctic ice core. Nature, 357, 488-490. 
Maclntyre, P., 1978: On the temperature coefficient of pCO, in 
seawater. Climatic Change, 1, 349-354. 
Maier-Reimer, E., 1993: The biological pump in the greenhouse. 
Global and Planetary Change, 8, 13-15. 
Maier-Reimer, E. and K. Hasselmann, 1987: Transport and 
storage in the ocean - An inorganic ocean-circulation carbon 
cycle model. Climate Dynamics, 2, 63-90. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1993: Century-scale effects of 
increased atmospheric C0 2 on the ocean-atmosphere system. 
Nature, 364, 215-218. 
Manning, M.R., 1993: Seasonal cycles in atmospheric CO, 
concentrations. In: The Global Carbon Cycle, M. Heimann 
(ed.), Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, pp.65-94. 
Marland, G. and R.M. Rotty, 1984: Carbon dioxide emissions 
from fossil fuels: a procedure for estimation and results for 
1950-1982. Tellus, 368, 232-261. 
Martin, J.H., 1990: Glacial-interglacial CO, change: the iron 
hypothesis. Paleoceanography, 5, 1-13. 
Maybeck, M., 1993: Natural sources of C, N, P, and S. In: 
Interactions of C, N, P, and S Biogeochemical Cycles and 
Global Change, R. Wollast (cd.), Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
pp. 163-193. 
Melillo, J.M., J.R. Fruci, R.A. Houghton, B. Moore III and D.L. 
Skole, 1988: Land-use change in the Soviet Union between 
1850 and 1980: causes of a net release of CO, to the 
atmosphere. Tellus, 40B, 166-128. 
Melillo, J.M., A.D. McGuire, D.W. Kicklighter, B. Moore III, 
C.J. Vorosmarty and A.L. Schloss, 1993: Global climate 
change and terrestrial net primary production. Nature, 363, 
234-240. 
Melillo, J.M., D.W. Kicklighter, A.D. McGuire, W.T. Peterjohn 
and K. Newkirk, 1994: Global change and its effects on soil 
organic carbon stocks. In: Dahlem Conference Proceedings, 
John Wiley and Sons, New York. (In press) 
Metherell, A.K., 1992: Simulation of soil organic matter 
dynamics and nutrient cycling in agroecosystems. Ph.D. 
Dissertation, Colorado State University, Fort Collins. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., S. Manabc, V. Meleshko and T. Tokioka, 1990: 
Equilibrium climate change - and its implications for 
the future. 
In: Climate Change: 
the 1990 
Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums 
(eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
pp.131-172. 
Moore, B. Ill, and B.H. Braswell Jr., 1994: The lifetime of 
excess atmospheric carbon dioxide. Global Biogeochemical 
Cyc/f.s, 8, 23-38. 
Neftel, A., H. Oeschger, J. Schwander, B. Stauffer and R. 
Zumbrunn, 1982: Ice core sample measurements give 
atmospheric CO, content during the past 40,000 years. Nature, 
295, 220-223. 
Neftel, A., E. Moor, H. Oeschger and B. Stauffer, 1985: 
Evidence from polar ice cores for the increase in atmospheric 
CO, in the past two centuries. Nature, 315, 45-47. 
Neftel, A., H. Oeschger, T. Staffelbach and B. Stauffer, 1988: 
CO, record in the Byrd ice core 50,000-5,000 years BP. 
Nature, 331,609-611. 
Norby, R.J., CA. Gunderson, S.0. Wullschleger, E.G. O'Neill 
and M.K. McCracken, 1992: Productivity and compensatory 
response of yellow-poplar trees in elevated C02. Nature, 357, 
322-324. 
Oechel, W.C., S.J. Hastings, G. Vourlitis, M. Jenkins, G. 
Riechers and N. Grulke, 1993: Recent change of Arctic tundra 
ecosystems from a net carbon dioxide sink to a source. Nature, 
361, 520-523. 
Oeschger, H., U. Siegenthaler and A. Guglemann, 1975: A box-
diffusion model to study the carbon dioxide exchange in 
nature. Tellus, 27, 168-192. 
Ojima. D.S., W.J. Parton, OS. Schimel, J.M.O. Scurlock and 
T.G.F. Kittel, 1993: Modelling the effects of climatic and C0 2 
changes on grassland storage of soil carbon. Water, Air, and 
Soil Pollution, 70, 643-657. 
Orr. J.C., 1993: Accord between ocean models predicting uptake 
of anthropogenic CO,. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 70, 465-
481. 
Owensby, C.E., P.I. Coyne, J.M. Ham, L.M. Auen and A.K. 
Knapp, 1993: Biomass production in a tallgrass prairie 
ecosystem exposed to ambient and elevated C02. Ecological 
Applications, 3, 644-653. 
Peng, T-H. and W.S. Broecker, 1991: Dynamic limitations on the 
Antarctic iron fertilization strategy. Nature, 349, 227-229. 
Peterson, B.J. and J.M. Melillo, 1985: The potential storage of 
carbon caused by eutrophication of the biosphere. Tellus, 37B, 
117-127. 
Pulley, H.W., H.B. Johnson, B.D. Marino and H.S. Mayeux, 
1993: Increase in C-, plant water-use efficiency and biomass 

70 
CO-, and the Carbon Cycle 
over Glacial to present CO, concentrations. Nature, 361, 61-
63. 
Poorter, H., 1993: Interspecific variation in the growth response 
of plants to an elevated ambient CO, concentration. Vegetatio, 
104/105, 77-97. 
Post, W.M., J. Pastor, P.J. Zinke and AG. Stangenberger, 1985: 
Global patterns of soil nitrogen storage. Nature, 317, 613-
616. 
Potter, C.S., J.T. Randerson, C.B. Field, PA. Matson, P.M. 
Vitousek, HA. Mooney and S.A. Klooster, 1993: Terrestrial 
ecosystem production: a process model based on global 
satellite and surface data. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 7, 
811-841. 
Prentice, K.C. and I.Y. Fung, 1990: The sensitivity of terrestrial 
carbon storage to climate change. Nature, 346, 48-51. 
Quay, P.O.. B. Tilhrook and C.S. Wong, 1992: Oceanic uptake 
of fossil fuel CO,: carbon-13 evidence. Science, 256, 74-79. 
Rastetter, E.B., R.B. McKane, G.R. Shaver and J.M. Melillo, 
1992: Changes in C storage by terrestrial ecosystems: how C-
N interactions restrict responses to CO-, and temperature. 
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 64, 327-344. 
Raynaud, D. and U. Siegenthaler, 1993: Role of trace gases: the 
problem of lead and lag. In: Global Changes in the Perspective 
of the Past, J.A. Eddy and H. Oeschger (eds.), John Wiley and 
Sons, Chichester, ppl73-188 . 
Raynaud, D., J. Jouzel, J-M.Barnola, J. Chappellaz, R.J. Delmas 
and C. Lorius, 1993: The ice record of greenhouse gases. 
Science, 259, 926-934. 
Riebesell, U., D.A. Wolf-Gladrow and V. Smetacek, 1993: 
Carbon dioxide limitation of marine phytoplankton growth 
rates. Nature, 361,249-251. 
Kochcfort. L. and F.A. Bazzaz, 1992: Growth response to 
elevated CO, in seedlings of four co-occurring birch species. 
Canadian.I ournal of Forestry Research, 22, 1583-1587. 
Rotmans. J. and M.G.J, den Elzen, 1993: Modelling feedback 
mechanisms in the carbon cycle: balancing the carbon budget. 
Tellus. 45K, 301-320. 
Sarmiento, J.L. and J.C. Orr, 1991: Three dimensional ocean 
model simulations of the impact of Southern Ocean nutrient 
depletion on atmospheric CO-, and ocean chemistry. Limnology 
and Oceanography, 36, 1928-1950. 
Sarmiento. J.L. and U. Siegenthaler, 1992: New production and 
the global carbon cycle. In: Primary Productivity 
and 
Biogeochemical Cycles in the Sea, P.G. Falkowski and A.D. 
Woodhead (eds.). Plenum Press, New York, pp317-332. 
Sarmiento. J.L. and E.T. Sundquist. 1992: Revised budget for 
the oceanic uptake of anthropogenic carbon dioxide. Nature, 
356. 589-593. 
Sarmiento, J.L., J.C. Orr and U. Siegenthaler, 1992: A 
perturbation simulation of CO, uptake in an ocean general 
circulation model../. Geophys. Res., 97, 3621-3645. 
Schimel, D.S., 1995: Terrestrial biogeochemical cycles: global 
estimates with remote sensing. Remote 
Sensing 
of 
Environment. (In press) 
Schimel. D.S., B.H. Braswell Jr.. E.A. Holland, R. McKeown, 
D.S. Ojima. T.H. Painter. W.J. Parton and A.R. Townsend. 
1994: Climatic, edaphic and biotic controls over storage and 
turnover of carbon in soils. Global Biogeochemical Cycles , 8, 
279-293. 
Schimel, D.S. and E.W. Sulzman, 1994: Variability in the Earth-
Climate system: decadal and longer timescales. In: The U.S. 
National Report (1991-1994) to the International Union of 
Geophysics and Geodessey, 
S.P. Nelson (ed.), American 
Geophysical Union, Washington, DC. (In press) 
Schindler, D.W. and S.E. Bayley, 1993: The biosphere as an 
increasing sink for atmospheric carbon: estimates from 
increased nitrogen deposition. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 
7, 717-734. 
Schlesinger, W.H., 1990: Evidence from chronosequence studies 
for a low carbon-storage potential of soils. Nature, 348, 232-234. 
Schlesinger, W.H., 1993: Response of the terrestrial biosphere to 
global climate change and human perturbation. Vegetatio, 
104/105, 295-305. 
Schlesinger, W.H. and J.M. Melack, 1981: Transport of organic 
carbon in the world's rivers. Tellus, 33, 172-187. 
Schulze, E.D., W. De Vries, M. Hauhs, K. Rosen, L. Rasmussen, 
O-C. Tann and J. Nilsson, 1989: Critical loads for nitrogen 
deposition in forest ecosystems. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 
48,451-456. 
Shaffer, G., 1993: Effects of the marine biota on global carbon 
cycling. In: The Global Carbon Cycle, M. Heimann (ed.). 
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, pp431-456. 
Shaver, G.R., W.D. Billings, F.S. Chapin III, A.E. Giblin, K.J. 
Nadelhoffer, W.C. Oechel and E.B. Rastetter, 1992: Global 
change and the carbon balance of Arctic ecosystems. 
BioScience, 42, 433-441. 
Siegenthaler, U. and H. Oeschger, 1987: Biospheric CO, 
emissions during the past 200 years reconstructed by 
deconcolution of ice core data. Tellus, 39B, 140-154. 
Siegenthaler, U. and F. Joos, 1992: Use of a simple model for 
studying oceanic tracer distributions and the global carbon 
cycle. Tellus, 44B, 186-207. 
Siegenthaler, U. and J.L. Sarmiento, 1993: Atmospheric carbon 
dioxide and the ocean. Nature, 365, 119-125. 
Siegenthaler, U., H. Friedli, H. Loeeetscher, E. Moor, A. Neftel, 
H. Oeschger and B. Stauffer, 1988: Stable-isotope ratios and 
concentration of CO, in air from polar ice cores. Ann. Glacioi.. 
10, 151-156. 
Skole, D. and C. Tucker, 1993: Tropical deforestation and habitat 
fragmentation in the Amazon: satellite data from 1978 to 1988. 
Science, 260, 1905-1910. 
Smith, T.M. and H.H. Shugart, 1993: The transient response of 
terrestrial carbon storage to a perturbed climate. Nature, 361. 
523 526. 
Stauffer, B., H. Hofer, H. Oeschger, J. Schwander and U. 
Siegenthaler, 1984: Atmospheric C0 2 concentration during the 
last glaciation. Ann. Glacioi, 5, 160-164. 
Stocker, T.F., W.S. Broecker and D.G. Wright, 1994: Carbon 
uptake experiments with a zonally-averaged global ocean 
circulation model. Tellus, 46B, 103-122. 
Suess, H.E., 1955: Radiocarbon concentration in modern wood. 
Science, 122, 415-417. 
Sugimura, Y. and Y. Suzuki, 1988: A high temperature catalytic 
oxidation method for non-volatile dissolved organic carbon in 
seawater by direct injection of a liquid sample. Marine 
Chemistry, 24, 105-131. 
Suzuki. Y.. 1993: On the measurement of DOC and DON in 
seawater. Marine Chemistry, 41. 287-288. 

COj and the Carbon Cycle 
71 
Takahashi, T., J. Olafsson, J.G. Goddard, D.W. Chipman and 
S.C. Sutherland, 1993: Seasonal variation of CO., and nutrients 
in the high-latitude surface oceans: a comparative study. 
Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 7, 843-878. 
Tans, P.P., T.J. Conway and T. Nakazawa, 1989: Latitudinal 
distribution of the sources and sinks of atmospheric carbon 
dioxide derived from surface observations and an atmospheric 
transport model. J. Geophys. Res., 94(D), 5151-5172. 
Tans, P.P., l.Y. Fung and T. Takahashi, 1990: Observational 
constraints on the global atmospheric CO, budget. Science, 
247, 1431-1438. 
Tans, P.P., J.A. Berry and R.F. Keeling, 1993: Oceanic UC/12C 
observations: a new window on ocean CO, uptake. Global 
Biogeochemical Cycles, 7, 353-368. 
Thomas, R.B., D.D. Richter, H. Ye, P.R. Heine and BR. Strain, 
1991: Nitrogen dynamics and growth of seedlings of an 
N-fixing tree (Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) Walp.) exposed 
to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide. Oecologia, 88, 415-
421. 
Thompson, M.L., I.G. Enting, G.I. Pearman and P. Hyson, 1986: 
Internal variations of atmospheric CO-, concentration. J. 
Atmos. Chem., 4, 125-155. 
Townsend, A.R., P.M. Vitousek and E.A. Holland, 1992: 
Tropical soils could dominate the short-term carbon cycle 
feedbacks to increased global temperatures. Climatic Change, 
22, 293-303. 
United Nations, 1992: Earth Summit Convention on Climate 
Change, 3-14 June 1992, United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
Vitousek, P.M. and R.W. Howarth, 1991: Nitrogen limitation on 
land and in the sea: how can it occur? Biogeochemistry, 13, 87-
115. 
Vloedbeld, M. and R. Leemans, 1993: Quantifying feedback 
processes in the response of the terrestrial carbon cycle to 
global change: the modeling approach of IMAGE-2. Water, 
Air, and Soil Pollution. 70. 615-628. 
Watson, A.J.. 1993: Air-sea gas exchange and carbon dioxide. 
In: The Global Carbon Cycle, M. Heimann (ed.), Springer-
Verlag, Heidelberg, pp397-411. 
Watson, R.T., H. Rhode, H. Oeschger and U. Siegenthaler, 1990: 
Greenhouse gases and aerosols. In: Climate Change: the IPCC 
Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. 
Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, ppl-40. 
Watson, R.T., E.G. Meira Filho, E. Sanhueza and A. Janetos, 
1992: Sources and sinks. In: Climate Change 1992: The 
Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp25-46. 
WEC (World Energy Council), 1993: Energy for Tomorrow's 
World - the Realities, the Real Options and the Agenda for 
Achievement, St. Martin's Press, New York, 320 pp. 
White, J.W.C., P. Ciais, R.A. Figge, R. Kenny and V. Markgraf, 
1994: A high resolution atmospheric pCO, record from carbon 
isotopes in peat. Nature, 367, 153-156. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1993: Balancing the global carbon budget. 
Implications for projections of future carbon dioxide 
concentration changes. Tellus, 45B, 409-425. 
Wong, C.S., Y-H. Chan, J.S. Page, G.E. Smith and R.D. 
Bellegay, 1993: Changes in equatorial CO, flux and new 
production estimated from C02 and nutrient levels in Pacific 
surface waters during the 1986/87 EI Nino. Tellus, 45B, 64-79. 
Woodward, F.I., 1992: Predicting plant responses to global 
environmental change. New Phytologist, 122, 239-251. 


2 
Other Trace Gases and 
Atmospheric Chemistry 
M. PRATHER, R. DERWENT, D. EHHALT, P. ERASER, 
E. SANHUEZA, X. ZHOU 
Contributors: 
E Alyea, T. Bradshaw, J. Butler, M.A. Carroll, D. Cunnold, E. Dlugokencky, 
J. Elkins, D. Etheridge, D. Fisher, P. Guthrie, N. Harris, I. Isaksen, DJ. Jacob, 
C.E. Johnson, J. Kaye, S. Liu, C.T. McElroy, P. Novelli, J. Penner, R. Prinn, 
W. Reeburgh, J. Richardson, B. Ridley, T. Rudolph, P. Simmonds, L.P. Steele, 
F. Stordal, R. Weiss, A. Volz-Thomas, A. Wahner, D. Wuebbles 
Modelling Contributors: see tables 


CONTENTS 
Summary 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 Atmospheric Chemistry 
2.2.1 Chemical Processes and the Removal of Trace 
Gases 
2.2.2 Atmospheric Adjustment Times of the Trace 
Gases 
2.2.3 Current Tropospheric OH 
2.2.4 Other Atmospheric and Surface Removal 
2.2.5 Lifetimes from Stratospheric Removal 
2.2.6 Examples of Chemical Feedbacks Affecting 
Greenhouse Gases 
2.3 Methane 
2.3.1 Methane Sources 
2.3.2 Removal of Methane 
2.3.3 Atmospheric Distribution 
2.3.4 Trends and Sensitivities 
2.4 Nitrous Oxide 
2.4.1 Sources of Nitrous Oxide 
2.4.2 Removal of Nitrous Oxide 
2.4.3 Atmospheric Distribution 
2.4.4 Trends and Sensitivities 
2.5 Halocarbons 
2.5.1 Atmospheric Distributions and Trends 
2.5.1.1 CFCs and carbon tetrachloride 
2.5.1.2 Methylchloroform and the HCFCs 
2.5.1.3 Other chlorinated species 
2.5.1.4 Methylbromide, halons and other 
brominated species 
2.5.1.5 Other perhalogenated species 
2.5.2 Industrial Production, Use and Emissions 
2.5.3 Natural Sources 
2.5.4 Halocarbon Removal Processes 
2.6 Observed Ozone (03) and Tropospheric UV 
2.6.1 Stratospheric Ozone 
2.6.2 Tropospheric Ozone 
2.6.3 Tropospheric UV 
77 
2.7 Tropospheric Nitrogen Oxides 
2.7.1 Sources of Tropospheric NOx 
79 
2.7.2 NOx Removal Processes 
2.7.3 Tropospheric Distribution of NO, 
79 
2.7.4 Trends of NO. 
82 
83 
84 
84 
85 
85 
85 
87 
87 
87 
89 
89 
91 
91 
91 
92 
92 
92 
93 
93 
93 
94 
94 
95 
95 
95 
96 
98 
99 
99 
99 
100 
100 
103 
79 
2.8 Carbon Monoxide and Volatile Organic Compounds 103 
2.8.1 Sources and Removal Processes of CO 
103 
2.8.2 Atmospheric distribution and trends of CO 
103 
2.8.3 Volatile Organic Compounds 
104 
2.8.3.1 Introduction 
104 
2.8.3.2 Sources of volatile organic compounds 
104 
2.8.3.3 Sinks of the volatile organic compounds 
105 
2.8.3.4 The role of volatile organic compounds 
105 
2.9 Inter-Comparison of Tropospheric Chemistry/ 
Transport Models 
105 
2.9.1 Intercomparison of Transport: A Case Study of 
222Radon 
106 
2.9.2 Intercomparison of Photochemistry: 0 3 Production 
and Loss 
109 
2.9.3 Conclusions 
111 
2.10 Global Tropospheric Ozone Modelling 
111 
2.10.1 Tropospheric NOx: Surface Combustion and 
Aircraft 
112 
2.10.2 CH4 Increases: A Case Study 
113 
2.10.2.1 The current atmosphere 
113 
2.10.2.2 O, perturbations 
113 
2.10.2.3 Adjustment time of CH4 emissions 
115 
2.10.3 Conclusions 
116 
2.11 Stabilisation of Atmospheric Chemical Composition 116 
2.11.1 Methane 
116 
2.11.2 Nitrous Oxide 
117 
2.11.3 Halocarbons 
117 
2.11.4 Ozone 
117 
References 
118 


SUMMARY 
Methane (CH4) 
Atmospheric CH4 concentrations have increased from 
about 700 ppbv in pre-industrial times to a global mean of 
1714 ppbv in 1992. The 1980s were characterised by 
declining methane growth rates which were approximately 
10 ppbv/yr by the end of the decade. The average growth 
rate of 13 ppbv/yr corresponds to an imbalance between 
sources and sinks of about 37 Tg(CH4)/yr. If emissions 
were frozen at this level, CH4 would rise to about 1900 
ppbv over the next 50 years. If emissions were cut by 37 
Tg(CH4)/yr, then CH4 concentrations would remain at 
today's levels. Current estimates of the CH4 budget assign 
20-40% to natural sources, 20% to anthropogenic fossil 
fuel related sources and the remaining 40-60% to other 
anthropogenic sources. 
The annual CH4 increase from 1991 to 1992 was much 
smaller than in the previous decade, 1992 to 1993 levels 
were unchanged, and in late 1993 CH4 apparently started 
to increase again. This anomaly was largest at high 
latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere, and could be 
explained by a rapid drop, of about 5%, in global annual 
emissions. Longer-period variations in the growth rate of 
CH4 have been observed for the 1920s and 1970s from air 
trapped in ice cores. 
Methane is the only long-lived gas that has clearly 
identified chemical feedbacks: increases in atmospheric 
CH4 reduce the concentration of tropospheric hydroxy! 
radical (OH), increase the CH4 lifetime and hence amplify 
the original CH4 perturbation. A recent analysis has shown 
that these feedbacks result in an adjustment time for 
additional emissions of CH4 equal to 14.5 ± 2.5 years 
based on a "budget" lifetime of about 10 years that reflects 
atmospheric chemical losses alone. It is uncertain how 
much the adjustment time would be affected by the small 
biological sink, and a range of 11 to 17 years encompasses 
this additional uncertainty. This lengthening of the 
effective duration of a CH4 pulse applies also to any 
derived perturbations (e.g., in tropospheric 03). 
Several atmospheric chemistry models have calculated 
the impact of a 20% increase in CH4 concentrations (from 
1715 to 2058 ppbv). Two important results were extracted 
from these simulations: (1) the chemical feedback of CH4 
on OH chemistry results in a reduction of the CH4 removal 
rate ranging from -0.17% to -0.35% for each 1% increase 
in CH4 concentration; and (2) predicted increases in 
tropospheric 0 3 varied by a factor of three or more across 
the models, averaging about 1.5 ppbv throughout most of 
the troposphere in both tropics and summertime mid-
latitudes. The first result was used to derive the methane 
adjustment time (14.5 ± 2.5 yr or about 1.45 times the 
lifetime) and the latter to estimate the ratio, about 0.25, of 
radiative forcing from induced tropospheric 0 3 increase to 
that from the CH4 increase. 
Nitrous oxide (N20) 
Atmospheric N-,0 concentrations have increased from 
about 275 ppbv in pre-industrial times to 311 ppbv in 
1992. The trend during the 1980s was +0.25%/yr with 
substantial year-to-year variations. A growth rate of 0.8 
ppbv/yr corresponds to an imbalance between sources and 
sinks of about 3.9 Tg(NnO)/yr. If these emissions were 
frozen then N.,0 levels would rise slowly to about 400 
ppbv over the next two centuries. 
Halocarbons 
Tropospheric growth rates of the major anthropogenic 
source species for stratospheric chlorine and bromine 
(CFCs, CC14, CH3CCI3 and the halons) have slowed 
significantly in response to reduced emissions as required 
by the Montreal Protocol and its amendments. Total 
atmospheric chlorine from these gases grew by about 60 
pptv (1.6%) in 1992 compared to 110 pptv (2.9%) in 1989. 
HCFC growth rates are accelerating as they are being used 
increasingly to substitute for CFCs. Tropospheric chlorine 
as HCFCs increased in 1992 by about 10 pptv compared to 
5 pptv in 1989. Stratospheric chlorine levels are expected 
to peak in the next decade, and it is expected that 
stratospheric ozone depletion will follow this, recovering 
slowly in the first half of the next century. 
For these long-lived, well-mixed gases, atmospheric 
lifetimes have been derived based on the recent re-
cvaluation of the lifetimes of CFC-11 (50 ± 5 yr) and 
CH,CC13 (5.4 ± 0.6 yr). These new lifetimes are slightly 
smaller than those given in previous assessments and have 
significantly greater certainty. The global mean lifetimes 
for the well-mixed gases are used to infer sources and 
sinks, and to predict the increase in atmospheric 
concentration due to specified anthropogenic emissions. 

78 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
Stratospheric ozone (03) 
Trends in total ozone since 1979 have been updated to 
May 1994, and estimates of depletion since 1970, 
attributed to increases in halocarbons, have been made: (1) 
Northern Hemisphere mid-latitude loss is significantly 
negative in all seasons, with winter/spring cumulative 
losses of 10%; (2) tropical (20°S - 20°N) losses are small 
and not statistically significant; (3) southern mid-latitude 
losses are significant in all seasons (4-5%/decade since 
1979). Unusually low values (lower than would be 
expected from an extrapolation of the 1980s trend) were 
observed in the 1991 to 1994 period, especially at 
Northern mid- and high latitudes. The Antarctic ozone 
"holes" of 1992 and 1993 were the most severe on record; 
for instance, parts of the lower stratosphere contained 
extremely low amounts of ozone corresponding to local 
depletions of more than 99%. 
The eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991 led to a massive 
increase in sulphate aerosol in the lower stratosphere. 
Observational evidence shows that this thirtyfold increase 
in aerosol surface area greatly enhanced the heterogeneous 
chemistry and accelerated photochemical loss of 0 3. 
Further evidence points to an additional heating of the 
stratosphere by Mt. Pinatubo aerosols, resulting in 
circulation changes that altered the distribution of 0 3 in the 
tropics immediately following the eruption, and possibly 
also in mid-latitudes. 
Tropospheric ozone (03) 
Tropospheric ozone appears to have increased in many 
regions of the Northern Hemisphere. Observations show 
that tropospheric ozone, which is formed by chemical 
reactions involving other hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide 
and some nitrogen oxides (NOJ, has increased above 
many locations in the Northern Hemisphere over the last 
30 years. However, in the 1980s, the trends were variable, 
being small or non-existent. At the South Pole, a decrease 
has been observed; however in the Southern Hemisphere 
as a whole, there are insufficient data to draw strong 
inferences. Model simulations and limited observations 
together suggest that tropospheric ozone has increased, 
perhaps doubled, in the Northern Hemisphere since pre-
industrial times. 
NOx and other short-lived tropospheric ozone 
precursors 
Uncertainties in the global budget of tropospheric ozone 
are associated primarily with our lack of knowledge of the 
distribution of 0 3, its short-lived precursors (NOx, 
hydrocarbons, CO), and atmospheric 
transport. 
Observations of NOx are just beginning to describe the 
global atmospheric distribution and they show the large 
variability in this ozone-producing species. Even with the 
observed distributions we cannot define the importance of 
anthropogenic sources (transport of surface pollution out 
of the boundary layer, direct injection by aircraft) relative 
to natural sources (lightning, stratospheric input) in 
controlling the global NOx distribution. Current estimates 
of anthropogenic NOx sources attribute 24 Tg(N)/yr to 
fossil fuel combustion at the surface, 0.5 Tg(N)/yr to 
aircraft emissions, 8 Tg(N)/yr to biomass burning and as 
much as 12 Tg(N)/yr release from soils, including 
fertilised fields. Anthropogenic emissions dominate natural 
sources in magnitude, but natural emissions may dominate 
a large fraction of the atmosphere remote from 
anthropogenic emissions. 
Changes in ozone concentrations in the upper 
troposphere and lower stratosphere impact the radiative 
forcing. In addition to anthropogenic sources of 0 3 
precursors from the lower troposphere, aircraft currently 
represent a direct anthropogenic source of NOx in that 
altitude range. Research evaluating the climatic effect of 
the current subsonic fleet is incomplete, but initial 
estimates of the possible changes to 0 3 show that this 
radiative forcing is similar to, but not greater than, that of 
the C0 2 from the combustion of aviation fuel, about 3% of 
all fossil fuel combustion. 
For compounds with lifetimes much shorter than 6 
months, mixing within the troposphere is not rapid enough 
to average over variations in chemical loss. For these 
short-lived gases (e.g., NOx, hydrocarbons, 0 3 and CO), 
the mean concentration cannot be accurately calculated 
from the product of emissions or production and a global 
mean lifetime, but their distribution and impacts may be 
evaluated in future assessments by the more advanced 
three-dimensional atmospheric chemistry models. 
Intercomparisions of atmospheric chemistry models 
Two model intercomparison exercises have been 
conducted to test the ability of models to simulate (a) the 
transport of shortlived tracers and (b) the basic features of 
0 3 photochemistry. More than 20 models participated. A 
high degree of consistency was found in the global 
transport of a shortlived tracer within the 3D Chemisti v 
/Transport Models (CTMs), but distinctly different result-, 
were found amongst 2-D models. General agreement was 
also found in the computation of photochemical rates 
affecting tropospheric 0 3. These are the first extensive 
intercomparisons of global tropospheric models. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
79 
2.1 Introduction 
The Earth's atmosphere is composed primarily of the gases 
N, (78% dry), 0 2 (21%) and Ar (1%), whose abundances 
are controlled over geologic time-scales by uptake and 
release from crustal material, by degassing of the interior 
and by the biosphere. Water vapour (H,0) is the next 
largest, though highly variable, constituent present mainly 
in the lower atmosphere at concentrations as high as 3%, 
where evaporation and precipitation control its abundance. 
The remaining gaseous constituents are considered trace 
gases, comprising less than 1% of the atmosphere, yet 
playing a disproportionately important role in the Earth's 
radiative balance. Among these, the greenhouse gases 
include ozone (03), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N.,0), 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), U-,0 in the upper atmosphere, 
as well as carbon dioxide (CO,). All but CO., are 
controlled in one way or another by atmospheric 
chemistry. Table 2.1 summarises the mean tropospheric 
abundance and atmospheric burdens of the more important 
of these gases. 
The climatic impacts of the radiatively active trace gases 
increase as their global mean abundances increase. It is 
important to understand the atmospheric chemical cycles 
involving these gases in order to comprehend the changes 
in atmospheric composition observed to date and to predict 
future composition in response to alterations in natural and 
human-induced emissions. This chapter describes the life 
cycles of the more important gases, noting how chemical 
reactions in the atmosphere balance the emissions. A brief 
review of important chemical processes and of the concept 
of residence times is followed by a summary of the known 
sources, sinks and time-scales affecting CH4, N.,0 and the 
halocarbons (chlorine and bromine containing organic 
compounds such as the CFCs). Ozone is a special case 
emphasising the complexities of atmospheric chemistry: 
direct emissions of 0 3 are not important; in situ 
production, loss and transport by the atmospheric 
circulation control its abundance. The net production in the 
lower atmosphere is controlled by a suite of short-lived 
trace gases (NO + NO, (= NOx), non-methane 
hydrocarbons (NMHC) and carbon monoxide (CO)), as 
well as CH4. These gases are not significant for their direct 
radiative effects, but rather for their ability to control the 
abundances of 0 3 and other greenhouse gases such as CH4. 
The complexity of the ozone chemistry requires that our 
numerical models simulate not only the chemical reactions 
directly involving 03, but also the global distributions of 
the short-lived species such as NOx, and the related 
transport processes. The current models used to predict the 
chemistry of the lower atmosphere are, as a class, poorly 
analysed in comparison with those used to assess 
stratospheric ozone depletion. We examine some recent 
model studies, particularly those evaluating the 
meteorological transport. Because of current inadequacies 
in the atmospheric models and uncertainties in emissions 
of some gases, our assessment of stabilising the radiative 
impact of the trace greenhouse gases (i.e., the atmospheric-
composition) relies on a combination of models and recent 
observations. 
2.2 Atmospheric Chemistry 
2.2.1 Chemical Processes and the Removal of Trace 
Gases 
The atmospheric residence times of many gases are 
determined primarily by chemical reactions. The bulk of 
the atmospheric mass, and of most greenhouse gases, is in 
the troposphere, which comprises on average the lowest 13 
km of the atmosphere. Nearly all the the remaining 
atmosphere (-15%) is in the stratosphere from about 13 to 
50 km altitude, the region containing most of the ozone 
(03). Tropospheric removal is dominated by reactions with 
the hydroxyl radical (OH); whereas stratospheric removal 
is dominated by ultraviolet photolysis. Tropospheric 
chemistry involving the production and destruction of 0 3 
is one of the most complex problems addressed by global 
atmospheric chemistry models to date. 
The time-scales of atmospheric chemistry are carefully 
defined here, both in concept and usefulness. We examine 
the different loss mechanisms for the long-lived 
greenhouse gases and use theoretical models and empirical 
data to derive with a fair degree of confidence the 
residence times, i.e., the time for a perturbation to decay to 
1/e (37%) of its original value. Less is known about the 
importance of the more complex feedback loops within 
atmospheric chemistry. An example shows the far reaching 
effects of increases in CH4, but current understanding does 
not allow quantification of the complete range of such 
feedbacks. 
Photochemistry and Losses 
Most atmospheric chemistry is initiated by ultraviolet (UV) 
sunlight. Since only light with wavelengths greater than 
290 nm reaches the troposphere, the number of compounds 
that can be directly photodissociated is limited. Most of the 
photochemical chains of interest begin with the dissociation 
of ozone (03) at wavelengths below 320 nm. 
0 3 + UV-sunlight — 0 2 + 0(>D). 
(2.1) 
A fraction of this highly reactive form of atomic 
oxygen, O('D), reacts with water vapour and is the 
primary source of tropospheric hydroxyl (OH), 
0('D) + H,0-»OH + OH. 
(2.2) 
In the troposphere, the OH radical is the most important 
chemical removal agent. It reacts with virtually all 
molecules containing hydrogen atoms (e.g., CH4); in other 

80 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
Table 2.1: Current atmospheric abundances and lifetimes of radiatively active trace gases. 
Species 
Strut H20 
Strat 0 3 
Trop H20 
Trop 0 3 
co2 
CH4 
N20 
CFC-11 
CFC-12 
CFC-113 
CFC-114 
CFC-115 
CC14 
CH3CCI3 
CH3CI 
HCFC-22 
CH3Br 
CF2CIBr 
CF,Br 
CF4 
C2Ffi 
SFft 
HCFC-123 
HCFC-124 
HCFC-141b 
HCFC-142b 
HCFC-225ca 
HCFC-225cb 
HFC-125 
HFC-134a 
HFC-143a 
HFC-152a 
HFC-227ea 
Mixing ratio (ppbv) 
1992 
2,000-6,000 
200 10,000 
10,000-20,000,000 
10-200 
356,000 
1,714 
311 
0.268 
0.503 
0.082 
0.020 
<0.01 
0.132 
0.160 
0.600 
0.105 
0.012 
0.0025 
0.0020 
0.070 
0.004 
0.0025 
0.0035 
1992 minus 
1990 
2,000 
14 
1.4 
0.005 
0.026 
0.005 
0.001 
-0.001 
0.007 
? 
0.014 
0.0006 
0.00014 
0.0003 
0.001 
pre-ind. 
278,000 
700 
275 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.600 
0 
0.008 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Burden 
(Tg) 
2,900 
300 
760,000 (C)++ 
4,850 
1,480 (N)tt 
6.2 
10.3 
2.6 
3.4 
3.5 
5.0 
1.5 
0.15 
0.08 
0.05 
0.9 
Lifetime 
(yr) 
see Ch.l 
11-17+ 
120 
50 (±5) 
102 
85 
300 
1,700 
42 
5.4 (±0.6) 
1.5 
13.3 
1.3 
20 
65 
50,000 
10,000 
3,200 
1.4 
5.9 
9.4 
19.5 
2.5 
6.6 
36. 
17.7 
55. 
1.5 
43 
Note: All mixing ratios, except for stratospheric 0 3 and H20, refer to mean tropospheric values. 
t For CH4 the adjustment time for decay of a perturbation is shown, rather than a "budget" lifetime - see text. The value of 
adjustment time conveyed to Chapter 5 for the calculation of GWPs, 14.5 ± 2.5 yrs, does not include possible losses of CH4 in the 
soil. 
t t The atmospheric burdens for C0 2 and N20 are expressed in Tg(C) and Tg(N) respectively. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
81 
reactions it oxidises species such as CO, nitrogen dioxide 
(N02) and sulphur compounds (e.g., SO,). In the 
unpolluted troposphere, the major reactions of OH are: 
OH + CH4 + 0 2 ^ CH302 + H20 
(2.3) 
OH + CO + 0 2 =2 C02 + H0 2 
(2.4) 
The loss of OH is matched by the production of peroxy 
radicals (H02, CH302). When OH reacts with other, non-
methane hydrocarbons (NMHC), such as ethane, 
analogous organic peroxy radicals are formed. Subsequent 
oxidation of CH302 and its NMHC analogues leads to 
production of one or more H02, which is recycled to OH 
by the reactions, 
H02 + NO -» OH + N0 2 
(2.5) 
H02 + 0 3 -» OH + 0 2 + 02. 
(2.6) 
The reactions (2.3) or (2.4), followed by (2.5) or (2.6), 
form a catalytic chain which destroys methane and carbon 
monoxide but may regenerate OH. The cycling of OH and 
H02 is terminated by reactions involving OH, H0 2 and 
N02. These regenerate H20 or form peroxides (H2O„ 
CHjOOH, etc.) which are subsequently removed by clouds 
and precipitation. In a polluted environment with large 
concentrations of N02, the major loss of OH is through 
formation of nitric acid (HN03). 
OH + N02 -> HN03 
(2.7) 
This reaction is also the major loss mechanism for NOx 
(NO + N02) throughout the troposphere, since most of the 
HN03 is lost from the atmosphere by washout and dry 
deposition. Like the OH-H02 pair above, the NOx pair is 
tightly linked through the reactions, 
NO + 0 3 -» N02 + 0 2 
(2.8) 
N02 + sunlight + 0 2 "-^ 0 3 + NO 
(2.9) 
In addition to the daytime photochemistry, there are 
some night-time reactions that affect 0 3 and NOx. The 
most important process is the reaction of NO? with 0 3 to 
form a nitrate radical (N03), which further reacts, e.g., to 
form nitrate aerosol, so that the net effect is the removal of 
both 0 3 and NOx. 
Molecules that escape tropospheric oxidation by OH, or 
removal by wet or dry deposition, will reach the 
stratosphere where they encounter sunlight with much 
shorter wavelengths, as low as 180 nm. These photons 
have sufficient energy to dissociate directly many of the 
compounds that could not be destroyed in the troposphere. 
This photolysis initiates the oxidation processes that, for 
example, turn CFCs into C02, HF and a mix of chlorine 
compounds. In addition, concentrations of O('D) from 
reaction (2.1) are higher in the stratosphere and contribute 
to the loss of the more stable gases. For gases destroyed 
primarily in the stratosphere, atmospheric lifetimes range 
from 40 to 200 yr and are limited at the lower range by the 
rate of transport into the stratosphere. 
A very few greenhouse gases (e.g., CFC-115 and C-,F()) 
are so stable that they are not efficiently photolysed in the 
stratosphere. Significant losses of these molecules occur 
above 60 km altitude through photolysis with Lyman-alpha 
sunlight (121.6 nm). The local rate of photolysis and the 
fractional mass of the atmosphere over which these losses 
occur are so small that the atmospheric lifetime of these 
gases exceeds 1000 yr (Ravishankara et al., 1993) and 
their atmospheric abundances equal accumulated 
emissions. 
Ozone 
The sunlight at 180-230 nm is also absorbed by molecular 
oxygen (02), which is photodissociated, generating 0 3 in 
the process. This absorption is sufficiently strong to 
prevent these wavelengths reaching below about 20 km 
altitude in the atmosphere. The stratospheric amount of 0 3 
is controlled by a balance between this production and 
transport and the catalytic loss-cycles involving CI and Br 
species, NOx, OH and H0 2. The dominant source of 
stratospheric CI today, 80%, is the family of industrial 
chlorocarbons, and human activity has also led to increases 
in the flux of Br into the stratosphere. Stratospheric NOx is 
generated from NnO. Stratospheric H,O (the source of OH 
and HO-,) will increase along with any increases in 
atmospheric CH4. Stratospheric 0 3 is the major species 
absorbing solar UV between 220 nm and 320 nm. Hence, 
depletion of stratospheric 0 3 is likely to change 
tropospheric chemistry through: (i) a lowered flux of 0 3 
into the troposphere, and (ii) increased tropospheric UV 
flux which enhances the primary production of OH. 
While the flux of air from troposphere to stratosphere in 
the tropics represents a major loss process for many of the 
long-lived species, the return flux in the mid-latitudes 
brings significant sources of 0 3 and NOx into the upper 
troposphere. On a globally averaged basis this source of 
tropospheric 0 3 is countered by removal through reactions 
with alkenes and NO near the Earth's surface and by dry 
deposition at the surface. In addition, comparable sources 
and sinks for 03, and even larger sources for NOx, occur 
throughout the troposphere. 
The sequence consisting of the reactions (2.4), (2.5) and 
(2.9) illustrates how molecular oxygen is activated: an 
oxygen atom is transferred via H0 2 (or other peroxy 
radicals) to NO-,, and eventually leads to a net formation of 
03. In the destruction of CO, for example, both OH + HO, 
and NOx are preserved and catalytically generate O v In the 
absence of NOx, the reaction sequence (2.4) and (2.6) 
destroys both CO and O v NMHC also play an important 
role in producing 0 3, the key being that they enhance 
overall the OH and H02 reactions ((2.3), (2.4), (2.6) and 

K2 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
(2.7)). The balance between in situ production and loss of 
O, depends on the NO concentration: production by 
reaction (2.5) followed by (2.9) is favoured over loss by 
reaction (2.6) when the NO/0-, concentration ratio exceeds 
about (10 pptv)/(30 ppbv). Thus, in most parts of the 
troposphere, the addition of NO will induce additional 
production of O v In heavily polluted urban environments, 
where NOx concentrations are already high, addition of 
NO can lead to a reduction in local 0 3 concentrations, but 
will lead to increased 0-, levels farther downwind. 
2.2.2 Atmospheric Adjustment Times of the Trace Gases 
The budget of a trace gas is defined by its sources and 
sinks. The lifetime describes the rate at which the 
compound is removed from the atmosphere by chemical 
processes or by irreversible uptake by the land or ocean. If 
emissions are uniform, the concentration of a trace gas 
builds up to a steady-state value at which the product of 
the global mean abundance (Tg) with the inverse global 
mean lifetime (1/yr) balances the emissions (Tg/yr). The 
sum over the chemical rates described above defines the 
budget of a trace gas (i.e., the sources and sinks) and thus 
the time-scale for a small perturbation in its abundance to 
disappear. This time is defined formally as the "adjustment 
time", and is the essential quantity used in evaluating indices 
such as the Greenhouse Warming Potential (GWP). For a 
long-lived trace gas, the average atmospheric adjustment 
time is the e-folding time (63% reduction) of an additional 
kilogram added to the atmosphere to be removed by 
chemical processes. A second time-scale can be defined 
based on the integrated loss divided by the total abundance. 
This turn-over time, often referred to as the "lifetime" in 
atmospheric chemistry, relates the observed global mean 
abundance with the emissions needed just to sustain it. 
These integrated time-scales require global summation 
of the local chemical loss processes acting on globally 
varying concentrations of the trace gas. For a compound 
such as C'H4, these vary widely throughout the atmosphere: 
the OH abundances depend on sunlight and other short-
lived, highly variable constituents such as NOx, H20 and 
(),: and the reaction rate of CH4 with OH varies by a factor 
of 20 over the range of lower atmospheric temperatures. 
The atmospheric lifetime collapses all of these local 
chemical losses into a single, global-mean loss frequency. 
By integrating CH4 losses over the globe for a year (i.e., 
Tg(CH4)/yr) and dividing by the average CH4 abundance 
(i.e., Tg(CH4)), one derives the inverse of the atmospheric 
lifetime, x. Because the lifetime is defined relative to the 
global atmospheric burden, we can add individual inverse 
lifetimes (i.e., losses) to get a total inverse lifetime, e.g., 
I T = 1/T()1| + l/TstraI + l/Toccan + 1/Tland + 1/Tchcm + 1/Twash 
where the terms are reaction with troposphere OH, 
stratospheric photolysis, irreversible oceanic uptake, net 
destruction at the land surface, additional chemical loss in 
the troposphere and removal by precipitation (washout), 
respectively. Calculation of these lifetimes is a difficult 
problem for global atmospheric chemistry models, but a 
good estimate helps constrain the total source of a 
compound. If observations indicate steady state, then 
sources are balanced by sinks. In the case of gases with 
measured trends in atmospheric abundance, the inferred 
source equals the loss calculated from the lifetime plus the 
annual increase in abundance derived from the trend. 
In general, the adjustment time for a trace gas can be 
approximated to first-order by the lifetime, for which we 
often have a good estimate, either theoretical or empirical. 
Most trace gases have little impact on the chemistry of the 
atmosphere (e.g., the CH-,CC13 abundance is too low to 
affect OH concentrations), and for these gases the 
adjustment lifetime is equivalent to the lifetime. However 
two gases, CH4 and N-,0, do interact strongly with the 
global atmospheric chemistry, and the exact calculation of 
their adjustment time requires inclusion of feedbacks and 
multiple reservoirs. 
For example, it has been known that the CH4-CO-OH 
system in the troposphere is highly coupled (Chameides el 
al., 1976; Sze, 1977): increased CH4 oxidation leads to 
additional CO formation; both suppress OH, the major sink 
for CH4; and thus the time-scale for decay of the 
perturbation lengthens. This feedback was reported by the 
global models and treated in IPCC (1990) as an "indirect" 
GWP based on model calculations of the decrease in 
global OH for CH4 increases (Isaksen and Hov, 1987). 
However, the concept of an extended adjustment time for 
perturbations has not been applied to GWPs until this 
assessment. The ratio of adjustment time to lifetime is 
greater than one and is independent of the magnitude of 
the methane perturbation for modest changes (Prather. 
1994). Because of differing NOx and NMHC fields, 
models of global troposphere chemistry differ in the 
strength of their CH4-CO-OH coupling (see Section 
2.10.2). Thus the adopted adjustment time for CH4, based 
on atmospheric chemistry alone, is 14 ± 2.5 yr using a 
chemical sink (OH and stratospheric loss) of 10 yr. If the 
biological soil sink were to respond to the atmosphere in 
the same way as the chemical sink, the response time 
would be reduced to a little under 14 yr. In this chapter we 
use the range 14 ± 3 (11-17) yr to cover this uncertainty. 
The other major compound for which the lifetime and 
adjustment time are expected to be different is N-,0. The 
stratospheric NOv derived from N.,0 controls stratospheric 
O, and hence the ultraviolet radiation field in the 
stratosphere and finally the N.,0 loss frequency. In contrast 
with CH4, one would expect the adjustment time for N-,0 
to be shorter than its lifetime by about 10% because 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
83 
increases in N 70 lead to a greater photolytic destruction 
rate. For N-,0, however, there may be additional 
complications, similar to those for CO-,, due to the 
potentially important reservoir of N-,0 dissolved in the 
oceans. If atmospheric N-,0 concentrations were to change, 
such an oceanic reservoir would be likely to interact with 
the atmosphere on a time-scale longer than the 120-year 
adjustment time given in Table 2.1. Neither of these effects 
has been studied sufficiently to be included quantitively 
here. 
Short-lived trace gases such as NOx (1-10 days) and CO 
(1-4 months) have not been included in this discussion 
because it is impossible to assign a useful global mean 
lifetime. Such gases have highly variable local loss rates, 
e.g., CO varies from 1 per month in the tropics, and 0.25 
per month at mid-latitudes in spring and autumn, to very 
small values in high latitude winter. The atmospheric 
circulation does not mix CO from equator to pole within 
the troposphere in much less than a season. Thus emissions 
of CO in the tropics will decay in a month, whereas high 
latitude emissions in winter will accumulate for a season 
until they mix to lower latitudes. In the case of long-lived 
gases such as CH4 with an adjustment time of about 11 to 
17 years, the surface emissions become reasonably well-
mixed throughout the troposphere before substantial losses 
occur, and thus the adjustment time does not depend on the 
location of the sources. For short-lived gases this is not 
true and they do not in general have well defined 
adjustment times, although a reasonable upper limit can be 
made by combining the chemistry with the atmospheric 
transport models. Given the finite rate of tropospheric 
mixing (about two weeks vertically, about three months 
from pole to tropics, and about one year between 
hemispheres) the concept of a global adjustment time as 
currently used in GWPs is of limited use for molecules 
such as NOx, 0 3 or even CO. 
The discussion of adjustment time and turn-over time 
has assumed that we are dealing with small perturbations 
about the current atmosphere. We have observed changes 
in CH4, N 90 and probably tropospheric 0 3 since the pre-
industrial atmosphere (see following discussion). These 
changes have been large, and we expect that the 
adjustment times for most gases have changed since 1850 
and will continue to change into the future in response to 
changing emissions of a wide range of gases. Current 
trends in the lifetime of methane appear to be small and 
difficult to detect (e.g., Prinn et al., 1992). 
2.2.3 Current Tropospheric 
OH 
The lifetimes of many greenhouse gases depend on the 
global OH field. Concentrations of OH respond almost 
instantly to variations in sunlight, O v NOx, CO. CH4 and 
NMHC; and therefore the OH field varies bv orders of 
magnitude in space and time. Direct observations of OH 
can be used to test the photochemical models under 
specific circumstances, but are not capable of measuring 
the global OH field. Therefore we must rely on numerical 
models to estimate the global, seasonal distribution of OH; 
these models need to simulate the variations in sunlight 
caused by clouds, ozone column and time-of-day in 
addition to the local chemical fields. These calculations of 
global tropospheric OH and the consequent derivations of 
lifetimes have not advanced significantly and are still 
much the same as in WMO(1990): we cannot expect such 
calculations to achieve an accuracy much better than 
±30%. 
The modelled OH fields can be tested in an averaged 
sense by comparison with the budgets for some 
compounds which are removed mainly by OH. These 
compounds must be reasonably long-lived (and therefore 
well mixed), have well-known source strengths and only 
small, well-defined losses apart from OH removal. In 
addition, their atmospheric burdens must be well measured 
and well calibrated. However, this empirical derivation of 
a weighted, global-mean OH does not help test that part of 
the OH distribution that controls the NOx lifetime and 
hence the net production of 0 3 in the troposphere. 
Empirical OH-Lifetimes based on CH,CCI V
 l 4CO, and 
HCFC-22 
CH3CCI3 fulfils all of the above requirements for 
calibrating tropospheric OH. A recent assessment (Kaye et 
al., 1994) has reviewed and re-evaluated the lifetimes of 
two major industrial halocarbons, methylchloroform 
(CH3CCI3) and CFC-11. An optimal fit to the observed 
concentrations of CH3CC13 from the five ALE/GAGE 
surface sites over the period 1978 to 1990 was done with 
two statistical/atmospheric models: the ALE/GAGE 12-
box atmospheric model with optimal inversion (Prinn et 
al., 1992); and the NCSU/UCI 3D-GISS model with 
autoregression statistics (Kaye et al., 1994). There are 
well-defined differences in the two atmospheric models' 
simulations; while important for modelling CFC-11, these 
have no impact on the derived CH3CCI3 lifetimes. But the 
empirical lifetime and its possible trend are closely tied to 
the absolute calibration of CH3CC13 measurements. With 
the ALE/GAGE calibration factor, a lifetime of 5.7+ 0.3 yr 
in 1990 with a decrease in lifetime of 1± 0.8%/yr from 
1978 to 1990 is obtained. For the calibration factor from 
CMDL (0.88 times the ALE/GAGE value, Frascr et al. 
1994), a lifetime of 5.1 ± 0.3 with a significantly smaller 
trend is derived. The interpretation of such a trend as 
increasing tropospheric OH is unresolved, since other 
factors, including the known geographic change in 
CH 3CC1 3 emissions, may influence the observations. 
Given the uncertainties in absolute calibration, we choose 

84 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
Table 2.2: CH3CCl3 Lifetime (yr) and the Range in OH-basedLifetimes 
total 
(range) 
strat 
(range) 
ocean 
(range) 
5.4 
(4.8-6.0) 
45 
(40-50) 
85 
(50 - infinite) 
upper limit: 
1/8.2 = 1/6.0 - 1/40 -1/50 
central value: 
1/6.6 = 1/5.4 -1/45 - 1/85 
lower limit: 
1/5.3 = 1/4.8 - 1/50 - 1/infinity 
-» tropospheric lifetime due to OH: 6.6 yr (±25%) 
Note: The lifetimes of many greenhouse gases, including CH4, are determined primarily by the concentrations of tropospheric OH 
radicals. Our best calibration of the global average OH is based on the empirical total lifetime for CH3CC13 (5.4 yr), which has three 
identified sinks: tropospheric OH, stratospheric photodissociation, and oceanic hydrolysis. The magnitude of the lifetime with 
respect to removal by OH (6.6 yr) is calculated by removing the stratospheric and oceanic components and increases the uncertainty 
range. The OH-based lifetime for CH4 is 1.65 times that of CH3CC13, based on the ratio of rate coefficients for reaction with OH. To 
that loss, a stratospheric lifetime corresponding to 120 yr must be added to get the atmospheric budget lifetime for CH4 of 10 yr. 
a CH3CC13 lifetime of 5.4 yr with an uncertainty range, 
±0.6 yr, to encompass the two calibrations. From this total 
atmospheric lifetime of CH3CC13, the losses to the ocean 
and stratosphere are deducted to derive the tropospheric 
lifetime for reaction with OH of 6.6 yr (±25%) as shown in 
Table 2.2. 
Analysis of the tropospheric budget of the radio-isotope 
14CO complements the CH3CC13 test of tropospheric OH: 
the l4CO is produced primarily in the stratosphere and 
upper troposphere by cosmic rays and has a much shorter 
lifetime, 1-3 months. Recent modelling (Derwent, 1994b) 
has supported the earlier results (Volz et al., 1981); 
however, new observations (Brenninkmeijer et al., 1992; 
Mak et al., 1992), particularly in the Southern Hemisphere, 
have not yet been reconciled with the latitudinal 
distribution of OH generated by global atmospheric 
chemistry models. The removal of l4CO emphasises more 
the upper troposphere in the mid-latitudes, whereas the 
loss of CH3CC13 and similar industrial halocarbons is 
dominated by the OH in the lower tropical troposphere 
(Prather and Spivakovsky, 1990). 
Another candidate that might offer a test of model 
predicted OH is HCFC-22 (Montzka et al., 1993). 
Although HCFC-22 production is well documented 
(Midgley and Fisher, 1993), the atmospheric emissions are 
too uncertain to improve the accuracy of the global budget 
analysis for CH,CC13. 
For well-mixed gases destroyed by OH, the mean OH 
estimated from the budget of one species can be 
transferred to another by the ratio of their respective rate 
coefficients. The original AFEAS study, and subsequent 
assessments (WMO, 1992; IPCC, 1992) have derived 
lifetimes relative to that of CH3CC13 by scaling their 
respective rate coefficients for reaction with OH at 277 K 
(Prather and Spivakovsky, 1990). The values of the 
derived lifetimes here rely on the precision of the empirical 
derivation of the CH3CC13 lifetime (Prinn et al., 1992). 
2.2.4 Other Atmospheric and Surface Removal 
For short-lived gases that react rapidly with OH, the 
possible impact of other, unidentified removal processes is 
likely to be small. On the other hand, for long-lived 
compounds (e.g., CFCs, CC14, HCFCs 142b & 143a), 
small additional losses may noticeably reduce the 
atmospheric lifetimes calculated here. 
The potential role of oceanic uptake and destruction as 
well as reactions in clouds of HCFC and HFCs was 
examined by Wine and Chameides (1990) and their 
conclusion that cloud processes appear unimportant still 
seems valid. More recently the role of the oceans in 
CH3CC13 loss (Butler et al, 1991) and CH3Br buffering 
(Butler, 1994) has been discussed. In general, oceanic loss 
is proportional to solubility (very high for CH3Br) and is 
limited by the air-sea exchange. Only for these two gases 
has oceanic loss been included in the lifetimes (Table 2.3). 
Chemical reactions with CI atoms in the marine 
boundary layer, or possibly N0 3 radicals at night, have 
been identified as losses for NMHC and HCFC/HFCs. 
Currently, these losses are thought to be small compared 
with that from OH. Reactions on biologically or 
mineralogically active land surfaces have been identified 
for many long-lived greenhouse gases but none are thought 
to be important (see sections on individual gases below): 
these have not been included in the atmospheric lifetimes 
in Table 2.1. 
2.2.5 Lifetimes from Stratospheric Removal 
For compounds destroyed only in the stratosphere, a lower 
limit can be placed on the total lifetime. It can be derived 
simply from an estimate of how fast tropospheric air is 
circulated through the stratosphere, with the limiting 
assumption that all of the trace gas entering tru 
stratosphere is destroyed. Using the mass flux through tlu 
100 mbar surface in the tropics (Holton, 1990) yields , 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
85 
value of 25 yr. The gas which most closely approaches this 
limit is CC14, a rapidly photolysed species, with a lifetime 
of about 40 years, somewhat longer than the 25 year value, 
because many CC14 molecules re-enter the troposphere. 
The derivation of the stratospheric-removal lifetimes in 
Table 2.1 is based on current two-dimensional 
stratospheric models which have a long history of 
development and testing (e.g., Ko et al., 1991; Prather and 
Remsberg, 1993). These models calculate vertical profiles 
and relative variations of halocarbons, N90 and CH4 in the 
stratosphere that are consistent with observations. The 
model derived lifetimes for CFC-11, ranging from 40 to 60 
yr, match the empirically derived value of 50 ± 5 years, 
based on reconciling emissions with the observed trend 
(see Kaye et al., 1994; and recent update, Cunnold et al., 
1994). 
2.2.6 Examples of Chemical Feedbacks Affecting 
Greenhouse Gases 
The varied chemical and physical couplings in the 
atmospheric system mean that a perturbation in one trace 
gas propagates through a series of interactions into a 
perturbation of many other species. Methane has an 
especially large number of identified couplings, some of 
which are used as an example to illustrate this point. To 
first order, a kilogram of CH4 released from the surface 
becomes well-mixed in troposphere, and a fraction of this 
CH4, in proportion to its tropical abundance, is transported 
into the stratosphere. This added kilogram of CH4 decays 
with an adjustment time of 11 to 17 years and not with the 
chemical sink time-scale of 10 years due to OH and 
stratospheric loss (see Section 2.2.2 above). This enhanced 
CH4 concentration has a direct radiative effect. In the 
stratosphere, CH4 directly affects the radical chemistry 
(C1/HC1, OH) that controls 0 3: by reducing the 
effectiveness of chlorine catalytic cycles, it would increase 
03. At the same time, oxidation of this CH4 increases 
stratospheric H20, leading to enhanced efficiency of the 
HOx-catalysed 0 3 loss and potentially increasing 
heterogeneous chemistry in the stratosphere by providing 
more condensable water. Changes to stratospheric H,O 
and 0 3 have direct greenhouse impacts. Any induced 
changes to stratospheric 0 3 will feed back on tropospheric 
chemistry through changes in UV and 0 3 fluxes into the 
troposphere. The additional CH4 also impacts tropospheric 
chemistry directly through reductions in OH and increased 
production of O v Lower OH increases the lifetimes and 
hence the concentrations of a whole host of atmospheric 
trace gases, many of which are direct greenhouse gases. 
Further, the concentrations of HCFCs and CH3CC13 would 
increase with a secondary impact on stratospheric chlorine 
levels and hence 0 3. Another secondary impact is in 
tropospheric chemistry where lower OH will reduce the 
oxidation of NOx, which controls tropospheric 0 3 
production and the recycling of OH. To quantify these 
interactions, the numerical models must simulate 
realistically the atmospheric chemistry and transport of the 
troposphere and stratosphere. 
2.3 Methane 
After water vapour and carbon dioxide, methane (CH4) is 
the most abundant greenhouse gas in the troposphere. It is 
also a reactive gas, which through various chemical 
interactions (detailed in Section 2.2) influences the 
concentrations of other greenhouse gases both in the 
troposphere and stratosphere, most notably that of ozone. 
2.3.1 Methane Sources 
CH4 is emitted by a large number of sources. These are 
listed in Table 2.3 and total 410-660 Tg(CH4)/yr globally. 
This range has shifted little from previous estimates in 
IPCC (1992). In fact, despite numerous publications of 
numerous new flux measurements and estimates, only few 
of the contributions from individual sources have been 
revised. These revisions are relatively small, usually 
concerned with the range rather than with the central 
values of the emissions estimates. Thus, recent flux data 
from the Amazon region suggest that a large fraction of 
CH4 is emitted from tropical wetlands (20°N - 30°S), with 
a global estimate of -60 Tg(CH4)/yr (Bartlett et al., 1990; 
Bartlett and Harriss, 1993). High latitude tundra studies 
indicate emissions ranging from 20 to 60 Tg/yr (Whalen 
and Recburgh, 1992; Reeburgh et al., 1993). A re-
evaluation of the ocean source (Lambert and Schmidt, 
1993) suggests only -3.5 Tg/yr are emitted by the open 
ocean, but emissions from methane-rich areas could be 
higher, pushing the upper limit of the oceanic source to 50 
Tg/yr. A recent estimate made by Martius et al. (1993) for 
the contribution of termites to the global budget agrees 
well with the central value of 20 Tg/yr given in the IPCC 
(1992). A new estimate has been made for methane 
originating from geological sources (including methane 
hydrates) of 5-15 Tg/yr (Judd et al., 1993). 
Studies of the carbon-14 content of atmospheric CH4 
indicate that 15 - 25% of total annual CH4 emissions are 
from fossil carbon sources (IPCC, 1992). However, there 
are large uncertainties in the contribution of the various 
fossil sources: coal mines, natural gas and the petroleum 
industry. New global figures for emissions from coal 
mines range from 17 Tg/yr to 50 Tg/yr (CIAB, 1992; 
Miillcr, 1992; Beck, 1993; Beck et al., 1993; Kirchgessner 
et al., 1993). Miiller (1992) estimated an emission from 
natural gas activities of 65 Tg/yr, higher than the range 
given in IPCC (1992) (2542 Tg/yr). Beck et al. (1993) give 
a value of 30 Tg/yr. Khalil et al. (1993a) proposed that low 

% 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
Table 2.3: Estimated sources and sinks of methane, 
TgfCH^Iyr. 
(a) Observed atmospheric increase, estimated sinks and sources derived to balance the budget 
Individual 
estimate 
Total 
Atmospheric increase 
37 (35-40) 
37 (35-40) 
Atmospheric removal (lifetime = 9.4 yr) 
tropospheric OH 
stratosphere 
soils 
Total sinks 
445 (360-530) 
40 (32-48) 
30 (15-45) 
515 (430-600) 
Implied total sources (atmospheric 
increase + total sinks) 
552 (465-640) 
(b) Inventory of identified sources 
Identified sources 
Individual 
estimate 
Total 
Natural 
Wetlands 
Termites 
Oceans 
Other 
115 (55-150) 
20 (10-50) 
10 (5-50) 
15 (10-40) 
Total identified natural sources 
160 (110-210)+ 
Anthropogenic 
Total fossil fuel related 
Individual fossil fuel related sources 
Natural gas 
Coal mines 
Petroleum industry 
Coal combustion+++ 
Biospheric carbon 
Enteric fermentation 
Rice paddies 
Biomass burning 
Landfills 
Animal waste 
Domestic sewage 
Total biospheric 
40 (2550) 
30 (1545) 
15 (530) 
? (130) 
85 (65100) 
60 (20-100) 
40 (2080 
40 (2070) 
25 (2030) 
25 (15-80) 
100 (70-120)++ 
275 (200-350) 
Total identified anthropogenic sources 
375 (300-450)+ 
TOTAL IDENTIFIED SOURCES 
535 (410-660) 
TOTAL Global Burden: 4850 Tg(CH4) 
Note: The observed increases in methane show that sources exceed sinks by about 35 to 40 Tg each year. All data are rounded to 
the nearest 5 Tg. 
• 
A pre-industrial level of 700 ppbv would have required a source of 210 Tg(CH4)/yr if the lifetime has remained constant, and 
2S0 Tg (CH4)/yr if current (ropospheric chemical feedbacks can be extrapolated back. The total anthropogenic emissions of CI 
based on identifed sources. 375 (300-450). is slightly higher than the inferred range from pre-industrial levels, 270-340. but is 
well within the uncertainties. 
t 
fractional source from fossil carbon based on a measure of the atmospheric ratio of 14CH to I2CH 
-TT Juddi-r nl. (1W.1). khalil t'r <;/. (lW3a) 
4 
4' 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
87 
temperature combustion of coal (not included previously) 
could be a significant source of methane, with a global 
emission of 16 Tg/yr and a range of 5-30 Tg/yr. Emissions 
of methane from the inefficient combustion of coal may be 
significant. However, there is considerable uncertainty in 
the magnitude of these emissions and further research is 
needed to refine preliminary estimates. 
Anastasi and Simpson (1993) estimated a 1990 emission 
of 84 Tg/yr from enteric fermentation in cattle, sheep, and 
buffalo, which contributes 90% of the total emission from 
domestic animals, towards the upper part of the range 
given in IPCC (1992) (65-100 Tg/yr). In a complete re-
evaluation of emissions from biomass burning, Andreae 
and Warneck (1994) report a total of 43 Tg/yr in good 
agreement with the global estimates made in IPCC (1992). 
Other recent estimates of CH4 from biomass burning are 
30 Tg/yr (Hao and Ward, 1993), 35 Tg/yr (Subak et al., 
1993) and 50 Tg/yr (Levine et al., 1994). 
Numerous studies of emissions from rice paddies (e.g., 
Bachelet and Neue, 1993; Delwiche and Cicerone, 1993; 
Lai et al., 1993; Subak et al., 1993; Wang et al., 1993a,b; 
Wassman et al., 1993; Shao et al., 1994; Shearer and 
Khalil, 1994) indicate a global source of 60 Tg/yr with a 
range of 20-100 Tg/yr. 
New estimates of landfills suggest a global source of 
about 40 Tg/yr (Miiller, 1992; Subak et al., 1993; Tohjima 
and Wakita, 1993). 
As Table 2.3 indicates, about 70% of the CH4 emissions 
(375 Tg/yr) result from human activity and approximately 
20% of the total emissions are of fossil origin. 
2.3.2 Removal of Methane 
As detailed in Section 2.2, CH4 is removed from the 
atmosphere through reaction with tropospheric OH, about 
445 Tg/yr (Table 2.3) and stratospheric removal, 40 Tg/yr. 
Another significant sink is the microbial uptake in soils, 
about 15-45 Tg(CH4)/yr. A growing number of studies 
(reviewed by Reeburgh et al., 1993) show that methane 
from the atmosphere, and also that diffusing upward from 
deep soils, is consumed by microbial communities in the 
upper soils. Methane fluxes at the terrestrial and marine 
surface are highly variable because they result from the 
difference of two large processes (in situ production and 
consumption). It is noted that this oxidation of CH4 is also 
important in modulating methane emissions from rice 
paddies, wetlands and landfills. Disturbance (cultivation, 
fertilisation) has been shown to reduce the effectiveness of 
the soil sink in temperate soils (Keller et al., 1990; Mosier 
et al, 1991; Hutsch et al., 1993; Minami et al., 1993; 
Ojimae/fl/., 1993). 
The budget imbalance depends on the recent trends (see 
Section 2.3.4) but sources must have exceeded sinks by 
about 7-8% over the last decade. 
2.3.3 Atmospheric 
Distribution 
The fact that sources of CH4 are essentially land based and 
therefore lie predominantly in the Northern Hemisphere 
can explain much of the latitudinal gradient observed in 
CH4 with about 6% lower values in the Southern 
Hemisphere. This difference corresponds to an excess 
Northern Hemisphere source of about 280 Tg(CH4)/yr. 
The observed seasonal cycle (±1.2% at mid-latitudes) can 
be explained in large part by the annual variation in 
tropospheric OH concentrations, and to a lesser extent by 
seasonally varying sources and atmospheric transport. The 
seasonal cycle in the Southern Hemisphere also contains a 
signal from transport of tropical biomass burning sources 
(Lassey et al., 1993; Law and Pyle, 1993). 
2.3.4 Trends and Sensitivities 
Atmospheric CH4 concentrations have changed 
considerably over time. Most striking is the increase of 
more than a factor of two over the last two centuries, 
derived from air trapped in ice cores (Figure 2.1). During 
the past decade the rate of that increase has declined. 
Measurements from two global observing networks have 
derived globally averaged growth rates for methane of 
approximately 20 ppbv/yr in 1979-80, 13 ppbv/yr in 1983, 
10 ppbv/yr in 1990 and about 5 ppbv/yr in 1992 (Steele et 
al., 1992; Khalil and Rasmussen, 1993; Dlugokencky et 
al., 1994a). The decline in growth rate was more rapid in 
the 30°-90°N semi-hemisphere than in the other semi-
hemispheres (Figure 2.2). The change in CH4 from 1991 to 
1992 in the Northern Hemisphere was close to zero. The 
cause of this global decline in methane growth rates is 
unknown and still a matter of speculation. It could, for 
1650 
1550 
1450 
1350 
1250 
1150 
1050 
950 
850 
750 
650 
900 
DE08 
Site J 
Mizuho 
Summit (Bern) 
Summit (Grenoble) 
- Cape Grim 
»
*
•
*
*
• 
1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800 1900 2000 
Year 
Figure 2.1: Methane mixing ratios from the air bubbles trapped 
in ice cores from Antarctica over the past 1,000 years (Law 
Dome (DE0S): Etheridge et al.. 1992; Mizuho: Nakazawa et al., 
1993) and Greenland (Site J: Nakazawa el al., 1993: Summit: 
Blunier el al., 199.3). Atmospheric measurements from Cape 
Grim. Tasmania, are included to demonstrate the smooth 
transition from ice core to atmospheric measurements. 

88 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistn 
1825 
1775 
1725 
1675 
~\ 
r 
£ 
1625 
CD 
5 
1575 
1525 
- H ^ v g ^ ^ 
• 
v«;*-»—-
-1 
L 
J 
L 
B 
Q B -
_I_ 
1965 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 
Year 
Figure 2.2: Seasonal cycles and trends in atmospheric methane over the decade 1983 to 1992. Results from the NOAA-CMDL global 
flask network (37 sites) have been gridded to 14-day intervals and averaged over four equal areas of the atmosphere: high northern 
(3()°N - 9()°N), low northern (0 - 30°N), low southern (0 - 30°S) and high southern (30°S - 90°S) semi-hemispheres (Steele et ai, 1992; 
Dlugokencky et«/., 1994c). 
example, be explained by a rapid drop of about 5% in 
global annual emissions. One suggestion is a decrease in 
CH4 emissions from 
the former Soviet 
Union 
(Dlugokencky et al., 1994b). Additional CH4 data from 
Antarctica by Aoki et al. (1992) confirm the trends 
observed by the NOAA-CMDL stations in the same 
region. 
A significant depletion in 13CH4 has been observed in 
the Southern Hemisphere since mid-1991, coincident with 
the significant drop in the CH4 growth rate between 1991 
and 1992. The isotopic data are used to infer that the 
change in CH4 growth rate is due to decreasing sources 
rather than increasing sinks and that it results from a 
combination of decreased tropical biomass burning and a 
lower release of fossil CH4 in the Northern Hemisphere 
(Lowe (V al., 1994). 
Observed methane levels in the high Arctic (Alert, 
83°N) in 1993 were actually lower than those observed in 
1992. The data indicate that both Europe and the former 
Soviet Union are major OH4 sources, but the cause of the 
change has not been identified (Worthy et al., 1994). 
The historic record of methane concentrations through 
the industrial period has been improved by the analysis of 
four new ice cores included in Figure 2.1. An Antarctic ice 
core (Law Home) covers the period from 1840 to 1980 and 
overlaps with the direct atmospheric measurements of the 
ll)70s (Htheridge et al., 1992). It thus allows the trends of 
methane concentration durum the industrial period to be 
studied in detail. An approximate doubling of methane is 
seen, as in previous ice core studies, but the growth rate is 
not monotonic, with apparent stabilisation around the 
1920s and again during the 1970s (Etheridge et al., 1992; 
Dlugokencky et al., 1994c). From Greenland and Antarctic 
ice cores, Nakazawa et al. (1993) have extracted methane 
records that begin at about 1300 and 1600 respectively and 
continue to about 1950. The pre-industrial global mean and 
inter-hemispheric difference were found to be about 720-
740 ppbv and 35-75 ppbv respectively, about one third of 
the present day difference, indicating that the pre-industrial 
natural sources in the Northern Hemisphere were larger 
than those in the Southern Hemisphere. A Greenland ice 
core has produced a further methane record over the past 
1000 years (Blunier et al., 1993). A similar pre-industrial 
level was found (700 ppbv) and pre-industrial variations of 
about 70 ppbv were detected before AD 1500 which are 
attributed to the changed oxidising capacity of the 
atmosphere, climatic impacts on wetlands and possible 
agricultural sources of methane. Further back in time, large-
changes in the methane concentration in Greenland ice 
cores through the deglaciation and the last glacial period 
are observed to be in phase with inferred temperature 
(Figure 2.3). The record shows clearly the marked CH4 
variations associated with the younger Dryas event as well 
as the rapid CH4 variations during the glacial perio.N 
associated with rapid Greenland climatic oscillation. 
Warm periods, each lasting hundreds of years within ii;. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
89 
last glacial period, are associated with methane increases 
of about 100 ppbv. New data from the Antarctic Vostok 
ice core have extended the methane record from 160 
thousand years before present (kaBP) through the 
penultimate glaciation to the end of the previous 
interglacial, about 220 kaBP (Jouzel et ai, 1993). There is 
a clear positive correlation of methane with temperature. 
Methane minima (300-400 ppbv) occur at times of glacial 
maxima with approximately double this amount for the 
interglacials. 
There are several potential climate feedbacks that could 
affect the atmospheric methane budget (IPCC, 1990). 
Recent attention has been focused on northern wetlands 
and permafrost, where changes in surface temperature and 
rainfall are predicted to occur in climate models. 
Traditionally, temperature increases are assumed to 
generate increases in CH4 emissions (Hameed and Cess, 
1983). Recent calculations suggest a moderate increase in 
CH4 emissions in a 2 x C0 2 scenario (Harriss et al., 1993). 
Climate models generally predict lower soil moisture in 
mid-continental regions in summer for a 2 x CO-, climate 
(1PCC, 1990), although changes in soil moisture at high 
latitudes are model dependent. Lowering the water table 
increases the thickness of the layer over which methane 
oxidation can take place, so northern wetlands appear to be 
more sensitive to changes in moisture than temperature. 
Persistent water table lowering of 50-75 cm resulted in 
zero or even slightly negative fluxes (Roulet et al., 1992, 
1993), which suggests that a reduction in soil moisture 
may significantly reduce methane fluxes from northern 
peatlands and wetlands. However, response of high 
latitude wetlands to seasonal changes in soil moisture is 
not well understood (Reeburgh et al., 1993). 
Recent data on the methane concentration in permafrost 
(Kvenvolden and Sorenson, 1993; Rasmussen et al., 1993) 
suggest a median concentration of 2-3 mg/kg. Estimates of 
future methane emissions from permafrost are less than 10 
Tg/yr based on a one-dimensional heat conduction model 
that does not consider microbial oxidation (Moraes and 
Khalil, 1993). 
Depth (m) 
§ § 
10,000 
— I 
' 
1 — 
20,000 
30,000 
Age (yrs BP) 
I o 
Figure 2.3: The methane record from a Greenland ice core over 
the period 7,000 to 40,000 years before the present is shown in 
parallel with 6180 (a surrogate for temperature). The significant 
climatic events are named or numbered as interstadial episodes 
(Chappelaz et a/., 1993). 
2.4 Nitrous Oxide 
Nitrous oxide (N 20) is an important, long-lived 
greenhouse gas that is emitted predominantly by biological 
sources in soils and water, which are not well quantified in 
global terms (Table 2.4). It is removed mainly in the 
stratosphere by photolysis and reaction with excited 
oxygen atoms (O('D)). A small soil sink has been 
suggested. The loss of N20 in the stratosphere yields NO, 
providing the major input of NOx to the stratosphere, thus 
in part regulating stratospheric ozone and influencing the 
NOx balance in the upper troposphere. 
2.4.1 Sources of Nitrous Oxide 
Tropical forest soils are probably the single most important 
source of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere. New data on 
tropical land-use changes and intensification of tropical 
agriculture indicate significant, growing sources of N20 
(Matson and Vitousek, 1990). The flux of N20 depends on 
the age of the pasture, with young pasture (<10 years) 
emitting 3-10 times more N 20 than tropical forests, 
whereas older pastures emit less N20 than tropical forest 
(Keller et al., 1993). However, further research on tropical 
agricultural systems is required before conclusions can be 
reached concerning the relative importance of tropical 
agricultural systems as growing N20 sources (Keller and 
Matson, 1994). The total N20 source from tropical soils 
(forest, savannah) is estimated at 4 Tg(N)/yr (range 2.7 -
5.7). The magnitude of N.,0 emissions from intensively 
fertilised tropical agricultural soils has not been quantified. 
No attempt has been made to speciate the tropical soil 
source into natural and anthropogenic components. More 

90 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
Table 2.4: Estimated sources and sinks ofN20 
typical of the last decade 
(Tg(N)lyr). 
Range 
Likely 
Atmospheric increase 
3.1-4.7 
3.9t 
Sinks 
stratosphere 
soils 
9-16 
9 
Natural 
oceans 
tropical soils 
wet forests 
dry savannas 
temperate soils 
forests 
grasslands 
1-5 
2.2 - 3.7 
0.5 - 2.0 
0.1 - 2.0 
0.5 - 2.0 
12.3 
Total Sinks 
Implied total sources (atmospheric increase + total sinks) 
9-16 
13-20 
12.3 
16.2 
Identified sources 
Range 
Likely 
Total identified natural sources 
6-12 
Anthropogenic 
cultivated soils 
biomass burning 
industrial sources 
cattle and feed lots 
1.8-5.3 
0.2 -1.0 
0.7-1.8 
0.2 - 0.5 
3.5 
0.5 
1.3 
0.4 
Total identified anthropogenic 
3.7-7.7 
5.7 
TOTAL IDENTIFIED SOURCES 
10-17 
14.7 
The observed atmospheric increase implies that sources exceed sinks by 3.9 Tg(N)/yr. 
reliable estimates require better models of N-,0 emissions 
from soils and better data bases of underlying soil and 
ecosystem properties. 
There is evidence to show that grasslands emit small 
amounts of N , 0 (Mosier et al., 1981, 1991; Minami et al., 
1993; Meyer et al., 1994) and Krielman and Bouwman 
(1994) estimated a global grassland source of 1.4 
Tg(N)/yr. A global value of approximately 1 Tg(N)/yr has 
been adopted in Table 2.4. 
The Earth's oceans are significant N-,0 sources. Nitrous 
oxide fluxes from upwelling regions of the Indian (Law 
and Owen. 1990) and Pacific (Codispoti et al.. 1992) 
Oceans suggest that oceans may be a larger source than 
previously estimated (1.4 - 2.6 Tg(N)/yr: IPCC 1992). The 
total pre-industrial N-,0 source was approximately 9 
Tg(N) yr of which approximately 3 Tg(N)/yr was oceanic 
(Weiss, 1994). An isotopic study of atmospheric N-,0 
(Kim and Craig, 1993) suggests a large gross flux of N-,0 
between the atmosphere and the ocean, but the possible 
implications for net fluxes are not clear. The ocean flux 
estimate that has been adopted for this assessment is 3 
Tg(N)/yr (range 1-5). 
New research suggests that N 9 0 emissions from 
cropped, nitrogen-fertilised (by mineral, manure and 
legumes) agricultural systems are significant on a global 
scale. Such sources have been extensively evaluated by 
IPCC Working Group II (personal communication) and 
estimated at 3.5 Tg(N)/yr (range 1.8 - 5.3). 
Nitrous oxide is also emitted by a large number of 
smaller sources, most of which are difficult to evahiaie. 
These include soils of other natural ecosystems, biorr.ass 
burning, degassing of ground water used for irrigation and 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
91 
specialised industrial processes. There are very few studies 
of these sources, particularly in the tropics, and 
uncertainties in their emission estimates are large. These 
sources are listed in Table 2.4 and are largely based on 
IPCC (1992). A few, previously unevaluated sources have 
been added including N20 from cattle and feed lots (0.2-
0.5 Tg(N)/yr; Khalil and Rasmussen, 1992) and N20 from 
cars fitted with catalytic converters (0.1-0.6 Tg(N)/yr; 
Dasch, 1992; Khalil and Rasmussen, 1992; Berger et ai, 
1993), the latter having been included in the figure for 
industrial sources, along with adipic acid production. The 
biomass burning source (0.2-1.0 Tg(N)/yr) may be 
underestimated due to unaccounted for enhanced post-
burning biogenic emissions (Levine, 1994). 
Table 2.4 indicates that about 40% of N20 sources are 
anthropogenic. This figure could be an underestimate 
because tropical agricultural soil sources resulting from 
human activities have not been separated from natural 
tropical soil sources. Nitrous oxide from natural sources is 
estimated at 9 Tg(N)/yr (range 6-12), in agreement with 
Weiss (1994). These estimates of natural sources fall at the 
lower end of those needed to maintain pre-industrial 
concentrations of 275 ppbv, about 11 ±3 Tg(N)/yr. 
2.4.2 Removal of Nitrous Oxide 
The major sink for N,0 is photodissociation by sunlight 
(wavelengths 180-230 nm) in the stratosphere; a secondary 
removal process, about 10%, occurs through reaction with 
0(1D). The best estimates for the lifetime of N 90 come 
from the 2D stratospheric chemical transport models that 
have been tested against observed distributions and tracer-
tracer correlations (Prather & Remsberg, 1993) and that 
include the accurate modelling of transmission of 
ultraviolet sunlight (Minschwaner et al., 1993). The 
current best estimate for stratospheric removal is 120 ± 30 
yr. Mahlman et al. (1986) reached a similar conclusion 
based upon 3-D transport model considerations. There is 
some evidence that N-,0 is consumed by some soils (cf. 
Donoso et al., 1993), but there are not enough data to 
make a reasonable global estimate of this sink. The 
consequences of a significant ocean reservoir of nitrous 
oxide have been neglected here in the consideration of the 
above lifetime. An ocean reservoir could potentially 
extend the response time for N 20 beyond the above 
estimate. 
The strengths of these sinks is summarised in Table 2.4. 
No estimate is made of the soil sink. The sum of the 
stratospheric loss and the atmospheric increase is about 16 
Tg(N)/yr (range 12-20). Although not indicated by the 
uncertainty ranges, this is probably better known than the 
total N-,0 source (approximately 15 Tg(N)/yr, range 10-
17). Based on these estimates the identified sources exceed 
sinks by about 15%, but clearly the uncertainty ranges are 
such that there may not be any major, unidentified sources. 
Sources and sinks whose strengths have not been 
estimated, or may be underestimated, are tropical 
agriculture, biomass burning, temperate grasslands 
(sources) and soils (sinks). 
2.4.3 Atmospheric Distribution 
Owing to its long lifetime, N-,0 exhibits only small spatial 
and temporal variations in the free troposphere. By 
empirically scaling with CFC interhemispheric gradients, 
the interhemispheric difference of about 1 ppbv (0.3%) 
corresponds to a source imbalance with an excess Northern 
Hemisphere source of 5 Tg(N)/yr. No seasonal variation 
has been observed. 
2.4.4 Trends and Sensitivities 
Analysis of available global nitrous oxide data indicates a 
clear continuous increase in N20 since the pre-industrial 
era. The rate of growth over the last decade is small, about 
0.25%/yr, and there is difficulty in measuring the global 
abundance of N.,0 with this precision. For example, the 
decadal trend from Prinn et al. (1990) is 0.7 to 1.0 ppbv/yr 
and that from Khalil and Rasmussen (1992) is 0.5 to 1.2 
ppbv/yr. In another recent analysis, Weiss (1994) showed 
that the global average abundance at the beginning of 1976 
was 299 ppbv and had risen to 310 ppbv at the beginning 
of 1993. During 1976-82 the growth rate was about 0.55 
ppbv/yr, which increased to a maximum of 0.8 ppbv/yr in 
1988-89, declining to the current rate of 0.6 ppbv/yr. A 
similar result has been observed in the 15-year global 
record of NOAA-CMDL (Elkins et al., 1993a, see Figure 
2.4). Zander et al. (1994) have extended atmospheric 
measurements of N.,0 from solar spectra collected at 
Jungfraujoch, and derived a mixing ratio of 275 ppbv for 
April 1951 together with an increase of about 10% over 
the past four decades. 
Previously, ice core records of nitrous oxide showed an 
increase of about 8% over the industrial period (Etheridge 
et.al., 1988; Khalil and Rasmussen, 1988a; Zardini et al., 
1989). A new record covering the last 45,000 years was 
obtained from two ice cores from Antarctica and 
Greenland (Leuenberger and Siegenthaler, 1992). The 
Greenland record covers the period 1780 to 1950 and 
suggests a pre-industrial nitrous oxide level of about 260 
ppbv, 10 and 25 ppbv lower than other records. Results 
from a new Antarctic core (Machida et al., 1994) indicate 
a pre-industrial level of about 273 ppbv. Thus estimates of 
pre-industrial levels of N.,0 average about 275 ppbv with a 
range of 260 to 285 ppbv. Nitrous oxide levels have risen 
approximately 15% since pre-industrial times. The 
Antarctic core shows that nitrous oxide was about 30% 
lower than these pre-industrial levels (about 180-190 ppbv) 

92 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
315 
78 
'80 
'82 
'84 '86 '88 
'90 
'92 
Year 
Figure 2.4: Nitrous oxide mixing ratios from 1977 to 1993. 
Globally averaged values are those reported from the NOAA-
CMDL flask sampling network (Elkins et al., 1993a). 
at the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and between the pre-
industrial and LGM levels (220-250 ppbv) between 30 and 
50 kaBP, consistent with the hypothesis that soils are a 
major natural source of nitrous oxide. 
2.5 Halocarbons 
Perhalocarbon species such as the CFCs, carbon 
tetrachloride (CC14), carbon tetrafluoride (CF4) and the 
halons are powerful greenhouse gases, because they 
strongly absorb terrestrial infrared radiation and have long 
(typically a 50 years) atmospheric lifetimes. The 
hydrohalogcnated species such as methylchloroform, 
HCFCs and CFCs are also significant infrared absorbers 
but their shorter atmospheric lifetimes (typically <. 15 
years) reduce their climatic impact compared to the 
perhalocarbon species. All species containing chlorine and 
bromine play a role in lower stratospheric ozone depletion, 
and hence climate cooling, and this tends to offset their 
ability to cause surface warming. The emissions of the 
major anthropogenic chlorine- and bromine-containing 
species are now largely controlled (> 90%) by the 
requirements of the Montreal Protocol. A recent, 
comprehensive review (Kaye et al, 1994) has provided 
extensive details on the global distributions, trends, 
emissions and lifetimes of halocarbons such as CFCs, 
halons and related species. This section provides a 
summary and update of that review. 
about 100%, CFC-113 by about 300% and CC14 by about 
20% (Cunnold et al., 1986; Rasmussen and Khalil, 1986; 
Makide et al, 1987; Simmonds et al, 1988; Fraser et al.. 
1994 and references therein). There is now clear evidence 
that the growth rates of the CFCs and CC14 have slowed 
significantly. CFC-11 and -12 (Figure 2.5) trends in the 
late 1970s to late 1980s were about 9-11 pptv/yr and 17-20 
CFC-12 
£ 
500 
Q . 
250 
I 
1 
O 
X 
o 
-| 
1 
1 
1 
r 
(a) 
+ Ireland 
— Oregon 
— Tasmania 
An*1* 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
l 
l 
I 
I 
I 
78 
'80 
'82 
'84 
'86 
'88 
'90 
'92 
Year 
CFC - 1 1 
a. 
o I 
1 
E 
O 
250 
200 -
150 -
-i 
1 
1 
r 
(b) 
+ Ireland 
- - Oregon 
— Tasmania 
_i 
i 
i 
i 
i_ 
'78 
'80 
'82 
'84 
'86 
'88 
'90 
'92 
Year 
Methylchloroform 
180 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
— i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
r 
(c) 
+ Ireland 
- - - Oregon 
- — Tasmania 
. , & 
J* ****%, 
.*&*'" 
78 
80 
'82 
84 
'86 
'88 
'90 
'92 
Year 
2.5.1 Atmospheric 
Distributions 
and Trends 
2.5.1.1 CFCs and carbon 
tetrachloride 
CFCs-11,-12 and -113 and carbon tetrachloride have been 
measured in a number of global programmes and their 
tropospheric mixing ratios have increased steadily from the 
mid-1970s to 1990, with CFC-11 and -12 increasing by 
Figure 2.5: Atmospheric abundances of (a) CFC-12, (b) CFC-11. 
and (c) CH3CCI3 from 1978 to 1992 from the ALE-GAGE global 
sampling network (Prinn et al., 1992, Cunnold et al., 1994; Fra-cr 
et al., 1994, Eraser and Derek, 1994 and unpublished data from ihc 
ALE/GAGE network). Monthly mean clean air values arc show: 
for three sites: Tasmania, Oregon and Ireland. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
93 
pptv/yr respectively. These declined to about 7 and 16 
pptv/yr respectively around 1990 and to about 3 and 11 
pptv/yr by 1993 (Elkins et al., 1993b; Simmonds et al., 
1993; Cunnold et al., 1994; Rowland et al., 1994). 
Global CFC-113 and CC14 data to the end of 1990 were 
recently reviewed (Eraser et al., 1994). A global average 
trend CFC-113 of about 6 pptv/yr was observed, with no 
sign of the slow-down observed for CFC-11 and -12, 
whereas carbon tetrachloride appeared to have stopped 
accumulating in the atmosphere. Global CFC-113 data 
extended to the end of 1992 now indicate that the growth 
rate has started to slow down, presumably in response to 
reduced emissions (Fisher et al., 1994; Fraser et al., 1994). 
Carbon tetrachloride data collected at Cape Grim, 
Tasmania, indicate that the levels of this trace gas have 
started to decline (Fraser and Derek, 1994). 
2.5.1.2 Methylchloroform and the HCFCs 
Global methylchloroform and HCFC-22 data to the end of 
1990 have recently been reviewed (Prinn et al., 1992; 
Montzka et al, 1993; Fraser et al, 1994), with growth 
rates in 1990 of 4-5 and 6-7 pptv/yr respectively. The 
methylchloroform data to the end of 1992 (Figure 2.5) 
indicate that the slowing of the growth rate observed in 
1990 has continued, presumably due to the combination of 
atmospheric oxidation and reduced emissions in 1991-92 
compared to 1990. Part of the declining methylchloroform 
trend has been ascribed to increasing OH levels (1.0 ± 
0.8%/yr, Prinn et al., 1992). The methylchloroform 
calibration problems detailed in Fraser et al. (1994) are 
important (see Section 2.2) and have yet to be resolved. 
Global HCFC-22 data (Montzka et al., 1993) indicate a 
mean mixing ratio in 1992 of 102 ± 1 pptv, an 
interhemispheric difference of 13 ± 1 pptv and a globally 
averaged growth rate of 7.4 ± 0.3 pptv/yr. Based on the 
latest industry estimates of HCFC-22 emissions (Midgley 
and Fisher, 1993), the data indicate an atmospheric 
lifetime for HCFC-22 of 13.3 (11.8-15.2) years, see Table 
2.1. The latest HCFC-22 data indicate that the near linear 
trend observed in earlier data has continued. The possible 
HCFC-22 calibration problems addressed in Fraser et al. 
(1994) have not yet been resolved. HCFC-142b 
(CH3CC1F2) and HCFC-141b (CH3CC12F) have recently 
been introduced as CFC substitutes, replacing CFC-11 in 
foam-blowing processes. The study of their accumulation 
in the atmosphere has only just commenced, but hopefully 
will provide essential information about their atmospheric 
lifetimes and conversely about OH levels in the 
atmosphere. Pollock et al. (1992) detected upper 
tropospheric levels of HCFC-142b at about 1.1 pptv in 
1989, growing at 7%/yr. Measurements of these two 
species has commenced using the NOAA-CMDL flask 
sampling network. The preliminary 1992 annual global 
mean HCFC-142b mixing ratio was 3.6 ± 0.1 pptv, 
growing at ~ 1 pptv/yr (Elkins et al., 1993b). The 
preliminary 1992 and 1993 annual global mean HCFC-
142b mixing ratios for 1992 and 1993 were 3.2 ± 0.1 and 
4.3 ± 0.1 pptv respectively, growing by 1.1 pptv/yr. The 
1993 mean mixing ratio of HCFC-141b was 0.7 ppbv, 
growing at 0.9 ppbv/yr into 1994 (Elkins et al., 1993a; 
Montzka et al., 1994). 
2.5.1.3 Other chlorinated species 
There are a number of other short-lived chlorinated species 
such as methylchloride, chloroform, dichloromethane and 
chlorinated ethenes that are present in the background 
atmosphere. Their atmospheric lifetimes are short and they 
do not make a significant contribution to radiative forcing, 
but methylchloride is a significant source of stratospheric 
chlorine. Available data on the abundance of these species 
have been reviewed (Fraser et al., 1994). Global mean 
methylchloride (CH3C1, 600-640 pptv), chloroform 
(CHC13, 10-15 pptv), dichloromethane (CH,C12, 30 pptv), 
tetrachlorethylene (CCl^CCl,, 10 pptv) and trichloro-
ethylene (CHCICCI^ 2-3 pptv) abundances are indicated. 
No long-term trends for these species have been observed, 
although they all exhibit distinct annual cycles (summer 
minimum, winter maximum). Measurements made in 1989 
in 
the 
Atlantic 
(45°N-30°S) 
showed 
average 
methylchloride levels of 540 pptv, with slightly higher 
levels in the SH (550 ± 12 pptv) than the NH (532 ± 8 
pptv). Significant gradients in dichloromethane (366 pptv, 
NH; 18 ± 1 pptv, SH), tetrachlorethylene(l-10 pptv, NH; 
1-3 pptv, SH) and trichloroethylene (1-15 pptv, NH; < 
lpptv SH) were observed consistent with anthropogenic, 
largely Northern Hemispheric, sources for these species 
(Koppmann et al., 1993). More recent measurements 
(1990) in the tropical Pacific Ocean (15°N to 10°S) showed 
that the average methylchloride level was 630 pptv; 
chloroform, 9 pptv; dichloromethane, 24 pptv; and 
tetrachlorethylene, 5 pptv. The methylchloride data 
showed no interhemispheric gradient, indicative of a 
largely oceanic source, whereas the other species showed 
clear gradients (higher in the Northern Hemisphere), 
indicative of Northern Hemispheric (presumably 
anthropogenic) sources (Atlas et al., 1993). 
2.5.1.4 Methylbromide, halons and other brominated 
species 
Since the 1PCC reports of 1990 and 1992, interest in and 
understanding of brominated species in the background 
atmosphere has expanded considerably, driven by the 
recognition of bromine's significant role in stratospheric 
ozone depletion. 
Available measurements on the global distribution, 
sources and sinks of methylbromide have been reviewed 

94 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
(Albritton and Watson, 1993; Penkett et al., 1994) and re-
analysed (Reeves and Penkett, 1993; Singh and 
Kanakidou, 1993). The data suggest global mean levels of 
10-15 pptv. Another data set (Khalil et al., 1993b) 
indicates an average level of about 10 pptv, which has 
increased over the past four years at about 3 ± 1%/yr. Six 
years of halon data (H-1211 and H-1301) show that the 
global background levels are about 2.5 pptv (H-1211) and 
2.0 pptv (H-1301), currently growing at about 3 and 8%/yr 
respectively (Butler et al., 1992). These rates have slowed 
significantly in recent years, consistent with reduced 
emissions (McCuIloch, 1992). 
Data from the tropical Pacific Ocean (Atlas et al., 1993) 
indicate concentrations of methylbromide, dibromomethane 
(CH-,Br,), bromoform (CHBr3) and dibromochloromethane 
(CHBr2Cl) of 14, 1.8, 1.8 and 0.2 pptv, respectively. The 
methylbromide data did not show an interhemispheric 
gradient, in contrast to the Atlantic Ocean data of Penkett 
et al. (1985), from which a large anthropogenic source was 
inferred. Clearly more research on the global distribution 
of methylbromide is required. Bromoform and 
dibromochloromethane show distinct equatorial maxima, 
indicating a tropical source related to biogenic activity. 
2.5.1.5 Other perhalogenated species 
Perhalogenated species such as tetrafluoromethane (CF4), 
hexafluoroethane (CF3CF3) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) 
strongly absorb infrared radiation, have very long 
atmospheric lifetimes and are therefore very powerful 
greenhouse gases. The global mean concentration of 
tetrafluoromethane was measured in 1979 at 70 ± 7 pptv 
(Penkett et al., 1981). Measurements at the South Pole 
between the late-1970s and mid-1980s indicate a mean 
concentration of 70 pptv growing at about 2%/yr (Khalil 
and Rasmussen, 1985). Fabian et al. (1987) have reported 
northern 
mid-latitude 
values of 70 pptv for 
tetrafluoromethane and 2 pptv for hexafluoroethane. 
Sulphur hexafluoride is a long-lived atmospheric trace gas 
whose current global background level is 2-3 pptv, 
increasing at about 9 ± 1%/yr, based on data observed in 
the lower stratosphere between 1981 and 1992 (Rinsland et 
al., 1993). Column measurements in Europe (1986 to 
1990) and North America (1981 to 1990) both show 
increases of 6-7%/yr (Zander et al., 1991). 
annual emissions fell by about 35%, somewhat less than 
production reductions, due to the time lag between 
production and emission. World-wide emissions of 
individual halocarbons are shown in Figure 2.6, based on 
industrial survey results (AFEAS, 1993; Fisher et al.. 
1994). Individual CFC compounds show substantial 
reductions in emissions over this period which vary among 
the compounds due to differences in application, ease of 
substitution/replacement and use-banking times. 
Allowances are included for production outside the region 
surveyed. Emissions of methylchloroform have also 
declined over this period, but to a lesser degree than the 
CFCs, as allowed by the provisions of the Protocol. 
HCFC-22 emissions rose continuously throughout this 
period since HCFC-22 has been used as a replacement for 
CFCs and its use has not yet been curtailed by the 
Protocol. Emissions of halons have been reduced 
substantially (McCulloch, 1992) (no data are available for 
1991 and 1992). No emission data are available for carbon 
tetrachloride due to the fact that its production/use has not 
been surveyed. 
800 
700 
600 
I" 500 
I too 
m 
•I 300 
200 i 
100 
0 
(a) 
+ +. 
i t * * * . * » ' 
9 <P' + + + 
— I 
1 
1 
1
— 
1972 
1976 
1980 
1984 
1988 
CFC-11 
CFC-12 
CFC-113 
+ 
HCFC-22 
CH3CCI3 
1992 
20 
18 
16 
1 1° 
.8 an 
E 
w 
6 -
4 -
2 
0 
(b) 
+ + + + 
* ; : : » « + 
CFC-114 
CFC-115 
H-1211 
H-1301 
1972 
1976 
1980 
1984 
1988 
1992 
2.5.2 Industrial Production, Use and Emissions 
World-wide consumption of CFCs has fallen significantly 
following enactment of the Montreal Protocol. From 1988 
to 1992. production of CFCs-11, -12 and -113 fell by about 
40% as a result of substitution and conservation measures 
taken in the refrigeration, foam-blowing, cleaning agent 
and aerosol propellant industries. During this same period. 
Figure 2.6: Annual emissions of some important industrial 
halocarbons from 1972 to 1992 based on production statistics 
(AFEAS, 1993; Fisher et al., 1994; Fisher, 1994 and unpublish. 
work from D. Fisher and P. Midgley). For CFC-11, CFC-12. 
CFC-113, CH-,CC13 and the halons, the estimates are for global 
use; for HCFC-22, CFC-114 and CFC-115, the estimates are 
from reporting companies and may be somewhat less than the 
global emissions. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
95 
CH2C12 and CHC1CC12 are used as industrial cleaning 
solvents. Sources of 0.9 and 0.6 Tg/yr have been recently 
estimated from observed atmospheric abundances 
(Koppmann et al., 1993). The aluminium refining industry 
is believed to be the major source of CF4 (0.018Tg/yr) and 
CF3CF3 (0.001 Tg/yr) although it still remains an open 
question as to what fraction of the atmospheric burden can 
be attributed to other sources, such as generation of F9, 
reduction of UF4 and UF6, the use of fluorspar in steel 
making, etc. (Cicerone, 1979). No natural sources have 
been identified. 80% of SF6 production (0.005 Tg in 1989) 
is used for insulation of electrical equipment, 5-10% for 
degassing molten reactive metals, and a small amount as 
an atmospheric tracer (Ko et al., 1993). 
2.5 J Natural Sources 
Methylhalides are produced primarily in the ocean, usually 
associated with algal growth (Sturges et al., 1993; Moore 
and Tokarczyk, 1993), although a significant fraction may 
come from biomass burning. Methylchloride, with an 
atmospheric abundance of about 600 pptv, is the dominant 
halogenated methane species in the atmosphere. 
Maintaining this steady-state mixing ratio with an 
atmospheric lifetime on the order of two years requires a 
production of around 3.5 Tg/yr (Koppman et al., 1993), 
most of which comes from the ocean. Sources from 
biomass burning have also been identified (Mano and 
Andreae, 1994; Rudolph et al., 1994). 
Total emissions of methylbromide have been estimated 
between 0.075 and 0.12 Tg/yr (Albritton and Watson, 
1993; and other model evaluations noted there), but the 
identity of the sources is still in question. The ocean is 
believed to contribute between 30-70% of atmospheric 
methylbromide (Khalil et al., 1993b; Reeves and Penkett, 
1993; Singh et al., 1983) and anthropogenic uses, such as 
fumigation of soils and fresh produce, are believed to 
contribute about 25%, with some arguments for a greater 
proportion. It has recently has been suggested that biomass 
burning could contribute 10-50% of the total flux (Mano 
and Andreae, 1994). Other halogenated methanes, such as 
bromoform and mixed halogens, are emitted mainly from 
coastal waters, but they do not accumulate significantly in 
the atmosphere. CHBr3, CHBr2Cl and CH2Br2 are 
produced by macrophytic algae (seaweeds) in coastal 
regions (Manley et al., 1992) and possibly by open ocean 
phyloplankton (Tokarczyk and Moore, 1994). 
2.5.4 Halocarbon Removal Processes 
Fully halogenated halocarbons are destroyed primarily by 
photodissociation and reactions with O('D) in the mid to 
upper stratosphere. These gases have atmospheric lifetimes 
of decades to centuries (Table 2.1). Halocarbons 
containing at least one hydrogen atom, such as HCFC-22, 
chloroform, methylchloroform, the methyl halides and 
other HCFCs and HFCs, are removed from the troposphere 
mainly by reaction with OH. The atmospheric lifetimes of 
these gases range from months to decades, see Table 2.1. 
However, some of these gases also react with sea water. 
About 5-10% of the methylchloroform in the atmosphere 
is lost to the ocean, presumably by hydrolysis (Butler et 
al., 1991; Wallace et al., 1994). Only about 2% of 
atmospheric HCFC-22 is apparently destroyed in the 
ocean, mainly in tropical surface waters (Lobert et al., 
1993). Although the ocean is probably a net source of 
methyl bromide, it is removed from sea water at about 10-
40% per day by hydrogen and halide exchange (Swain and 
Scott, 1953; Mabey and Mill, 1978; Elliot, 1984; Elliot and 
Rowland, 1993; Gentile et al., 1989). The lifetime of 
methyl bromide with respect to tropospheric OH is about 2 
yr, but the total lifetime may be significantly less. Butler 
(1994) estimated an effective lifetime of 1.2 yr with 
respect to increased or decreased emissions, owing to the 
role of the ocean as a "buffer" for atmospheric methyl 
bromide. Other, presently unquantified, land-based sinks 
may also contribute to a shorter atmospheric lifetime of 
methyl bromide (Rasche et al., 1990; Oremland et al., 
1993a,b). 
Recent studies show that carbon tetrachloride may also 
be destroyed in the ocean. Widespread, negative saturation 
anomalies (-6% to 0.8%) of carbon tetrachloride, 
consistent with a subsurface sink (Lobert et al., 1993), 
have been reported (Butler et al., 1993; Wallace et al., 
1994). Published hydrolysis rates for carbon tetrachloride 
are not sufficient to generate the observed saturation 
anomalies (Jeffers et al., 1989), which, nevertheless, 
indicate that about 20% of the carbon tetrachloride in the 
atmosphere could be consumed by the oceans. 
Recent investigation of the atmospheric lifetimes of 
perfluorinated species CF4, CF3CF3 and SFf) indicates 
lifetimes of >50,000, >10,000 and 3,200 years 
(Ravishankara et al., 1993). Destruction processes 
considered include photolysis, reaction with O('D), 
combustion and removal by lightning. Loss by uptake into 
the oceans is not significant for perfluorinated 
hydrocarbons. 
2.6 Observed Ozone (03) and Tropospheric UV 
Ozone is found throughout the atmosphere, with about 
90% in the stratosphere and the remainder in the 
troposphere. In both regions it is continually formed and 
destroyed through photochemical processes. In the 
troposphere two other important processes are the transport 
of ozone rich air from the stratosphere and the destruction 
of ozone at the Earth's surface (see Section 2.2). Ozone is 
radiatively important in both the ultraviolet and infrared 

96 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
parts of the spectrum and, as described in Section 4.3 of 
Chapter 4, the radiative forcing due to ozone changes 
depends on whether the ozone is in the stratosphere or 
troposphere. This radiative forcing is greatest when the 
ozone changes occur near the tropopause and so the trends 
of most interest here are those observed in the upper 
troposphere and lower stratosphere. We consider the 
observed changes in ozone in these regions separately. Our 
understanding of and ability to model the processes 
controlling tropospheric ozone are discussed elsewhere in 
this chapter. Our current understanding of stratospheric 
ozone is described in the 1994 WMO/UNEP Ozone 
Assessment and is not discussed here. Similarly, a number 
of data quality issues which are discussed in some detail in 
the 1994 Ozone Assessment are not mentioned here. 
2.6.1 Stratospheric Ozone 
For some time it has been realised that stratospheric ozone 
levels over northern mid-latitudes (30°-60°N, where most 
of the ground-based Dobson spectrophotometers which 
monitor ozone are) have decreased since around 1970 
(WMO, 1990). The losses are greatest in winter and 
spring. Satellite measurements from November 1979 to 
March 1991 confirmed this finding and showed that 
broadly similar mid-latitude losses have also occurred at 
equivalent latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere. Globally, 
the most obvious feature is the annual appearance of the 
Antarctic ozone hole in September and October. The 
October average values are 50-70% lower than those 
observed in the 1960s. The ozone loss occurs at altitudes 
between 14 and 20 km and is clearly caused by the 
chlorine and bromine compounds released in the 
stratospheric decomposition of halocarbons (principally 
CFCs, halons and mcthylbromide). The weight of evidence 
shows that the mid-latitude ozone loss is due largely to the 
same chlorine and bromine compounds. These results and 
the effect of more recent data are assessed in the 1994 
Ozone Assessment. 
The most obvious features in the recent record are the 
low values seen in the 1991 to 1993 period. Such effects 
occurred regionally, with the largest deviations (15% 
below historic levels) observed in the northern mid-
latitudes in the springs of 1992 and 1993 (Bojkov et al., 
1993; Gleason et al.. 1993; Kerr et al.. 1993; Komhyr et 
al.. 1994). The globally averaged ozone values were 1-2% 
lower than would be expected from an extrapolation of the 
trend prior to 1991, allowing for the natural fluctuations 
resulting from the solar cycle and the quasi-biennial 
oscillation. In the spring of 1994 ozone values were back 
in line with the long-term trend seen through the 1980s. 
The trends calculated up to May 1991 and May 1994 
using data from the SBUV satellite instruments and 
ground-based Dobson instruments (February 1994) are 
shown in Figure 2.7. The first point to note is that SBUV 
shows a larger ozone decline, by about 2%/decade, than is 
shown by the Dobson network. The best agreement occurs 
in northern mid-latitudes where the Dobson network is 
strongest. The reason for this difference is being 
investigated. Overall the confidence in the trends from the 
ground based network is high, although the observed 
decreases in sulphur dioxide over Europe since the 1960s 
may have induced overestimates in the ozone decreases at 
polluted locations (De Muer and De Backer, 1992). The 
second point is that by continuing the analysis into 1994, 
the effect of the low ozone values in 1992-93 on the 
calculated trend is small and is largest in northern mid-
latitudes where the largest ozone anomalies were observed. 
The ozone decreases, both long-term and in 1992-93, have 
occurred in the lower stratosphere at altitudes between 
about 15 and 25 km (e.g., London and Liu, 1992; Kerr el 
al. 1993; Hofmann et al., 1993, 1994a; Logan, 1994). 
There is some disagreement between instrument types as 
to the magnitude of the changes at these altitudes, but at 
northern mid-latitudes the observed trends are in the range 
-5to-15%/decade. 
The trend in ozone in the tropics reported using data 
from the TOMS satellite instrument from November 1978 
to March 1991 was effectively zero (WMO, 1991). That 
found using data from January 1979 to May 1991 the 
SBUV satellite instruments is -0.8 ± 2.1%/decade. 
Measurements made using Dobson instruments in this 
region show a zero trend, but the number of observing sites 
is small. It is impossible at the moment to decide which is 
the best trend estimate, but it is worth noting that the 
SBUV trends in the tropics are less than 95% significant 
and that the claimed stability of each system is about 
1%/decade. While ozone levels in the tropics after 1991 
were less obviously anomalous than those in the northern 
mid-latitudes, some effect on the trend is noticeable. When 
the data from 1979 to May 1994 from SBUV are analysed, 
the trend in the tropics is calculated to be -1.8 ± 
1.4%/decade. The corresponding trend from the ground-
based network is also more negative for the period ending 
in May 1994. 
Large negative trends (-20 to -30 (±18)%/decade at 16-
17 km) have been reported for the tropics using the SAGE 
satellite instrument (McCormick et al., 1993). Limited 
tropical ozone sonde records do not indicate significant 
trends between 15 and 20 km for this time period. With 
information currently available is difficult to evaluate the 
trends below 20 km in the tropics. The effect on the trend 
in the total column from any changes at these altitudes 
would be small because only small amounts of ozone are 
present. 
Ozone values over southern mid-latitudes since 1"M 
have not been very different from those seen in the 
previous two years, apart from the continuing long-term 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
97 
Dec-Jan-Feb 
(b) - Mar-Apr-May 
I 
Latitude 
Latitude 
(c)-Jun-Jul-Aug 
(d) - Sep-Oct-Nov 
! 
Latitude 
(e) - Year Round 
-10 
-12 
-14 
n-j—i—i—| 
1 
r 
-60 
-30 
90 
0 
Latitude 
_ SBUV - SBUV/2 
1/79...5/94 
-o SBUV - SBUV/2 
1/79...5/91 
-* Dobson 
1/79...2/94 
•^ Dobson 
1/79...5/91 
Figure 2.7: The seasonal and latitudinal variation of the total ozone trends calculated from the Dobson ground-based measurement 
record and the combined SBUV and SBUV-2 measurement records. The trends are calculated from January 1979 to May 1991 and to 
February 1994 (Dobson) and May 1994 (SBUV) so that the effect of the low total ozone values which were observed in the 1991 to 
1994 period can be seen. The uncertainties associated with the combined SBUV records are 1-2% (95% confidence limits) except at the 
higher latitudes shown in their respective winters where they reach 3-4%. (Adapted from Harris et ai, 1994) 

9K 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
trend. In contrast, the springtime Antarctic depletions in 
1992 and 1993 were greater than in earlier years with 
record low values observed. Measurements of the vertical 
profile over Antarctica show that large volumes of the 
lower stratosphere around 18 km altitude contained 
extremely low amounts of ozone (Hofmann et al., 1994b). 
In addition, depletion of ozone occurred at altitudes above 
and below the altitude range where it had occurred in 
previous years. 
The reasons for the anomalous behaviour in ozone in the 
last three years are not known exactly, although a number 
of mechanisms have been suggested. One probable major 
influence was the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the 
Philippines in June 1991 which injected large amounts of 
gaseous SO-, into the stratosphere which was then 
chemically transformed into sulphuric acid droplets 
(aerosols). A thirtyfold increase in the surface area of 
stratospheric aerosols was observed. The presence of 
aerosols in the stratosphere can change local heating rates 
which in turn affect the atmospheric dynamics and ozone 
distribution. For instance, tropical stratospheric 
temperatures rose in the second half of 1991, with 
maximum increases of 2-3°C at 30-50 hPa (Labitske and 
McCormick, 1992). At the same time negative ozone 
anomalies (about 6% of background values) were observed 
(Chandra, 1992; Schoeberl et al., 1992). The presence of 
aerosols also affects the chemical balance by providing 
surfaces on which chemical reactions involving chlorine 
and bromine compounds can proceed, an effect which is 
enhanced at lower temperatures. The increased altitude 
range of springtime ozone depletion over Antarctica in 
1992 and 1993 may be related to the presence of aerosol at 
these altitudes (Hofmann et al., 1994b). 
An updated analysis of the ground-based total ozone 
measurements through 1991 shows that the mid-latitude 
trends in the 1980s were significantly larger than those in 
the 1970s. This acceleration is consistent with the 
increasing halogen levels in the stratosphere and to the 
non-linearity between ozone loss and halogen levels. The 
total amount of organic chlorine in the troposphere 
increased by 1.6% in 1992, about half the rate of increase 
(2.9'r) in 1989. Peak total of chlorine/bromine loading in 
the troposphere is expected to occur in 1994 and the 
stratospheric peak will lag by about 3 to 5 years. Thus in 
the next few years, stratospheric halogen amounts are 
expected to start to decline. In the interim, total ozone 
amounts should stop decreasing and then begin a recovery 
to pre-1970 values if future halocarbon emissions are 
controlled as prescribed in the current Montreal Protocol. 
This recovery will take place over decades, determined by 
the lifetimes of the CFCs. 
While it is possible to reconcile the observed ozone 
losses with the increase in chlorinated and brominated 
compounds in the stratosphere, the predictive capabilities 
of the models still have significant uncertainties, in part 
because of the role of heterogeneous chemistry as 
demonstrated by the impact of Mt. Pinatubo. The depletion 
is not linear with additional chlorine and hence one cannot 
attribute a quantitative 0 3 loss to a given CFC, since the 
greatest recovery of 0 3 will occur with the first reduction 
in chlorine, whatever its source. 
2.6.2 Tropospheric Ozone 
The state of knowledge regarding ozone trends in the 
troposphere, especially in the free troposphere, is not as 
good as in the stratosphere. There are a limited number of 
ozone sonde stations with records suitable for long-term 
trend analysis, and even at these sites a number of 
questions about the data quality remain. The stations are 
mainly in the Northern Hemisphere in Europe, N. America 
and Japan. Even in these regions the data are somewhat 
sparse (particularly in Japan) so there is a fair degree of 
uncertainty involved in reaching conclusions. Elsewhere 
around the globe, especially in the tropics and Southern 
Hemisphere, insufficient measurements of good quality 
have been made with ozone sondes to allow credible, 
regionally-representative trends to be determined. 
Available records have been assessed recently by Akimoto 
et al. (1994), Furrer et al. (1992), Logan (1994), London 
and Liu (1992), Oltmans and Levy (1994) and Tarasick el 
al. (1994). 
Over the last 20-30 years, the biggest change in free 
tropospheric ozone has occurred over Europe with an 
increase of perhaps 50% since the end of the 1960s. The 
change over N. America is less, possibly about 10-15%. 
The change over Japan is probably closer to that seen over 
Europe than that over N. America. The behaviour during 
the 1980s was different. Over N. America there seems to 
have been no increase, and over Canada levels have 
actually declined. The trend over Europe was also smaller 
than before with, for instance, little change seen at 
Hohenpeissenberg, Germany since the mid-1980s. 
Information is contained in measurements of ozone 
made at the Earth's surface, although care has to be taken 
in the interpretation of these data as they are not directly 
representative of free tropospheric levels. Staehelin et al. 
(1994) reviewed measurements of ozone made at mountain 
sites in Europe in the 1930s, 1950s and the present day. 
They concluded that ozone concentrations over Europe (0-
4 km, surface sites) are about a factor of two higher now 
than in the earlier period. A number of surface 
measurements of ozone have been made at remote and 
high altitude sites since the early 1970s (Wege et al., 1"<Q: 
Scheel et al., 1990, 1993; Kley et al., 1994; Oltmans nd 
Levy, 1994). All stations north of 20°N show a positive 
trend in ozone that is statistically significant over ite 
whole period. Larger positive trends are observed at ;ie 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
99 
high altitude European sites than elsewhere. In all records 
only a small increase, or no change, is seen in the 1980s. 
Thus the surface measurements of ozone are in qualitative 
agreement with the ozone sonde record. Again, there is 
only a limited amount of data in the tropics and Southern 
Hemisphere: surface observations at the South Pole show 
that ozone has decreased there over the last 10-20 years. 
The apparent regional differences in the tropospheric 
ozone trends are not fully understood. As discussed 
elsewhere in this chapter, NOx and NMHC amounts vary 
substantially through the troposphere, and their emissions 
have changed both temporally and regionally. Numerical 
simulation of tropospheric 03, both global distribution and 
trends over the past century, is a research task for the three-
dimensional chemical transport models (see Section 2.9). 
2.6.3 Tropospheric UV 
An important chemical coupling that affects the lifetimes 
of CO, CH4, NMHC, HFCs and HCFCs is the change of 
solar UV radiation reaching the troposphere due to 
changes in stratospheric ozone column density, and 
tropospheric ozone (Liu and Trainer, 1988; Briihl and 
Crutzen, 1989; Fuglestvedt et al., 1994). Reductions in 
stratospheric ozone as observed since the late 1970s have 
been observed to lead to enhanced penetration of UV 
radiation into the troposphere (Smith et al., 1992; Kerr and 
McElroy, 1993) that in turn will yield increased production 
of 0(XD) and OH. Tropospheric UV can also be altered on 
regional or local scales by changes in reflecting cloud 
cover, absorption by tropospheric 03, or back-scattering by 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosols (Liu et al., 1991). 
Increased tropospheric UV will feed back into the 
abundances of CO and hydrogen-containing trace gases by 
increasing their sinks. In addition it will speed up the 
reactions that both create and destroy tropospheric ozone 
(see Section 2.2), which, depending on the NOx abundance 
(Fuglestvedt et al., 1994), could lead to a net decrease or a 
net increase in tropospheric ozone. 
2.7 Tropospheric Nitrogen Oxides 
Although of little direct impact on the tropospheric 
radiation balance, N0 2 and NO (NOx) have a large indirect 
effect owing to their importance in tropospheric chemistry. 
There, the role of NOx is that of a catalyst promoting the 
formation of 0 3 and controlling the concentration of OH, 
the most important oxidising agent of the troposphere (see 
Section 2.2). Through OH, emissions.of NOx influence the 
adjustment times and thus the abundances of many 
infrared absorbing gases. 
2.7.7 Sources of Tropospheric NOx 
NOx is emitted mainly as NO by a large variety of sources. 
The major sources of tropospheric NOx are summarised in 
Table 2.5. Fossil fuel combustion in the stationary power 
and transport sectors is the largest source of NOx. 
Although emissions from fossil fuel use over North 
America and Europe, 6 Tg(N)/yr and 7.3 Tg(N)/yr 
respectively, still constitute the largest regional sources, 
they have hardly increased since 1979 owing to a levelling 
off in fuel consumption and to air quality abatement 
measures. The emissions over Asia, however, are 
continuing to increase at a rate of 4%/yr, reaching 4.7 
Tg(N)/yr in 1987 with an estimated emission of 5.7 
Tg(N)/yr in 1991 (Kato and Akimoto, 1992). According to 
Hameed and Dignon (1991) the global emissions from 
fossil fuel combustion increased from 18.1 Tg(N)/yr in 
1970 to 24.3 Tg(N)/yr in 1986. Emissions from aircraft 
engines are listed separately from other fossil fuel sources 
because they are released predominantly in the free 
troposphere at cruise altitudes (8-12 km) rather than at the 
surface and are currently increasing at a mean rate of 
4%/yr (Baughcum et al., 1993). Although only a small 
fraction of the total combustion source, they are potentially 
responsible for a large fraction of the NOx found at those 
altitudes at northern mid-latitudes (Ehhalt et al., 1992). 
Microbial activity in soils also gives continental sources 
for NO (e.g., Sanhueza, 1992; Williams et al., 1992). 
It is noted that the estimates of NOx sources in Table 2.5 
are the means of a range. In the cases of fossil fuel 
combustion, aircraft emissions and stratospheric input, 
ranges may be as narrow as ±30%; but in the case of 
natural sources, these are a factor of 2. NOx produced by 
lightning is probably the most important natural source in 
the free troposphere and has an even larger uncertainty. 
Geographical distributions and seasonal variations of these 
emissions have been published and are needed to model 
properly the atmospheric distribution of NOx (Penner et 
al, 1991; Kasibhatala, 1993). 
Table 2.5: Estimated global emissions ofNOx typical of 
the last decade (Tg(N)lyr). 
Sources 
Magnitude 
(Tg(N)/yr) 
Fossil fuel combustion 
24 
Soil release (natural and anthropogenic) 
12 
Biomass burning 
8 
Lightning 
5 
NH3 oxidation 
3 
Aircraft 
0.4 
Transport from stratosphere 
0.1 (0.6 total NOy) 

100 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
2.7.2 N0X Removal Processes 
Atmospheric oxidation of NO, to HN03 by OH in the 
daytime and to N03 by 0 3 at night are the most important 
removal processes of NOx from the troposphere. Dry 
deposition of NO-, plays a lesser, but still significant, role. 
Some fraction of the NOx so lost is regenerated from 
HN0 3 or N0 3 in the free troposphere by photo-
dissociation. The tropospheric lifetime of NOx is short and 
variable. It varies with altitude, for example, from less than 
a day in the boundary layer to about a week at the 
tropopause. 
Although the removal processes of NOx are reasonably 
well identified, the global distribution of NOx is not well 
defined by observations and the loss rates are highly 
variable. Thus our estimates of the atmospheric budget of 
NOx are based on model simulations using highly 
uncertain values for NOx sources as noted above. 
Fortunately, the fact that, except for the small fraction 
which is dry deposited as N09, all of the NOx is converted 
to nitrate and deposited as such by dry or wet processes 
allows an independent check of the removal of NOx from 
the troposphere. The various analyses of global nitrate 
deposition based on the concentration in precipitation 
collected in a number of networks have been summarised 
by Warneck (1988). The latest such estimate was made by 
Logan (1983), giving a total deposition of (44 ± 20) 
Tg(N)/yr of which (17 ± 5) Tg(N)/yr were due to dry 
deposition of HN03, N0 3 aerosol and N02. This estimate 
balances fairly well the emissions at that time, which have 
since grown to those given in Table 2.5. 
2.7.3 Tropospheric Distribution ofNOx 
Because of its complex geographical source pattern and its 
short lifetime, the spatial and temporal distribution of 
tropospheric N0X is highly variable. That variability is 
10 -? 
0.1 
O 
z 
0.01 
0.001 
• 
Ground Data 
O Flight Data 
0.01 
0.1 
10 
100 
NOy (ppbv) 
Figure 2.8: Measured NOx and NO mixing ratios at the Earth's surface and in the lower and middle troposphere of North America 
(from data summarised by Carroll and Thompson, 1994). The location of the symbol indicates the mean of the measurements, the error 
bars the mean standard deviation. The NO mixing ratio given here is calculated from the mean measured NOx ratio and the NOx/NOv 
ratio given by Carroll and Thompson (1994). The letters and numbers within the symbols refer to the following measurement 
campaigns: 
a 
A 
b 
B 
H 
K 
M 
n 
N 
P 
s 
S 
T 
2 
3 
ABLE-3a 
AASE 
ABLE-3b 
MLOPEX 
NACNEMS 
SOS/SONIA 
TOR 
C1TE2 
CITE3 
Bethel, Barrow, AK, 0-6 km 
North America 40°N, >59°N,10-12 km 
Labrador, Hudson, 0-6 km 
Barrow, AK 
Harvard Forest, MA 
Kinterbush, AL 
Mauna Loa Obs., HI 
Egbert, Ontario; Bondville, IL 
Niwot Ridge, CO 
Point Arena, CA 
Candor, NC 
Scotia, PA 
Schauinsland, Germany 
Pacific; Continental US, ~5 km 
Natal, Brazil; Wallops US, 0-6 km 
summer 
winter 
summer 
all year 
summer 
spring 
summer 
summer 
spring 
summer 
summer 
winter,summer 
summer 
autumn, summer 
1988 
1988-89 
1990 
1990 
1990-1992 
1990 
1988 
1988 
1984;1987 
1985 
1991 
1986;1988 
1989-1990 
1986 
1989 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
101 
demonstrated 
in 
Figure 
2.8 
which 
summarises 
measurements from rural and remote surface stations as 
well as airborne measurements in the lower and middle 
troposphere mostly over continental North America. NOx 
is plotted against simultaneous measurements of NO 
which is defined as NO + NO, + N 0 3 + 2 x N 20 5 + HNO-, 
+ HN03 + HN0 4 + PAN (peroxyacetyl nitrate) and other 
organic nitrates, and describes the sum of all reactive 
nitrogen compounds. NO 
results from the chemical 
ageing of NOx, but is longer lived and therefore a more 
conservative tracer of NOx sources. 
Even in this data set which excludes the high NO x 
concentrations around the urban centres and the very low 
concentrations in very remote areas, NOx varies over 3 
orders of magnitude, the higher mixing ratio being 
observed closer to the sources. The mean vertical profiles 
included in these data, which reached up to 6 km, showed 
little variation with altitude. The highest values were 
observed over the east coast of the United States which 
was the only profile with a significant vertical gradient. 
NO roughly correlates with NO x, although not well 
enough to serve as a substitute for a direct NO x 
measurement. As Figure 2.8 demonstrates, at a given NOy 
mixing ratio NO x can still vary over two orders of 
magnitude. 
NOx has now been measured up to the tropopause in a 
number of campaigns covering large geographical areas. 
Figure 2.9 summarises the means and variability of NOx 
measured in the free troposphere from many aircraft 
campaigns. Unfortunately at the time of writing some of 
the most recent data, notably those from PEM West over 
the Pacific in September to October 1991, AASE II over 
northern mid-, subpolar and polar latitudes in January to 
March 1992, and TRACE A over the tropical Atlantic in 
October 1992, are not available for review. However, a 
number of broad conclusions can be drawn from data 
collected during the STRATOZ III campaign in June 1984, 
the AASE I effort in January to February 1989, the 
TROPOZ II campaign in January 1991, and the CITE 
efforts from 1984 to 1989 (Drummond et at., 1988; 
Wahner et al., 1994). The STRATOZ III and TROPOZ II 
results indicate that: 
(i) mixing ratios of NO were lower in the Southern 
Hemisphere during both summer and winter; 
(ii) NO mixing ratios increased with altitude in both 
hemispheres during summer and winter with high values 
(several hundred pptv) in the upper troposphere at the 
northern mid-latitudes. Due to the generally higher 
mixing ratios in the planetary boundary layer over the 
continents, a C-shape vertical profile is observed in 
continental air. In contrast, very low NO concentrations 
are seen in the surface layer in oceanic air, a finding that 
is shared by observations made, for example, during the 
CITE-2 campaign over the eastern Pacific in summer 
1986 (Carroll et «/., 1992), the CITE-3 campaign over 
the western Atlantic in summer 
and autumn 
1989 
(Davis et al, 1993), and the SAGA 3 campaign in the 
equatorial Pacific during February to March 1990 
(Torres and Thompson, 1993); 
(iii) the shape of the vertical profile at the northern mid-
latitudes changes dramatically between 
summer and 
winter. 
In summer the mid-troposphere has relatively low NO. 
with average values between 10 and 30 pptv. and the 
largest vertical gradient is located between 8 and 10 km 
altitude. In winter the troposphere is much more heavily 
loaded with NO and sharp gradients spread throughout the 
free troposphere. Some of the features observed in thest-
distributions were due to the location of the flight track. 
which usually followed continental coast-lines. These are 
usually more heavily populated and therefore subject to 
human-made pollution, such that intense continental! 
plumes would be sampled during times of off-shore v. ind>.. 
The zonal distribution of NOx sources, in particular the 
difference between the oceanic lack and the eotMinemitall 
abundance of surface sources, leads to large gmadik-rcts m 
the tropospheric NO x distribution. For example. Wge 
longitudinal gradients of NO mixing ratio were cifcc'irvcd 31 
all altitudes in the free troposphere across the Noulfo 
Atlantic from 55°N to 65 = N latitude. purtMinroaMv 
dominated by an outflow of polluted air from nfcie E«M<cf»r;ijjiij 
continent during STRATOZ III (Ehhalt el alt... E ^ ' % Tikis. 
together with the measurements shown in Figures 2.*. aadi 
2.9, indicates that there is no sense in tiykis » 'dkfoc i 
typical, globally averaged, verticil NO ((w NO, u [r#o&lk.. 
The actual profile will alwavs siuwtTis.lv a W ir*!piii.\iiilih 
depend on location, season arad lucidl '*Wili IfiitM uiim "Jhr 
case of NO also on the time <ati uiljiv«.. Hun Hum™, fiia-rlvi 
information is required four the wtCTflwrc-naiiiiiMi <ott 'liht-
observed profile and to: a ceWWI wmywnwwi wi'tlh inrioidkll 
calculations. The AASE I tcswIlO'S [pmoiviinik: juMumn-'HiiiH 
evidence for a C-shaped \<mcwl [(wniiBr iin witiwiiuUiil} ttv 
and for the build-up of reactive mtawptiri sifirirJFC:S i?ti :\u 
upper troposphere at mid- tw> fei^lh Itjt'titanJkss iin Ulrir- Nii'iitriirntfi 
Hemisphere in winter (CaitWlU «•» i/JL. W0i)>. I|i„ :ui\iiimu\ m-> 
these campaigns whete tuic^s.mni'ciiOTtJfitf*. wm- •ch;:s\\\w-l\ 
throughout the entire ver^cid] e\WWi <oi\ iilht- \woi<f\m\<\\\:i?i.. •>< 
number of airborne oamjwiijtras. Itovc W'tMSK'Jl <ctt\ \hv*.':v. :;;t'.'l 
mid-tropospheric disUifowltiimws wtl SV)V. iiuW'llu.-.Hi'^i <ti'( 
ABLE-3A flights o\et Ab.sJka * *•!:»:"««• '!'«<:< t<'<.><!<M>obr<-
et al., 1992) and the WW h: :•':• e.*i.v.;.^,;;\-. '.••- •:•:>.:<•:<:.:.:. 
Canada in summer ll>t-V' \'SA-.vJ,'-"0,'i-', •('.. *L. \i>Mii,, >,•.!.•;,-.•;•: -fa 
al., 1994; Talboi <; .;•;.. ;^'-J>. Wv-.'.t:.^: -yc-ey:'..- ••:>....•> 
from these airborne eanv.Mii^s t.:x ;.',sJ >.>,'«'.-, •,•.-, ':'• .c.-;::: 

102 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
mean 
median 
central 67% 
central 90% 
upper limit 
calculated from PSS 
~^m^i 
.^^. 
- # 
" 4 " 
I 
I 
I 
I M I N I 
J 
I I I Mill 
_1_U_LLUJ| 
Spring 1984 GTE/CITE-1 
East Pacific 5.1-7.6 km 
Summer 1986 GTE/CITE-2 
East Pacific <0.6 km 
East Pacific 4.6-5 km 
Continental USA 4.6-6.1 km 
1986-87 Northern Europe 
4-11.9 km # 
Summer 1988 ABLE-3A Bethel 
4.5-6.2 km 
3^.5 km 
1.5-3 km 
0-1.5 km 
Summer 1988 ABLE-3A Barrow 
4.5-6.2 km 
3-4.5 km 
1.5-3 km 
0-1.5 km 
Winter 1988-89 AASE 
>59°N 10-12 km 
Near40°N 10-12 km 
Spring 1989INSTAC 
Tropical Northbound 4.5 km* 
Tropical Southbound 4.5 km* 
Continental Northbound 4.5 km* 
Maritime Southbound 4.5 km* 
Continental Southbound 4.5 km* 
Summer 1989 CITE-3 Wallops 
4.5-6 km 
3-4.5 km 
1.5-3 km 
0-1.5 km 
Autumn 1989 CITE-3 Natal 
4.5-6.2 km 
3^1.5 km 
1.5-3 km 
0-1.5 km 
Summer 1990 ABLE-3B Labrador 
4.5-6.2 km 
3-4.5 km 
1.5-3 km 
0-1.5 km 
Summer 1990 ABLE-3B Hudson 
4.5-6.2 km 
3-4.5 km 
1.5-3 km 
0-1.5 km 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
N0X concentration (ppbv) 
Figure 2.9: The statistical distribution of the NOx mixing ratio (ppbv) observed at various altitudes during several aircraft campaigns. 
(Adapted from Carroll and Thompson, 1994) 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
103 
2.9, but we have not included here a review of NOx at 
remote surface sites such as the MLOPEX campaign 
(Carroll et al., 1992). 
High mixing ratios of NO (300 to 500 pptv) in the upper 
troposphere, observed for instance during both STRATOZ 
III and TROPOZ II, indicate NO sources in addition to the 
stratospheric input (Ehhalt et al., 1992). Possible sources 
are: NO produced by lightning, aircraft emissions, and fast 
upward transport from a polluted boundary layer. There 
are a number of observations, where the vertical NO 
profile is strongly and unequivocally influenced by one or 
the other of these sources, e.g., lightning (Dickerson et al., 
1987; Ridley, private comm.), aircraft emissions (Arnold 
et al., 1992), fast vertical transport (Drummond et al., 
1988), which make it clear that all these sources can and 
do make a contribution to the NO x in the upper 
troposphere. However, at present there are not enough data 
to derive their respective global contributions from 
atmospheric measurements alone. 
2.7.4 Trends 
ofNOx 
Because of the high variability in its t r o p o s p h e r e 
concentrations, it is not possible to establish a trend for 
NOx from atmospheric measurements. Some of its sources, 
predominantly in the Northern Hemisphere, continue to 
increase (see Section 2.7.1), and the concentration of 
nitrate in Greenland ice cores shows an increase during the 
last century. This evidence suggests that tropospheric NOx 
has been increasing, at least in the northern mid-latitudes. 
There is evidence that tropospheric 0 3 has increased at 
northern mid-latitudes (see Section 2.6) which could be 
understood in terms of a combined increase in CH4, CO 
and N0X, but a quantitative reconciliation of all causes of 
tropospheric 0 3 change has not been achieved. 
2.8 Carbon Monoxide and Volatile Organic 
Compounds 
Carbon monoxide (CO) and volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs) have little direct radiative impact on the 
atmosphere. However, as described in Section 2.2, these 
compounds can strongly influence tropospheric chemistry 
and, in particular, 0 3 and OH concentrations, and so could 
have an important indirect impact. VOCs include non-
methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs) and other organic 
compounds, containing additional elements such as 
oxygen. 
2.8.1 Sources and Removal Processes of CO 
The major sources of CO (Table 2.6) are technological 
(including transport, combustion, industrial processes and 
refuse incineration), biomass burning, and the oxidation of 
methane and non-methane hydrocarbons (IPCC, 1992). Ocean 
sources may also be important (Erikson and Taylor, 1992). 
Each of these sources has a large uncertainty. It is estimated 
that about two-thirds of CO currently results from 
anthropogenic activities, including that derived from anthro-
pogenic CH4. There is a large uncertainty associated with 
the magnitude of the CO source from the oxidation of VOC. 
The most important removal mechanism for CO is 
reaction with OH radicals. Soil uptake and stratospheric 
removal are minor sinks of CO (WMO, 1986). In 
principle, the atmospheric removal rate for CO can be 
calculated from its observed distribution, the modelled 
distribution of OH, and the corresponding reaction rate 
coefficients. Based on measured CO distributions and an 
OH-field from model calculations, a removal rate of 2020 
Tg(CO)/yr has been obtained. Studies of l 4CO indicate 
that OH levels in the Southern Hemisphere 
arc 
significantly higher than in the Northern Hemisphere 
(Brenninkmeijer et al., 1992) and that global CO sinks 
may be larger than indicated in Table 2.6 (Mak et al., 
1992). However, 
simulations 
of 
CH 3CC1 3 
(e.g. 
Spivakovsky et al., 1990) do not require hemispheric 
differences in OH and place tight bounds on the CO sink 
consistent with the budgets adopted here. 
2.8.2 Atmospheric 
distribution and trends of CO 
Measurements made over the past 25 years have shown 
that CO mixing ratios in the troposphere range from 
Table 2.6: Estimated sources and sinks of CO typical of 
the last decade 
(Tg(CO)lyr) 
Sources 
Range 
(Tg(CO)/yr) 
Technological 
Biomass burning 
Biogenics 
Oceans 
Methane oxidation 
NMHC oxidation 
300 - 550* 
300* - 700 
60 - 160 
20 - 200 
400 - 1000 
200 - 600 
Total sources 
1800-2700 
Sinks 
OH reaction 
Soil uptake 
Stratospheric loss 
1400 - 2600 
250 - 640 
-100 
Total sinks 
2100-3000 
Note: Adapted from IPCC (1992) and +J. Logan (Harvard, 
pcrs. comm.). 

104 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
approximately 40 to 200 ppbv (e.g., Novell! et at., 1992). 
Annual mean CO levels in the high latitudes of the 
Northern Hemisphere are about a factor of 3 greater than 
those at similar latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere 
(Figure 2.10). Mixing ratios vary seasonally: highest levels 
are observed during winter and lowest in summer. CO 
levels over continental locations are usually greater than 
over the oceans (Kirchhoff and Marinho, 1989; Poulida et 
at., 1991), and regional processes, such as biomass 
burning, can affect large areas distant from the emission 
source (Reichle et al., 1990; Fishman et al., 1991). 
Long-term trends in atmospheric CO have been 
estimated at several locations world-wide using data 
collected over the past 30 years (Khalil and Rasmussen, 
1988b; Brunke et al., 1990; Zander et al., 1989). From 
these studies a consensus emerged that up to 1990 CO 
mixing ratios in the Northern Hemisphere had probably 
increased at an average rate of 1%/yr (WMO, 1990). In the 
Southern Hemisphere, the rate of change in CO over time 
is less than in the Northern Hemisphere (Fraser et al., 
1986; Dianov-Klokov et al., 1989). A review of available 
data concluded that there was no significant trend in the 
Southern Hemisphere (WMO, 1990). 
More recent data (Novell! et al., 1994) indicate that 
global CO levels have fallen sharply since about 1990, at 
about 1%/yr. The largest decline has been observed at high 
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. In contrast, Khalil 
and Rasmussen (1994) for the period 1987-1992 reported 
decreases of 1.4 ± 0.9%/yr in the Northern Hemisphere 
and 5.2 ± 0.7%/yr in the Southern Hemisphere. There is no 
known explanation for this rapid decline although 
12 
10 A 
E 
8 
a> 
6 
3 
4 -
40-60 
60 
160-180 
0 
90° S 
60° S 
30° S 
0° 
Latitude 
30° N 
60° N 
90° N 
Figure 2.10: The CO mixing ratios (ppbv) as a function of 
latitude and altitude averaged over the four transects that were 
measured during the STRATOZ 11 and STRATOZ III flights in 
April May 1WI1 and June 1984. During each of the missions, one 
distribution along the east coast of North America and the west 
coast of South America and another along the east coast of South 
America and the west coast of Africa were determined (Seller 
and 1'ishman. Il>8l: Mareneo et al.. 1990). 
hypotheses include increasingly effective emission 
controls. The extent to which this trend is a truly global 
phenomenon is uncertain, because of the limited spatial 
coverage of the observing network for this short-lived gas. 
2.8.3 Volatile Organic 
Compounds 
2.8.3.1 
Introduction 
Non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs) constitute a large 
class of compounds containing only carbon and hydrogen 
atoms. They range from the simplest such as ethane (C,H()) 
and acetylene (C9H2) up to complexes with ten or more 
carbon atoms. Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
include the NMHCs and other organic compounds 
containing additional elements such as oxygen. 
The oxidation of VOCs in the atmosphere has a general 
impact on atmospheric chemistry that depends only partly 
on the individual compound and thus allows us to consider 
them as a class. VOCs have a major influence on 
tropospheric chemistry (Derwent, 1994a) through three 
processes: 
(i) as a source of tropospheric 0 3 on the regional and 
global scales, by their irreversible oxidation in the 
presence of NOx; 
(ii) as a source of CO and other reactive VOCs such as 
aldehydes and ketones; 
(iii) as a source of organic nitrogen compounds which 
act as temporary reservoirs for NOx, allowing far greater 
global dispersion of the sources. 
An accurate assessment of the role of VOCs in radiative 
forcing is complicated by the many individual compounds. 
whose sources and reactivities (e.g., the number of 0 3 and 
CO molecules made per VOCs destroyed in the presence 
of NOx) are not well known. This assessment recognises 
the potential importance of VOCs in controlling 
tropospheric 0 3 and OH, but at this time can only provide 
the following synopsis, without any quantitative evaluation 
of their climate impacts. 
2.8.3.2 Sources of volatile organic 
compounds 
The estimation of VOC emissions is complicated by the 
wide variety of sources and by the large number of 
individual hydrocarbons. Sources of VOCs are associated 
with both natural biogenic processes and human activities. 
In some areas, natural sources dominate whereas in the 
industrialised regions of the Northern Hemisphere, human 
activities contribute the larger fraction. 
The status of global emission inventories of VOCs h.-.-
been extensively reviewed as part of the Global Emission 
Inventory Activity (GEIA) of the International Glob d 
Atmospheric Chemistry Program (Graedel et a!.. 199.^. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
105 
Recent estimates indicate a global total for anthropogenic 
VOCs of about 140 Tg/yr with 25% due to road transport, 
14% from solvent use, 13% fuel production and 
distribution, 34% fuel consumption and the rest 
uncontrolled burning and other minor sources (Bouwman, 
1993). 
VOC inventories without detailed species composition 
profiles offer little progress towards understanding the role 
of these compounds in tropospheric chemistry. Detailed 
speciated emission inventories are available only for North 
America and Europe (Placet et al., 1990; Lubkert and 
Zierock, 1989) with European NMHC emissions totalling 
24.5 Tg/yr (Simpson, 1993). Some information on the 
long-term trends for man-made emissions is available for 
the USA (Gschwandtner et al., 1986; Placet et al., 1990). 
Recent estimates for the emission rates of NMHCs 
(Miiller, 1992) indicate that this is the largest contribution 
of a single source to the budget of VOCs. However, the 
number of compounds and their source strengths which go 
up to make this total is poorly understood. A recent 
overview is found in Fehsenfeld et al. (1992). 
Biomass burning is an important source of VOCs in 
subtropical and tropical regions, and includes forest and 
savannah fires, burning of agricultural wastes and the use 
of biomass fuels. The impact of biomass burning on global 
chemistry has been recently reviewed (Andreae, 1993). 
Many of the hydrocarbons liberated by biomass burning 
are alkenes, which in the presence of NOx (also emitted by 
the fire) show a high propensity to ozone formation. 
Consequently, there are numerous observations of ozone 
production in biomass-burning plumes (Delany et al., 
1985; Andreae et al., 1988; Cms et al., 1988; Kirchhoff et 
a/., 1989). 
2.8.3.3 Sinks of the volatile organic 
compounds 
For most VOCs, reactions with hydroxy! radicals provide 
the major atmospheric loss. Adjustment times due to OH 
oxidation range from a fraction of a day for the biogenic 
hydrocarbons, to several months for ethane, one of the 
longest lived NMHCs. This is the only removal process 
which has been quantified for a significant number of 
VOCs. 
Certain hydrocarbons have heightened reactivities with 
other atmospheric oxidants: ozone, chlorine atoms and 
N0 3 radicals. Ozone reacts rapidly only with olefinic 
NMHCs and then usually only significantly with certain 
specific natural biogenic terpenes. These reactions tend to 
be ozone sinks and may generate organic aerosols and 
other low volatility products such as organic carboxylic 
acids. Chlorine atoms react with a wide variety of VOCs 
but their importance in global hydrocarbon chemistry is 
not established. Nitrate (NO-,) radicals are present in the 
atmosphere to a significant amount only during night-time. 
They are formed by the reaction of NO-, with ozone and 
can react rapidly with certain VOCs. Night-time N O , 
chemistry may be significant under some circumstances 
but, again, its global importance in VOC chemistry is not 
established. 
2.8.3.4 The role of volatile organic 
compounds 
Because of their generally short atmospheric lifetimes and 
highly localised sources, organic compounds are not 
evenly distributed in space or time. There are now many 
measurements of the bewilderingly large number of 
organic compounds which contribute to global and 
regional scale ozone formation, carbon monoxide 
production and the formation of organic nitrogen 
compounds. However it is not possible to give at present 
an assessment of the major VOCs and their roles in 
tropospheric chemistry. 
2.9 Inter-Comparison of Tropospheric 
Chemistry/Transport Models 
A chemical response of the atmosphere is expected for the 
human-induced changes in the cycles of many trace gases. 
For example, we have accumulated evidence that 
tropospheric ozone in the northern mid-latitudes has 
increased substantially, on the order of 25 ppbv, since prc-
industrial times. During this period, the global atmospheric 
concentration of CH4 has increased regularly, and the 
emissions of NOx and NMHC, at least over northern mid-
latitudes, have also increased greatly. An accounting of the 
causes of the 0 3 increases, and ascribing the induced 
climatic change to emissions of any particular gas, requires 
a global tropospheric 3-D Chemistry/Transport Model 
(CTM). A CTM provides the framework for coupling 
different chemical perturbations that arc by definition 
indirect and thus cannot he evaluated simply with linear, 
empirical analyses. 
In this report we use CTMs to calculate the total GWP 
for CH 4 (see Chapter 5), including the complex 
tropospheric chemical impacts on O v Thus we place an 
increasing responsibility on our CTM simulations of the 
atmosphere and should therefore ask how much confidence 
we have in these models. Models of tropospheric 
chemistry and transport have not been adequately tested in 
comparison with those stratospheric models used to assess 
ozone depletion associated with CFCs. The stratospheric 
assessment models are all two-dimensional (latitude by 
height), based on an established dynamical theory that 
allows inherently 3-D motions in the stratosphere to be 
mapped onto two dimensions (e.g., see WMO, 19X6). 
There is no such corresponding theory for the troposphere, 
and it is expected that 3-D models will be needed to 
describe the tropospheric distribution of trace gases 
including phenomena such as convection, clouds and the 

/06 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
different chemical regimes in continental and marine 
boundary layers. Furthermore, the stratospheric models 
have been extensively tested as a class against one another 
and against observations (e.g., WMO, 1994 and preceding 
reports; Prather and Remsberg, 1993). It has taken the 
stratospheric research community nearly a decade to 
develop assessments based on standard trace-gas scenarios 
that allow the results from different models to be 
compared. In contrast, most of the current tropospheric 
ozone models (2-D and a few 3-D) have published a few 
sample calculations, which differ from model to model and 
are not directly comparable. 
There are numerous published examples of individual 
model predictions of the changes in tropospheric 0 3 and 
OH in response to a perturbation (e.g., pre-industrial to 
present, doubling CH4, aircraft or surface combustion 
NOx, stratospheric 0-, depletion). Since these calculations 
in general used different assumptions about the perturbants 
and the background atmosphere, it is impractical, if not 
impossible, to use these results to derive an assessment. 
We need to understand how representative those models 
used in climate studies are, particularly the analyses of 
indirect radiative effects of CH4 changes. 
Thus, two quite different model intercomparisons are 
included as part of this report: (1) the transport of radon-
222, a short-lived tracer, that highlights the difference 
between 2-D and 3-D models in the troposphere; and (2) a 
set of prescribed tropospheric photochemical simulations 
that test the approximations made in modelling chemical 
rates for 0-, production and loss. Both of these studies 
were initiated as blind intercomparisons, with model 
groups submitting results before seeing those of others. In 
the transport study, no obvious mistakes in performing the 
case studies were found, and detailed results will be 
published as a workshop report. In the photochemical 
study, some obvious errors in the set-up, diagnosis, or 
model formulation were identified and resubmitted by the 
contributors as discussed below. Both provide a first look 
at the consistency among current models. Participation in 
these two intercomparisons was a prerequisite for the use 
of any model's results in a third study (Section 2.10.2), 
which examines the chemical perturbations caused by CH4 
increases and provides the basis for calculating the indirect 
GWPofCH 4inChapter5. 
2.9.1 Intercomparison 
of Transport: A Case Study of 
222Radon 
The model comparison that tested atmospheric transport 
was carried out in a World Climate Research Programme 
(WCRP) Workshop on short-range transport of greenhouse 
gases that followed a similar workshop on the long-range 
transport 
of 
CFC-11 
(Dec 
1991). 
The 
basic 
intercomparison examined the global distribution and 
variability predicted for the radon (222Rn) emitted by 
radioactive decay of radium in soils. Radon is an ideal gas 
with a constant adjustment time of 5.5 days, and the 
daughter product, lead-210, is treated as a small aerosol. 
Although NO x would seem a more relevant choice for 
these model comparisons, the large variations in the 
adjustment time for NO x (e.g., <1 day in the boundary 
layer and >10 day in the upper troposphere) make it 
difficult to prescribe a meaningful experiment without 
running realistic chemistry — a task beyond the capability 
of most of the participating models. Furthermore, the non-
linearities of the NOx-OH chemistry would require that all 
major sources be included (see Section 2.7), which again is 
too difficult for this model comparison. 
Twenty atmospheric models (both 3-D and 2-D) 
participated in the 222Rn intercomparison for CTMs (see 
Table 2.7). Most of the participants were using established 
(i.e., published), synoptically varying (i.e., with daily 
weather) 3-D CTMs; several presented results from new 
Table 2.7: Models participating 
in the Rn/Pb 
transport 
intercomparison 
Code 
Model 
Contributor 
CTMs established: 3-D synoptic 
1 
CCM2 
Rasch 
2 
ECHAM3 
Feichter/Koehler 
3 
GFDL 
Kasibhatla 
4 
GISS/H/I 
Jacob/Prather 
5 
KNMI 
Verver 
6 
LLNL/Lagrange 
Penner/Dignon 
7 
LLNL/Euler 
Bergman 
8 
LMD 
Genthon/Balkanski 
9 
TM2/Z 
Ramonet/Balkanski/Monfray 
CTMs under development: 3-D synoptic 
10 
CCC 
Beagley 
11 
LaRC 
Grose 
12 
LLNL/Impact 
Rotman 
13 
MRI 
Chiba 
14 
TOMCAT 
Chipperfield 
15 
UGAMP 
P. Brown 
CTMs used assessments: 3-D/2-D monthly average 
16 
Moguntia/3D 
Zimmermann/Feichter 
17 
AER/2D 
Shia 
18 
UCamb/2D 
Law 
19 
Harwell/2D 
Reeves 
20 
UWash/2D 
M. Brown 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
107 
models under development. Among these synoptic CTMs, 
the circulation patterns represented the entire range: grid-
point and spectral, first generation climate models (e.g., 
CCM1 and GISS), newly developed climate models (e.g., 
CCM2 and ECHAM3), and analysed wind fields from 
ECMWF (e.g., TM2Z and KNMI). One monthly averaged 
3-D CTM and four longitudinally and monthly averaged 
2-D models also participated. 
We have a limited record of measurements of 222Rn 
with which to test the model simulations. Some of these 
data are for the surface above the continental sources (e.g., 
Cincinnati, OH), and some are from islands far from land 
sources (e.g., Crozet I.). The former show a diurnal cycle 
with large values at the surface at night when vertical 
mixing is suppressed. The latter sites show a very low 
background level with large events lasting as long as a few 
days. An even more limited set of observations from 
aircraft over the Pacific (e.g., 300 mbar over Hawaii) 
shows large variations with small layers containing very 
high levels of radon, obviously of recent continental 
origin. A set of box plots in Figure 2.11 summarises the 
observations of radon at each of these three sites and 
compares with model predictions (see Table 2.7 for model 
codes). At Cincinnati the synoptic 3-D CTMs generally 
reproduce the mean afternoon concentrations in the 
boundary layer, although some have clear problems with 
excessive variability, possibly with sampling the boundary 
layer in the afternoon. At Crozet most of the synoptic 
models can reproduce the low background with occasional 
radon "storms." In the upper troposphere over Hawaii, the 
one set of aircraft observations shows occasional, 
extremely high values, unmatched by any model; but the 
median value is successfully simulated by several of the 
synoptic 3-D CTMs. The monthly averaged models could 
not, of course, simulate any of the time-varying 
observations. 
The remarkable similarity of results from the synoptic 
CTMs for the free tropospheric concentrations of radon in 
60 
_g 40 -
% 20 
Radon-222 concentration statistics for June to August 
OBS 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
LL 
Crozet, surface 
I ^ I M I 
_B_ 
396 
OBS 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
OBS 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 
Figure 2.11: Radon-222 concentration statistics (OBS) for June, July and August at Cincinnati OH (40°N, 84°W, mixed layer at 2 
p.m.), Crozet I. (46°S, 51°E, surface), and over Hawaii (20°N, 155°W, 300 mbar). Modelled time-series show minima and maxima, 
quartiles (shaded box), and medians (white band). Identification codes are given in Table 2.7. Observations at Hawaii (Balkanski el al., 
1992) show the same statistics; but for Cincinnati (Gold el al.. 1964) the shaded box gives the interannual range of June-August means; 
and for Crozet (Polian et al., 1986), the lower bar gives background concentrations, with the upper bracket showing typical maximum 
events. 

JOS 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
all three experiments was a surprise to most participants. 
All of the established CTMs produced patterns and 
amplitudes that agreed within a factor of two over a range 
in concentration of more than 100. As an example, the 
zonal mean radon from case (i) for December, January and 
February is shown for the ECHAM3 and CCM2 models in 
Figure 2.12a-b. The two toothlike structures result from 
the major tropical convergence and convective uplift south 
of the equator and the uplift over the Sahara in the north. 
This basic pattern is reproduced by all the other synoptic 
CTMs. In June, July and August (not shown) the 5 x 10"21 
v/v contour shifts north of the equator, and again, the 
models produce similar patterns. In contrast, the 2-D 
model results, shown for the AER model in Figure 2.12c, 
have much smoother latitudinal structures, fail to match 
the expected zonally averaged concentrations, do not show 
the same seasonality, and, of course, cannot predict the 
large longitudinal gradients expected for 222Rn (similar 
arguments hold for NO x, see Kanakidou and Crutzen, 
1993). Results from the Moguntia CTM (monthly average 
3-D winds) fell in between these two extremes and could 
not represent the structures and variations predicted by the 
synoptic CTMs. 
Such differences in transport are critical to this 
assessment. Both NOx and 0 3 in the upper troposphere 
have chemical time-scales comparable to the rate of 
vertical mixing, and the stratified layering seen in the 
monthly averaged models is likely to distort the 
importance of the relatively slow chemistry near the 
tropopause. Compared with the synoptic models, it is 
obvious that the monthly averaged models simulate the 
transport of surface-emitted NOx into the free troposphere 
very differently, which may lead to inaccurate estimation 
of total NOx concentrations. The 2-D models appear to 
have a clear systematic bias favouring high-altitude 
sources (e.g., stratosphere and aircraft) over surface 
sources (e.g., combustion) and may calculate a very 
different ozone response to the same NOx perturbations. 
The participating synoptic CTMs are derived from such 
a diverse range of circulation patterns and tracer models 
that the universal agreement is not likely to be fortuitous. It 
is unfortunate that we lack the observations to test these 
predictions. Nevertheless, it is clear that the currently 
tested 2-D models, and to a much lesser extent the monthly 
averaged 3-D models, have a fundamental flaw in 
transporting tracers predominantly by diffusion, and they 
cannot be viewed as reliable in simulating the global 
distribution of short-lived species. The currently tested 
synoptic 3-D CTMs are the only models which have the 
capability of simulating the global-scale transport of NOx 
and O,; however, this capability will not be realised until 
these models include improved simulations of the 
boundary layer, clouds and chemical processes. 
to 
Q. 
2 
Q. 
1000 
90°S 
60°S 
3Q°S 
0° 
30°N 
60°N 
90°N 
Latitude 
90°S 
60°S 
3Q°g 
0° 
30°N 
Latitude 
60°N 
90°N 
90 N 
Figure 2.12: Latitude-by-altitude distribution of radon-222 as 
simulated in global chemical transport models. The contours arc 
mixing ratios in units of 10"21 by volume and have been averaged 
over Dec-Jan-Feb. These results are examples taken from a 
WCRP workshop on atmospheric transport (December, 1993). 
The two three-dimensional models (panel a, CCM2; and panel b. 
ECHAM3) reported longitudinally averaged distributions that 
agreed in general with most of the other 3-D models in the 
workshop, but were dramatically different in magnitude and 
structure from the 2-D models, such as the AER model shown 
here (panel c). 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
109 
2.9.2 Intercomparison of Photochemistry: 
03 Production and Loss 
The photochemical evolution of NOx and 0 3 in a parcel of 
tropospheric air is as important as the transport in the CTM 
simulations of ozone. We need to evaluate the chemistry in 
these models separately. Unfortunately, there is no easy 
observational test of the rapid photochemistry of the 
troposphere that includes the net chemical tendency of O v 
Furthermore, uncertainties in the kinetic parameters would 
probably encompass a wide range of observations. Thus, 
we chose an engineering test in which all chemical 
mechanisms and data, along with the atmospheric 
conditions, were specified exactly in each case. This 
comparison becomes then a test of the photochemical 
schemes used by the different groups, and in general there 
is only one correct answer. For most of these results, many 
models give similar answers, resulting in a "band" of 
consensus, which we assume here to be the best answer. 
We are thus testing the consistency of the numerical 
solution of the photochemical reaction system under highly 
constrained conditions. 
The original specifications for the comparison of 
photochemical schemes (PhotoComp) and the follow-on 
evaluation of CH4's impact on global chemistry (delta-
CH4) brought results from a wide variety of research 
groups listed in Table 2.8. Twenty-three model groups 
submitted to PhotoComp, and seven groups to the delta-
CH4 study. Assessment of the initial results revealed 
numerous mistakes. Most of these obvious discrepancies 
occurred in model formulation, interpretation of 
instructions, or reporting of results. Assessment of 
tropospheric chemistry lacks experience when compared 
with that of stratospheric ozone, and one purpose in having 
such a blind intercomparison was to provide a measure of 
potential model discrepancies. (For more typical 
assessments such as the delta-CH4 study, there remain so 
many options in these complex calculations that 
differences can be easily ascribed to many "justified" 
causes.) If these model assessments had been frozen in 
January 1994 as originally planned, then there would have 
been only two model results for the delta-CH4 scenario. 
Therefore, the model intercomparison / assessment was 
continued with resubmissions up to June 1994. The current 
list of contributions is the same as for the parallel WMO 
Ozone Assessment. Removal or correction of obvious 
errors did not eliminate discrepancies among the models, 
and significant differences still remain and are presented 
here. Table 2.8 gives the participating models and their 
contributors along with letter codes used in the figures. 
codes for those submitted after the January 1994 meeting 
(§), and notation for those models contributing to delta-
CH4(&). 
Details of PhotoComp are given in Chapter 7 of the 
1994 WMO Ozone Assessment. Atmospheric conditions 
were specified (1 July, US Standard Atmosphere with only 
molecular scattering and 0^ + 0 3 absorption) and the air 
parcels with specified initial conditions were allowed to 
evolve in isolation for five days with diurnally varying 
photolysis rates ("J"s). The PhotoComp cases were 
selected as examples of different chemical environments in 
the troposphere. The wet boundary layer is the most 
extensive, chemically active region of the troposphere. 
Representative conditions for the low-NOx concentrations 
over oceans (case: MARINE) and the high-NOx 
concentrations over continents (case: LAND) were picked. 
In MARINE, ozone is lost rapidly (-1.4 ppbv/day), but in 
LAND the initial N0X boosts 0 3 levels. Over the 
continental boundary layer NOx loss is rapid, and the high 
NOx levels must be maintained by local emissions (e.g., 
Zhou et al., 1993). This region has the potential for export 
of 0 3 (and its precursors) to the free troposphere 
(Pickering et al., 1992; Jacob et al., 1993). Rapid 0 3 
formation has been observed to occur in biomass burning 
plumes, and the rate is predicted to depend critically on 
whether hydrocarbons are present (PLUME/HC) or not 
(PLUME). In the dry upper troposphere (FREE), 0 3 
evolves very slowly, less than 1%/day, even at NOx levels 
of 100 pptv. 
The photolysis of 0 3 yielding O('D) (reaction (2.1)) is 
the first critical step in generating OH, and it controls the 
net production of 03. In this case tropospheric values peak 
at about 4-8 km because of molecular scattering. Model 
predictions for this photolysis rate at noon, shown in 
Figure 2.13a, fall within a band, ±20% of the mean value, 
if a few outliers are not considered. These differences are 
still large considering that all models purport to be making 
the same calculation. This photolysis of 0 3 and subsequent 
reaction with H^O (reaction (2.2)) drives the major loss of 
0 3 in MARINE (0 km, 10 pptv NOx) as shown in Figure 
2.13b. The spread in results after 5 days, 21 to 23 ppbv, or 
±12% in 0 3 loss, does not seem to correlate with the 0 3 
photolysis rates in Figure 2.13a. Also shown in Figure 
2.13b is the evolution of 0 3 in LAND (0 km, 200 pptv 
NOx). The additional NOx boosts 0 3 for a day or two, and 
doubles the discrepancy in the modelled ozone. The 
disagreement here is important since most tropospheric 0 3 
is destroyed by these reactions ((2.1), (2.2) and (2.6)) in 
the wet lower troposphere. 
The production of 0 3 in a NOx-rich PLUME (4 km, 10 
ppbv NOx) without non-methane hydrocarbons is rapid 
and continues over 5 days as shown in Figure 2.13c. 
Model agreement is excellent on the initial increases from 
30 to 60 ppbv 0 3 in 48 hours, but starts to diverge as NOx 
levels fall. When large amounts of NMHC are included in 
PLUME+HC (also Figure 2.13c), ozone is produced and 
NOx depleted rapidly, in less than one day. Differences 
among models become much greater, in part because 
different chemical mechanisms for NMHC oxidation were 

110 
Other Trace Gases and A tmospheric Chemistry 
Table 2.8: Models participating in the photochemical 
intercomparison 
and the delta-CH4 
simulation. 
Code 
Model 
Contributor* 
Email 
A 
B 
B& 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
I 
J 
K 
L 
M& 
N 
0 
P 
P& 
Q+ 
R& 
S 
T 
T& 
U 
Y/+ 
Z/+ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
§ 
U. Mich. 
UKMO/UEA 
UEA-Harwell/2D 
U.Iowa 
UCIrvine 
NASA Langley 
AER (box) 
Harvard 
NASA Ames 
NYU-Albany 
KFAJuelich 
GFDL 
Ga.Tech. 
U. Camb/2D 
U. Camb (box) 
LLNL/2D 
LLNL/3D 
" 
NASA Goddard 
AER/2D 
Cen. Faible Rad. 
U. Oslo/3D 
" 
NILU 
U. Wash. 
Ind. Inst. Tech. 
S. Sillman 
R. Derwent 
C. Reeves 
G. Carmichael 
M. Prather 
J. Richardson 
R. Kotamarthi 
L. Horowitz 
B. Chatfield 
S.Jin 
M. Kuhn 
L. Perliski 
P. Kasibhatla 
K. Law 
0. Wild 
D. Kinnison 
J. Penner 
C. Atherton 
A. Thompson 
R. Kotomarthi 
M. Kanakidou 
T. Berntsen 
1. Isaksen 
F. Stordal 
H.Yang 
M.Lai 
sillman@madlab.sprl.umich.edu 
rgderwent@email.meto.govt.uk 
c.reeves@uea.ac.uk 
gcarmich@icaen.uiowa.edu 
prather@halo.ps.uci.edu 
richard@sparkle.larc.nasa.gov 
rao@aer.com 
lwh@hera.harvard.edu 
chatfield@clio.arc.nasa.gov 
jin@mayfly.asrc.albany.edu 
ICH304@zam001.zam.kfa-juelich.de 
lmp@gfdl.gov 
psk@gfdl.gov 
kathy@atm.ch.cam.ac.uk 
oliver@atm.ch.cam.ac.uk 
dkin@cal-bears.llnl.gov 
pennerl@llnl.gov 
cyndi@tropos.llnl.gov 
thompson@gatorl .gsfc.nasa.gov 
rao@aer.com 
mariak@asterix.saclay.cea.fr 
terje.berntsen@geofysikk.uio.no 
frode@nilu.no 
yang@amath.washington.edu 
mlal@netearth.emet.in 
Explanation of Codes: 
/ submitted results only for the photolysis experiment, J[03 O('D) + 0 2]. 
& submitted results for the methane perturbation study (second contributor if listed). 
+ submitted results for the methane perturbation study, but could not be used. 
§ results revised or submitted since the Irvine drafting session (January 1994), see text. 
t Only a single point of contact is given here. 
used. (The reaction pathways and rate coefficients for 
chemistry with CH4 as the only hydrocarbon have become 
standardised, but different approaches are used for non-
methane hydrocarbons.) 
The 24-hour averaged OH concentrations are shown for 
LAND in Figure 2.13d. Values are high during the first 
day and demonstrate the dependence of OH on NOx, which 
begins at 200 pptv and decays rapidly to about 10 pptv by 
day 4. Modelled OH values fall within a ±2(V/c band. This 
variation in OH between models, however, does not 
correlate obviously with any other model differences such 
as the photolysis rate of 0-, or the abundance of NO. These 
results sli 
or more exist in the calculations of 0 3 change and OH 
concentrations. This spread is not a true scientific 
uncertainty, but presumably a result of different numerical 
methods that could potentially be resolved, although no 
single fix, such as 0 3 photolysis rates, would appear to 
reduce the spread. A more significant uncertainty in the 
current calculations of 0 3 tendencies is highlighted by the 
parallel experiments with and without NMHC: the sour o. 
transport and oxidation, and in particular the correlate of 
NOx emissions and NMHC emissions on a fine scale. : MV 
control the rate at which NOx produces O v 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
Ill 
12-
8-
4-
0-
(a) 
- 
i 
i 
— 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
r 
i 
I 
i 
i 
I 
i 
I 
. 
I 
1 
"I 
I 
l 
1 
T I J j O E 
1 
1 
1 
1 
-
\
-
^
-
\
-
1 
' TJ<I 
' 
1 
*7- L -H ^k? 
' 
| 
Y
-
^
B
, 
i 
T 
aIE i 
i 
- 1 — 1 — , — 1 — , — 1 — I 
— 
— 
— 
— 
34 
10-5 
2x10-5 
3x10-5 
4x10-5 
J(03->0(1D)+02) noon (/sec) 
5x10-5 
<0 
! 
3 2 -
30 -- xxxxx-
I 
5 
28+. 
s 
(b) 
26 
2 4 - - -
22 
20 
18 
1. 
-w&Sr-
*BJ. 
4# 
g 
a. 
MB6 
uB T r^i 
2 
3 
Days 
180 
160 
8 
o 
+ 
E 
40 
20 
(c) 
140 
120 -
100 
80 
6 0 -
+ 
*;GCNt> -» 
^
E 
B 
L 
E 
m 
H 
- F t r -
% 
_ H _ 
- n -
c 
t- % Am 
0.12 
0 . 1 0 -
a. 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Days 
Figure 2.13: Intercomparison of 23 photochemical models, testing their ability to calculate photodissociation rates and chemical rates 
of ozone net production. All models agreed to adopt the same chemical rate coefficients and cross-sections; see Table 2.8 for the key to 
the letters. 
(a) Photodissociation rate for 0 3 into O('D) and Oz; values refer to noon, July 1, 45° N, assuming the US Standard Atmosphere. 
(b) The 5-day evolution of near-surface 03, initialised at noon with 30 ppbv (XXXXX) and with high levels of NOx (LAND, upper 
case key letters, see Table 2.8) or with low NOx (MARINE, lower case keys). 
(c) The 5-day evolution of 0 3 in a simulated biomass burning plume at 4 km altitude, initialised at 30 ppbv of 0 3 and extremely high 
levels of NOx. Two cases of no NMHC (lower case keys) and equivalently high NMHC (upper case keys) are considered. 
(d) The 5-day evolution of OH concentrations, calculated as 24-hour averages from noon to noon, are shown for the LAND simulation 
of panel (b). 
2.9.3 Conclusions 
3-D synoptic CTMs are needed for climate assessments 
that involve atmospheric chemistry. However, the 
currently available CTMs have been evaluated only for the 
transport of simple tracers; these models must develop the 
chemical mechanisms so that they can accurately simulate 
the scales of chemistry that remove NOx and NMHC while 
making 0 3. The chemistry in these models will continue to 
be tested and evaluated against observations. The growth 
in our understanding of tropospheric chemistry, and 
particularly that of 0 3, has been and will continue to he 
driven by a combination of careful field observations of 
trace gases, laboratory investigations of chemical 
mechanisms and the theoretical development of CTMs and 
related models. 
2.10 Global Tropospheric Ozone Modelling 
Modelling tropospheric ozone is one of the more difficult 
tasks in atmospheric chemistry. The difficulty is due in 
part to the large number of processes that control 
tropospheric ozone and its precursors, and in part to the 
large range of spatial and temporal scales that must be 
resolved. Global tropospheric CTMs attempt to simulate 
the life cycles of many trace gases for which we have 
uncertain knowledge of their sources as well as the 
chemical mechanisms of their destruction. 
The accurate description of the boundary conditions for 
a CTM simulation of tropospheric ozone is daunting, lor 
stratospheric assessments we have been interested in long-
lived gases which are well mixed in the troposphere, and 
whose concentrations are. therefore, independent of when 

r 
112 
or where they were emitted at the North pole or the South, 
in summer or winter. For tropospheric ozone, the key 
constituents, NOx and NMHC, do not become well mixed 
in the troposphere, and their impact on ozone is likely to 
depend on when or where they were emitted. This greatly 
complicates any assessment since, unless great effort is 
made, the CTM simulations from different research groups 
will not be simulating the same atmosphere. 
Such differences are apparent when comparing the 
published simulations of tropospheric ozone and its 
climatic impact. Most of the models published to date are 
2-D (see discussion in Section 2.9.1) and have calculated 
changes in tropospheric O-, since the pre-industrial 
atmosphere or made predictions of future ozone for 
assumed growth scenarios in CH4, NOx and other trace 
gases (Kanakidou et al., 1991; Wuebbles et al., 1992; 
Fuglestvedt el al., 1993,1994a; Law and Pyle, 1993; 
Derwent, 1994b; Hauglustaine el al., 1994; Strand and 
llov, 1994). Two monthly averaged 3-D CTMs have 
included a fairly complete chemical model to study 
tropospheric O-, (Miiller, 1992; Lelieveld, 1994). The 
global synoptic 3-D CTMs (see Section 2.9.1) have been 
developed recently to the level where extensive 
publications are starting to appear (e.g., Penner et al., 
1991). 
Few of the above studies of pre-industrial atmospheres 
can be compared directly because of the diversity in 
boundary conditions used. While most calculations will 
use similar boundary conditions for the long-lived gases 
(CH, and N-,0) based on the ice core record, the historical 
records of CO, NOx and NMHC emissions are unknown. 
Furthermore, many of these models are solely tropospheric 
and do not include photochemical coupling with the 
stratosphere, and the stratospheric influxes of 0 3 and NOx 
are prescribed. Since the documented changes in CH4 and 
N,0 are substantial, it is likely that stratospheric ozone has 
evolved. Thus CTMs simulating tropospheric 0 3 must 
include the interactions with an evolving stratosphere. A 
final warning must he that these models cannot predict the 
possible changes in the circulation over the last centuries. 
In spite of these obvious problems, the predicted 
changes in tropospheric O^ in the Northern Hemisphere 
since pre-industrial times have been calculated 
(Hauglustaine et al.. 1994) as approximately a doubling. 
Combined with the historical evidence from observations 
(see Section 2.6). we may make a best guess that the 
increase in ozone since 1S50 is about 25 ppbv throughout 
the troposphere at northern mid-latitudes, and possibly 
extending into the tropics. However, changes in the 
Southern Hemisphere, which is remote from human 
influence in terms of NO . CO and NMHC emissions, are 
not certain. The confidence in this number is no greater 
than a factor of 2 at best, and such "best guesses'" do not 
substitute for critical assessment of the CTM simulations 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
which await the ongoing development of the models and 
corresponding measurements. 
2.10.1 Tropospheric NOx: Surface Combustion and 
Aircraft 
The sources of NOx in the troposphere are numerous (see 
Section 2.7) and the large natural source from lightning is 
not well characterised. Thus the 3-D CTMs failure to 
simulate correctly the NOx distributions and total nitrate 
observations in the troposphere, particularly in remote 
marine locations, is not surprising (Penner et al., 1991; 
Kasibhatala et al., 1993). These problems could be due to 
limitations in knowledge of emissions and to errors in the 
simulation of atmospheric chemistry and transport from 
intensive source regions. 
Recent attention has focused on the role of aircraft 
relative to other anthropogenic sources of NOx, as jet 
engine exhaust is placed directly into the upper 
troposphere and lower stratosphere. Aircraft are a small 
source of NOx, producing about 1/80 of the NOx released 
from other combustion sources at the Earth's surface. 
Similarly, aircraft fuel is about 3% of the total fossil fuel 
burned each year. However, upper tropospheric ozone 
exerts a greater radiative forcing than ozone at lower 
altitudes and so the importance of the various sources of 
upper tropospheric ozone need to be quantified. 
Several recent studies have estimated peak increases of 
about 5% in tropospheric ozone over the northern mid-
latitudes troposphere due to the current aircraft fleet (Beck 
et al., 1992; Johnson et al., 1992; Fuglestvedt et al., 1TO: 
Rohrer et al., 1993). In general this work uses 2-D models. 
which have systematic discrepancies in the rate of vertical 
mixing between the surface and the mid troposphere 
(Section 2.9.1), although these studies are rapidly 
expanding to the best current 3-D transport models. Model 
tests also demonstrate that the ozone forming potential of 
NOx emitted by aircraft depends upon transport 
formulation, injection height, removal by cloud processes, 
and the background level of NOx from other sources. Fur 
example, if the lightning source of tropospheric NOx is 
underestimated in the model, then the aircraft impacl on 
ozone is overestimated (Fuglestvedt et al., 1994). 
If we select an upper limit for the effect of aircraft N(\ 
on ozone, then the short-term radiative forcing could he 
comparable to the radiative forcing due to the CO^ from 
the burned fuel. 
While aircraft emissions of NOx are thought to ha\ e a 
greater radiative effect (through ozone formation in he 
upper troposphere) on a per kilogram basis, surl. ce 
emissions of NOx probably dominate the anthn :"-
genicallv induced production of ozone within % 
troposphere. The 3-D synoptic CTMs show that sin •:. 
short-lived trace species are rapidly mixed throughou: \ 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
16-
113 
14-
12-
-g-10 
3 
< 6-I 
4 
2 
0 
(a) 
Natal 
Mar-Apr-May 
0 
i 
i 
i 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Ozone (ppbv) 
l 
u 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 100 120 140 160 
Ozone (ppbv) 
Figure 2.14: Profiles of 03 observed in the tropical troposphere (Natal, panel a) and at northern mid-latitudes in July (G = Goose Bay 
and H = Hohenpeissenberg, panel b). The data from the two Northern hemisphere stations are averages over 1980 to 1991 (Logan, 
1994). The tropical station shows measurements taken during the seasons of minimum ozone (March, April and May) and maximum 
ozone (September, October and November) (Kirchhoff et al., 1989). 
troposphere. Jacob et al. (1993) calculated the net export 
of 03 and its precursors from the boundary layer over the 
North American continent and found it comparable to the 
mean stratospheric source of 0 3 over the northern mid-
latitudes. 
2.10.2 CH4 Increases: A Case Study 
The impact of methane perturbations are felt throughout all 
of atmospheric chemistry from the surface to the 
exosphere, and most of these mechanisms are well 
understood. Quantification of these effects, however, is 
one of the classic problems in modelling atmospheric 
chemistry. Similar to the ozone studies noted above, the 
published methane-change studies have examined 
scenarios that range from 700 ppbv (pre-industrial) to 1700 
ppbv (current) to a doubling by the year 2050 (e.g., WMO, 
1992), but these scenarios are not consistent across 
models. The study of the effects of an increase in methane 
concentrations (delta-CH4) was designed to provide a 
common framework for evaluating the multitude of 
indirect effects, especially changes in 0 3 and OH, that are 
associated with an increase in CH4 (see Section 2.2.6) and 
that provide the basis for the quantitative evaluation of 
radiative forcing from today's CH4 emissions. The study 
centres on today's atmosphere; using each model's best 
simulation of the current atmosphere and then increasing 
the CH4 concentration in the troposphere by 20%, from 
1715 ppbv to 2058 ppbv. This increase is small enough 
that perturbations to current atmospheric chemistry are 
approximately linear. The list of participating research 
groups is given in Table 2.8, and the protocol and history 
are described above with PhotoComp. 
2.10.2.1 The current atmosphere 
Important diagnostics from delta-CH4 include 0 3 and NOx 
profiles for the current atmosphere, providing a test of the 
realism of each model's simulation. Typical profiles 
observed for 0 3 in the tropics and in northern mid-latitudes 
over America and Europe are shown in Figure 2.14. The 
corresponding calculated 0 3 profiles, shown in Figure 
2.15a-b, differ by almost a factor of 2, but encompass the 
observations. The clear divergence of results above 10 km 
altitude illustrates the difficulty in determining the 
transition between troposphere and stratosphere. This 
exercise is only the beginning of an objective evaluation of 
tropospheric ozone models. A more rigorous diagnosis is 
needed, including other latitudes and seasons. 
The modelled zonal-mean NOx profiles, shown in 
Figure 2.15c, differ by almost a factor of 10. Comparisons 
in the lowest 2 km altitude are not meaningful since the 
CTMs average regions of high urban pollution with clean 
marine boundary layer. The range of modelled NOx values 
in the free troposphere often falls outside the range of 
typical observations, about 20 to 100 pptv, as shown in 
Figures 2.8 and 2.9. 
2.10.2.2 O? perturbations 
The calculated changes in tropospheric 0 3 for June, July 
and August in northern mid-latitudes and the tropics are 

114 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
14 
12 
10 
I 8 
! • 
4 
2 
(a) 
ci B " | 
| 
| 
°Bpfi 
I 
I 
I 
l 
„ 
l 
l 
l 
-pB 
1 
1 
1 
- ^ ~ p 1 
f 
j~-—"I 
'""^MP -"! 
1 
1 
1 
50 
100 
150 
200 
0 3 (ppbv) @ 12°S-12°N / Jun-Jul-Aug 
250 
14 
12 
10 
1 8 
« I6 
4 
(b) 
i 
! 
i 
i 
1 
4 - - R -
1 
R! 
1 
X» 
' 
^ 
J_*_a[P.B. 
--4-v-t-
R |«l 
PB | 
' M 
P 
1 
T& F0|B 
! 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
R 
— 
1 
l 
I 
i r 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i r 
i 
i 
- i 
i 
i 
i r 
i 
i 
—i 
p 
I 
1 
-1 
1 
50 
100 
150 
200 
0 3 (ppbv) @ 35°N-55°N / Jurwlul-Aug 
250 
14 
12 
10 
Is 
! • 
4 
2 
( C )B 
o! 
I R 
I 
I 
| 
B ° ! 
«j 
T jp 
I 
I 
"~a—T—R—i 
1 
r 
1 
B 
M! R 
I
T
! 
I 
I 
--U 
i.p 
1 
1 
j 
1 
.^:__4-J--l-4--. 
B RI 
j M 
] 
| 
| 
| 
"
_ 0 ¥
T : — f " " 1 — : — i 
B 
\0 T 
? 
I 
! T 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
NO x (pptv) @ 35°N-55°N / Jun^Jul-Aug 
600 
shown in Figure 2.16a-b for the delta-CH4 study. Ozone-
increases everywhere in the troposphere, with values 
ranging from about 0.5 ppbv to more than 5 ppbv (the 
extremely high values for model P in the upper 
troposphere must be considered cautiously since this recent 
submission has not yet been scrutinised as much as the 
other results). In general the increase is larger at mid-
latitudes, but not for all models. Results for the southern 
mid-latitudes in summer (December, January and 
February) (not shown) are similar to the northern. 
The large spread in these results shows that our ability 
to predict changes in tropospheric 0 3 induced by CH4 
perturbations is not very good. This conclusion is not 
unexpected given the large range in modelled NOx (Figure 
2.15c), but the differences in 0 3 perturbations do not seem 
14 
12 
10 
& 8+-
I6 
4 
(a) 
1. 
T I 
|c 
-TT" 
o 
I 
crt-
B 
& B | P 
_cf_ 
§ 
"n~" 
B 
O 
1 p 
- 1 — 
i r 
~i~t~ 
I»/IR 
._r_B_|__ 
PR 
M, 
R 
'"RIP 
- I - -
!p 
i -r-i 
i 
— i — 
i 
r | R 
- T M - - I R - -
Rl 
p 
1 
- R - - 1 
I 
l 
l 
l 
I 
— 
I P -
l 
l 
l 
l 
l 
l 
—i 
1 
--p-l 
_ _ ] 
- | — -
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
Delta-Os (ppbv) @ 12°S-12°N / Jun-Jul-Aug 
14 
12 
10 
Is 
a> 
•a 
S 
6 
(b) 
H". 
r 4 
._J-r-
T 
r O 
R 
R-4 
B 
" r T F r J " 
-i 
a-[L_ 
r 
# ! M 
"Tl 
—SiJP-k-
R B0P| 
--I--P--
T 
0 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Delta-03 (ppbv) @ 35°N-55°N / Jun-Jul-Aug 
Figure 2.15: Profiles of 0-, modelled for the tropical troposphere 
(panel a, 12° S to 12° N), the northern mid-latitude troposphere 
(panel b, 35° N to 55" N), and those of NO, modelled for the 
northern mid-latitude troposphere (panel c, 35° N to 55° N). The 
models were simulating the current atmosphere, and results are 
averaged over northern summer (Jun-Jul-Aug). Results are from 
the delta-CH4 study and the letter keys are given in Table 2.8. 
Figure 2.16: Changes in tropospheric 0 3 profiles predicted b\ 
models for a 20% increase in CH4 relative to today's atmospli-
(as shown in Figure 2.15). Results parallel those in Figure 2.1 
averaged over northern summer and reported for (a) the tropin 
and (b) northern mid-latitudes. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
to correlate with the model's NOx. Nevertheless, a 
consistent pattern of increases in tropospheric 03, ranging 
from 0.5 to 2.5 ppbv, occurs throughout most of the 
troposphere. Our best estimate is that a 20% increase in 
CH4 would lead to an increase in ozone of about 1.5 ppbv 
throughout most of the troposphere in both tropics and 
summertime mid-latitudes. This indirect impact on the 
radiative forcing (see Chapter 4) is about 25 ± 15% of that 
due to the prescribed 343 ppbv increase in CH4 alone. 
2.10.2.3 Adjustment time ofCH4 emissions 
Methane is the only long-lived gas that has clearly 
identified, important chemical feedbacks: increases in 
atmospheric CH4 reduce tropospheric OH, increase the 
CH4 lifetime, and hence amplify the climatic and chemical 
impacts of a CH4 perturbation (Isaksen and Hov, 1987). 
The delta-CH4 simulations from six different 2-D and 3-D 
models show that these chemical feedbacks change the 
relative loss rate for CH4 by -0.17% to -0.35% for each 1% 
increase in CH4 concentration as shown in Table 2.9. This 
range reflects differences in the modelled roles of CH4, 
CO, and NMHC as sinks for OH. For example, model M, 
with the smallest feedback factor, has fixed the 
concentrations of CO; and model R has shown that 
calculating CO instead with a flux boundary condition (as 
most of the other models have done) results in a larger 
feedback. These differences cannot be resolved with this 
intercomparison, and this range underestimates our 
uncertainty in this factor. 
Recent theoretical analysis has shown that the feedback 
factor (FF) defined in Table 2.9 can be used to derive an 
adjustment time that accurately describes the time-scale for 
the decay of a pulse of CH4 added to the atmosphere. 
Table 2.9: Inferred CH4 response time from the CH4 
perturbation simulations. 
Model code 
Feedback factor 
Adjustment time/lifetime 
•0.20% 
•0.17% 
0.35% 
0.22% 
0.26% 
0.18% 
•0.34% 
1.29 
1.23+ 
1.62 
1.32 
1.39 
1.26+ 
1.61 
Note: Feedback factor = relative change (%) in the globally 
averaged CII4 loss frequency (i.e., [OH]) for a +1% increase 
in CH4 concentrations. 
t These models use fixed CO concentrations and so 
underestimate this ratio. 
115 
Hffectively. a pulse of C\\4. no matter how small, reduces 
the global OH levels by a similar amount (i.e. -0.3% per 
+ 1%). This leads to a relative build-up of a corresponding 
increase in the already existing atmospheric reservoir of 
CH4, which cannot be distinguished from a longer 
adjustment time for the initial pulse. Thus the adjustment 
time (AT) is longer than the lifetime (LT) derived from the 
budget (i.e., total abundance divided by total losses). 
Prather (1994) has shown that the ratio, AT/LT, is equal to 
1/(1 + FF) and that this adjustment time applies to all CH4 
perturbations, positive or negative, no matter how small or 
large, as long as the change in CH4 concentration is not 
large enough to change the feedback factor. Based on 
model results, this assumption should apply at least over a 
±30% change in current CH4 concentrations. Two of the 
models with results in Table 2.9 have shown that small 
CH4 perturbations decay with the predicted adjustment 
time. 
Based on these limited results, we choose 1.45 as the 
best estimate for the ratio AT/LT, with an uncertainty 
bracket of 1.20 to 1.70. The budget lifetime of CH4 is 
calculated to be about 10 yr, using the CH-,CCI3 lifetime as 
a standard for OH and including stratospheric losses, and 
gives a best estimate for the CH4 adjustment time of 14.5 ± 
2.5 yr. If the biological soil sink were to respond to the 
atmosphere in the same way as the chemical sink, this 
would reduce the adjustment time to a little under 14 yr. In 
this chapter we use the range 14 ± 3 (11-17) yr to cover 
this uncertainty. This enhanced time-scale describes the 
effective duration for all current emissions of CH4; it is 
independent of other emissions as long as current 
concentrations of CH4, ±30%, are maintained. In the 
extreme case that all CH4 emissions (including natural 
sources) ceased, the initial rate of decay (1/9.4 /yr) would 
become more rapid as OH levels increased, resulting in 
increasingly rapid decay, with an average adjustment time 
of about 8.5 yr. However, a small additional pulse on top 
of this decaying profile still produces chemical feedbacks 
that lengthen its adjustment time to 10.1 yr, a factor of 1.2 
longer than the bulk of the CH4. 
Some of this effect was included in the previous 
assessment as an "indirect OH" enhancement to the size of 
the CH4 perturbations. Here we recognise that the OH 
chemical feedbacks give an effective residence time for 
CH4 emissions that is substantially longer than the lifetime 
used to derive the global budgets. This effective 
lengthening of a CH4 pulse applies also to all induced 
chemical perturbations such as tropospheric 0 3 and 
stratospheric H20. 
Deriving natural sources based on observed pre-
industrial concentrations is more uncertain for CH4 than 
for N20 because we do not know how tropospheric OH 
has changed. If the CH4 lifetime has not changed, then a 
source of 210 Tg(CH4)/yr would be needed to maintain 

116 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
700 ppbv. If the current feedback factor is applicable to 
low values of CH4, then 280 Tg(CH4)/yr is required. 
However, industrial and agricultural emissions of CO, 
NMHC and NOx also perturb tropospheric OH, and a clear 
picture of changes since the pre-industrial is not yet 
available (Thompson and Cicerone, 1986; Isaksen and 
Hov, 1987; Derwent, 1994b). 
2.10.3 Conclusions 
As noted above, there are numerous published studies 
examining the response of tropospheric ozone to changes 
in CH4 and other trace gases since the pre-industrial era, 
particularly the emissions of NOx from surface combustion 
and aircraft. It is difficult to evaluate the robustness of 
those results, as well as those from the delta-CH4 study, 
without a more objective critique of the model 
performance, which should occur with time. This period 
will mark a significant transition in assessment models of 
the troposphere where we will rely increasingly on 3-D 
models. 
A degree of caution is necessary in interpreting the 
results quoted here for tropospheric 0 3 changes as a 
central value with a formal range of uncertainty (e.g., 95% 
confidence level). They represent our current best guesses; 
we must be aware that these values could change 
significantly. 
2.11 Stabilisation of Atmospheric Chemical 
Composition 
The atmospheric abundance of a chemical species is 
governed by the rates of production and removal, where 
these terms include processes occurring at the Earth's 
surface (emission and deposition) and in the atmosphere 
(chemical). When the gross production/emission rate is 
equal to the gross removal rate, the atmospheric 
concentration is in steady state and therefore remains 
constant over time. In practice, it is more straightforward 
to quantify the net change in atmospheric abundance (by 
direct measurement of the atmospheric concentration), 
than to estimate either of the gross terms with any 
accuracy. As discussed earlier in this chapter, a number of 
atmospheric feedback processes are known which have the 
potential to change atmospheric turn-over times (the 
removal rate), principally through perturbation of the 
tropospheric hydroxyl radical concentrations. How well 
current models of the atmosphere can quantify the effects 
of these feedbacks is unclear, and so in this discussion it is 
assumed (with the exception of CH4 where the adjustment 
time is used) that the atmospheric lifetimes of the various 
gases remains constant. 
The adjustment time determines the speed with which 
the atmospheric abundance responds to changes in the 
production rate - the faster the removal process (i.e. the 
shorter the adjustment time), the quicker the response. 
Thus if emissions for CH4 (adjustment time about 14 
years) and N20 (about 120 years) were to be held constant, 
the atmospheric abundance of CH4 would stabilise sooner. 
Thus we discuss stabilisation at different levels with 
particular emphasis on the implications for the 
anthropogenic component. 
The major sources of most of the gases discussed in this 
section are at the Earth's surface. However some of the 
gases discussed in this chapter are predominantly formed 
in the atmosphere. Two of these are of particular 
importance: 0 3 and CO. 0 3 is formed exclusively through 
photochemical processes in the atmosphere, and its 
concentration is strongly influenced by chemicals of 
anthropogenic origin (e.g., halocarbons in the stratosphere. 
N0X and hydrocarbons in the troposphere). A major source 
of CO is the oxidation of methane and other hydrocarbons 
in the troposphere. The link between surface emissions of 
NMHC and CO production in the atmosphere is more 
quantitatively established than the corresponding link 
between NOx and NMHC emissions and the production of 
tropospheric ozone, although the mechanisms for both are 
well known. 
2.11.1 Methane 
The observed trend in the CH4 atmospheric abundance 
over the past decade has been 35-40 Tg/yr (+0.7%/year): 
thus we know that gross production exceeded the gross 
removal by this rate. As shown in Table 2.3, the best 
estimate for the gross production of CH4 is 535 Tg/yr. Of 
this about 375 Tg/yr is associated with anthropogenic 
activities and 160 Tg/yr with natural processes. 
Stabilisation of CH4 concentrations will follow 
stabilisation of emissions, and a wide range of potential 
stabilisation profiles can be envisaged depending on how 
much control of anthropogenic emissions is possible. In 
this respect it should be noted that the continued increase 
in CH4 observed since 1950 implies a sustained increase in 
emissions of about 1%/year. Four cases can be considered: 
(a) If this (or any) increase in emissions were to 
continue, no stabilisation of the atmospheric ( H, 
abundance would occur. 
(b) If current emissions were held constant. ( II, 
concentrations would stabilise in less than 50 year*, at 
about 1900 ppbv. 
(c) If emissions could be cut by about 37 Tg/yr. he 
atmospheric CH4 abundance would stabilise at curent 
levels. 
(d) If emissions could be reduced by more thai 37 
Tg/yr, the atmospheric abundance would stabilise h >w 
current levels. The 15-year adjustment time of * 11. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
117 
would allow such changes to occur on a decadal time-
scale. 
Very crudely, each reduction in emissions of 37 Tg/yr 
would lower the atmospheric concentration at stabilisation 
by about 170 ppbv (10% of current values). (Conversely 
each increase of 37 Tg/yr would raise the atmospheric 
concentration at stabilisation by about 170 ppbv.) It must 
be emphasised that these estimates should only be used as 
a guide because it is assumed that other changes in 
atmospheric chemistry that control the CH4 adjustment 
time are not changing over this period. 
2.11.2 Nitrous Oxide 
The atmospheric N 20 abundance has, on average, 
increased by about 3.9 Tg(N)/yr (0.25%/yr) over the last 
10-15 years. The anthropogenic emissions are estimated to 
be about 5.7 Tg(N)/yr, so a cut of about two-thirds of the 
anthropogenic emissions is needed to stabilise N 20 
concentration at today's value. However, if the 
anthropogenic emissions were held constant at current 
values, the atmospheric N20 abundance would climb from 
310 ppbv to about 400 ppbv. The relatively long lifetime 
of N20 (120 years) means that this change would be slow 
with the N20 abundance reaching 370 ppbv by the year 
2100. Further, any reductions in the atmospheric N 20 
abundance would take a hundred years or so. 
2.11.3 Halocarbons 
Nearly all CFCs and other industrial halocarbons are out of 
balance in that emissions exceed atmospheric losses. For 
short-lived halocarbons such as CH3CC13 with stable 
emissions over the past several years, the compound is 
nearly in steady-state, and the reduction in emissions 
expected under the Montreal Protocol would first stabilise, 
and then reduce atmospheric concentrations. For longer-
lived compounds (CFCs), the primary production allowed 
under Article 5 of the Protocol and the continued release of 
the bank of current CFCs may sustain concentrations of the 
longer-lived CFCs over over the next decade or so. 
Overall, total tropospheric chlorine levels in the form of 
industrial halocarbons should peak in the next few years. 
In the longer term, atmospheric abundances will fall, the 
speed of decline depending on the adjustment time of the 
particular compound. 
HCFCs and HFCs, used as substitutes for CFCs, are 
expected to grow as emissions increase. Under the terms of 
the Montreal Protocol, the HCFCs will be phased out in 
the early part of next century. There are no natural sources 
and so their atmospheric abundances will respond to the 
reductions in emissions. Once the emissions have been 
stopped, the atmospheric abundance will return to zero -
the time needed for this to occur varies from chemical to 
chemical according to atmospheric adjustment time, but is 
shorter than for the longer-lived CFCs. Presently there are 
no controls over HFCs. The atmospheric abundances of 
these compounds would behave similarly to HCFCs if 
emissions were controlled. 
Perfluorinated species (CF4, C2F6, SF()) are extremely 
long-lived. There are no known sinks for these compounds 
on the time-scales of centuries, and the only method of 
stabilising these compounds is complete cessation of 
emissions. 
2.11.4 Ozone 
Stratospheric ozone decreases over the last 25 years have 
occurred principally from the use of CFCs and halons. 
Future production of these and other ozone-depleting 
substances is limited under the Montreal Protocol. 
Depletion of stratospheric ozone is predicted to peak in the 
next decade, and ozone levels are expected to recover as 
the concentrations of these compounds fall, which will 
take several decades. Recovery of the Antarctic ozone hole 
is not expected until the middle of the 21st century. CFCs, 
halons and related compounds are not the only 
anthropogenic influences and other perturbations (NOx 
from N-,0, changes in stratospheric temperatures from 
increased radiative forcing, etc.) will also influence future 
stratospheric ozone levels. 
In most of the troposphere, the rate-limiting precursor of 
new ozone production is NOx, although NMHCs play an 
important 
role 
in some regions. 
Accordingly, 
recommendations to stabilise tropospheric ozone focus on 
controlling emissions of NOx. However, as shown in 
Section 2.10.2, some control of CH4 (and CO and NMHC) 
is also necessary. The lifetime of ozone is very short (2-4 
weeks), and so the effects of any reductions in precursor 
emissions should be felt quickly. 
How to control these precursors, particularly NOx and 
NMHC, is extremely difficult to assess, because their 
impact on tropospheric 0 3 cannot be calculated by just 
summing their global emissions. The effect of these short-
lived species depends on where and when they are emitted, 
as evidenced by the fact that aircraft emissions of NOx 
have a proportionately greater impact than equal surface 
emissions on 0 3 in the upper troposphere. Both this 
relative impact and the absolute source (i.e., anthropogenic 
surface emissions of NOx are about 80 times those from 
aircraft) must be combined when assessing the role of 
short-lived species on radiative forcing. 

118 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
References 
AFEAS (Alternative Fluorocarbons Environmental Acceptability 
Study), 1993: Production, Sales and Atmospheric Release of 
Fluorocarbons Through 1992, SPA-AFEAS, Inc., Washington 
DC, USA. 
Akimoto, H., N. Nakane and Y. Matsumoto, 1994: The 
chemistry of oxidant generation: tropospheric ozone increase 
in Japan. In: The Chemistry of the Atmosphere: Its Impact on 
Global Change, J.G. Calvert (ed), Blackwell Sci. Publ., 
pp.261-273. 
Albritton, D. and R. Watson, 1993: Methyl bromide and the 
ozone layer: a summary of current understanding. In: Methyl 
Bromide: 
Its Atmospheric 
Science, 
Technology 
and 
Economics. Montreal Protocol Assessment Supplement, R. 
Watson, D. Albritton, S. Anderson and S. Lee-Bapty (eds), 
UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya. 
Anastasi, C. and V.J. Simpson, 1993: Future methane emissions 
from animals. J. Gcophys. Res., 98, 7181-7186. 
Andreae, M.O., 1993: The influence of tropical biomass burning 
on climate and the atmospheric environment. 
In: 
Biogeochcmistry of Global Change: Radiatively Active Trace 
Gases. R.S. Oremland (ed.). New York: Chapman & Hall, 
pp.113-150. 
Andreae, M.O. and P. Warneck, 1994: Global methane 
emissions from biomass burning and comparison with other 
sources. Pure and Applied Chemistry, 66, 162-169. 
Andreae, M.O., E.V. Browell, G.L. Garstang, R.C. Gregory, 
R.C. Harriss, G.F. Hill, D.J. Jacob, M.C. Pereira, G.W. Sachse, 
AW. Setzer, PL. Silva Dias, R.W. Talbot, A.L. Torres and 
S.C. Wofsy, 1988: Biomass-burning emissions and associated 
haze layers over Amazonia../. Geophys. Res. 93, 1509-1527. 
Aoki, S.. T. Nakazawa, S. Murayama and S. Kawaguchi, 1992: 
Measurements of atmospheric methane at the Japanese 
Antarctic station, Syowa. Tellus, 44B, 273-281. 
Arnold, F., J. Scheid, Th. Stimp, H. Schlager and M.E. 
Reinhardt, 1992: Measurements of jet aircraft emissions at 
cruise altitude 1: The odd-nitrogen gases NO, NO-,, HNO, and 
HNOv Geophys. Res. Lett., 12, 2421-2424. 
Atlas, E., W. Pollock, J. Greenberg, L. Heichat and A. 
Thompson. 1993: Alkyl nitrate, non methane hydrocarbons 
and halocarbon gases over the equatorial Pacific Ocean during 
SAGA 3../. Geophys. Res., 98, 16933-16947. 
Bachelet, 0. and H. Neue, 1993: Methane emissions from 
wetland rice areas of Asia. Chemosphcrc, 26, 219-237. 
Balkanski, Y.J., D.J. Jacob, R. Arimoto and M.A. Kritz,1992: 
Long-range transport of radon-222 over the North Pacific 
Ocean: implications for continental influences. ./. Atmos. 
Chem., 14,353-374. 
Bartlett, KB. and R.C. Harriss. 1993: Review and assessment of 
methane emissions from wetlands. Chemosphere, 26, 261-320. 
Bartlett, KB.. P.M. Crill, J.A. Bonassi, J.E. Richey and R.C. 
Harriss, 1990: Methane flux from the Amazon River 
floodplain: emissions during rising water../. Geophys. Res., 95, 
16773-16788. 
Baughcum, S.L.. D.M. Chan, S.M. Happenny. S.C. Henderson, 
PS. Hertel. T. Higman, DR. Maggiora and C.A. Oncina. 
1993: Aircraft emissions scenarios. In: The Atmospheric 
Effects of Stratospheric Aircraft: A 3rd Program Report. 
NASA Ref. Publ. 1313.pp87-208 
Beck, L.L., 1993: A global methane emissions program for 
landfills, coal mines, and natural gas systems. Chemosphere. 
26, 447-452. 
Beck, L.L.,. S. Piccot and D. Kirchgessner, 1993: Industrial 
sources. In: Atmospheric Methane: Sources, Sinks and Role in 
Global Change, M. Khalil (ed), NATO ASI series, pp.230-253. 
Beck J.P., C.E. Reeves, F.A.A.M. de Leeuw and S.A. Penkett. 
1992: The effect of aircraft emissions on tropospheric ozone in 
the Northern Hemisphere. Atmos. Env. 26A, 17-29. 
Berger, M.G.M., R.M. Hofmann, 0. Scharffe and P.J. Crutzcn. 
1993: Nitrous oxide emissions from motor vehicles in tunnel*. 
and their global extrapolation. J. Geophys Res., 98(DI0), 
18527-18531. 
Blunier, T., J. Chappellaz, J. Schwander, J. Barnola, T. Desperls. 
B. Stauffer and D. Raynaud, 1993: Atmospheric methane 
record from a Greenland ice core over the past 1000 years. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 2219-2222. 
Bojkov, R.D., C.S. Zerefos, D.S. Balis, I.C. Ziomas and A.F. 
Bais, 1993: Record low total ozone during northern winters of 
1992 and 1993. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 1351-1354. 
Bouwman, A.F. 1993: Report of the third workshop of the 
Global Emissions Inventory Activity (GEIA). RIVM Report 
481507002, RIVM, Bilthoven, The Netherlands. 
Brenninkmeijer, C.A.M., M.R. Manning, DC. Lowe, 0. 
Wallace, R.J. Sparks and A. Volz-Thomas, 1992: 
Interhemispheric asymmetry in OH abundance inferred from 
measurements of atmospheric 14CO. Nature, 356, 50-52. 
Briihl, C, and P.J. Crutzcn, 1989: On the disproportionate role of 
tropospheric ozone as a filter against solar UV-B radiation. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 703-706. 
Brunke, E.G., M.E. Scheel and W. Seller, 1990: Trends of 
tropospheric carbon monoxide, nitrous oxide and methane as 
observed at Cape Point, South Africa. Atmos. Env.. 24(A). 
585-595. 
Butler, J.H., 1994: The potential role of the ocean in regulating 
atmospheric CH3Br. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 185-188. 
Butler, J.H., J.W. Elkins, T.M. Thompson, B.D. Hall. Til. 
Swanson and V. Koropalov, 1991: Oceanic consumption of 
CH3CC13: implications for tropospheric OH. J. Geophys. Res.. 
96, 22347-22355. 
Butler, J.H., J.W. Elkins, B.D. Hall, SO. Cummings and S.A. 
Montzka, 1992: A decrease in the growth rates of atmospheric 
halon concentrations. Nature, 359, 403-405. 
Butler, J.H., J.W. Elkins, T.M. Thompson, B.D. Hall. J.M 
Lobert, T.H. Swanson and V. Koropalov, 1993: A significant 
oceanic sink for atmospheric CC14. In: The Oceanogr.iph\ 
Society, 
Third Scientific 
Meeting, Apr 13-16, Sriittle. 
Abstracts, p.55. 
Carroll, M.A. and Anne M. Thompson, 1994: NOx in the Non-
Urban Troposphere. In: Current Problems and Progress in 
Atmospheric Chemistry, John R. Barker (ed.). World Scientific 
Publishing Company. (In press) 
Carroll, M.A., D.D. Montzka, G.Hubler, K.K. Kelly and u.L 
Gregory, 1990: In situ measurements of NOx in the Ai 'vrnc 
Arctic Stratospheric Expedition. Geophys. Res. Lett.. '•' Mi. 
493-496. 
Carroll. M.A.. B.A. Ridley, D.D. Montzka. G. Hublr I.G. 
Walega, R.B. Norton and B.J. Huebert, 1992: Measuren 
>of 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
119 
nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide during the Mauna Loa 
Observatory Photochemistry Experiment. J. Geophys. Res., 97 
(D10), 10361-10374. 
Chameides, W.L., S.C. Liu and R.J. Cicerone, 1976: Possible 
variations in atmospheric methane. J. Geophys. Res., 81, 
4997-5001. 
Chandra, S., 1992: Changes in stratospheric ozone and 
temperature due to the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 20, 33-36. 
Chappellaz, J., T. Blunier, D. Raynaud, J.M. Barnola, J. 
Schwander and B. Stauffer, 1993: Synchronous changes in 
atmospheric CH4 and Greenland climate between 40 and 8 kyr 
B?. Nature, 366, 443-445. 
CIAB, 1992: Global methane emissions from the coal industry. 
Report of Global Climate Committee, Coal Industry Advisory 
Board. 
Cicerone, R., 1979: Atmospheric carbon tetrafluoride : a nearly 
inert gas. Science, 206, 59-60. 
Codispoti, L., J. Elkins, T. Yoshinari, G. Frederich, C. Sakamoto 
and T. Packard, 1992: On the nitrous oxide flux from 
productive regions that contain low oxygen waters. In: 
Oceanography of the Indian Ocean, B. Desai (ed), Oxford & 
IBM Publishing Co., New Delhi, India, pp 271-284. 
Cros, B., R. Delmas, A. Nganga, A. Minga, J. Fishman and V. 
Brackett, 1988: Seasonal trends of ozone in equatorial Africa: 
Experimental evidence of photochemical formation. J. 
Geophys. Res..93, 8355-8366. 
Cunnold, D., R. Prinn, R. Rasmussen, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea, C. 
Cardelino, A. Crawford, P. Eraser and R. Rosen, 1986: The 
atmospheric lifetime and annual release estimates for CCI-,F 
and CC12F? from 5 years of ALE data. J. Geophys. Res., 91, 
10797-10817. 
Cunnold, D., P. Eraser, R. Weiss, R. Prinn, P. Simmonds, B. 
Miller, F. Alyea and A. Crawford, 1994: Global trends and 
annual releases of CC13F and CC1,F0 estimated from 
ALE/GAGE and other measurements from July 1978 to June 
1991.7. Geophys. Res., 99, 1107-1126. 
Davis, D.D., G. Chen, W. Chameides, J. Bradshaw, S. Sandholm, 
M. Rodgers, J. Schendal, S. Madronich, G. Sachse, G. 
Gregory, B. Anderson, J. Barrick, M. Shipham, J. Collins, L. 
Wade and D. Blake, 1993: A photostationary state analysis of 
the N02-NO system based on airborne observations from the 
subtropical/tropical north and south Atlantic../. Geophys. Res., 
98, (D12), 23501-23523. 
Dasch, J.M., 1992: Nitrous oxide emissions from vehicles. J. Air 
Waste Manage. Assoc, 42, 63-67. 
Delany, A.C., S. Haagensen, A.F. Walters, A.F. Wartburg and 
P.J. Crutzen, 1985: Photochemically-produced ozone in the 
emission from large-scale tropical vegetation fires../. Geophys. 
Res. 90, 2425-2429. 
Delwiche, C.C. and R.J. Cicerone, 1993: Factors affecting 
methane production under rice. Global Biogeochem. Cycles., 7, 
143-155. 
De Muer, D. and H. De Backer, 1992: Revision of 20 years of 
Dobson total ozone data at Uccle (Belgium): fictitious Dobson 
total ozone trends induced by sulphur dioxide trends. ./. 
Geophys. Res, 97, 5921-5937. 
Derwent, R.G., 1994a: The estimation of global warming 
potentials for a range of radiatively active gases. In: Non-CO, 
Greenhouse Gases, J. Van Ham, L.J.H.M. Janssen,and R.J. 
Swart (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands, pp. 
289-299. 
Derwent, R.G, 1994b: The influence of human activities on the 
distribution of hydroxy! radicals in the troposphere. Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. (Submitted) 
Dianov-Klokov, V.I., L.N. Yurganov, E.I. Grechko and A.V. 
Dzhola, 1989: Spectroscopic measurements of carbon 
monoxide and methane 2: Seasonal variations and long-term 
trends. J. Atmos. Cliem., 8, 153-164. 
Dickerson, R.R., G.J. Huffman, W.T. Luke, K.E. Nunnermacker, 
K.E. Pickering, A.C.D. Leslie, C.G. Lindsey, W.G.N. Slinn, 
T.J. Kelly, PH. Daum, A.C. Delany, P.J. Grecnbcrg, P.R. 
Zimmerman, J.F. Boatman, J.D. Ray and D.H. Stedman, 1987: 
Thunderstorms: An important mechanism in the transport of 
air pollutions. Science, 235, 460-465. 
Dlugokencky, E.J., K.A. Masarie, P.M. Lang, P.P. Tans, LP. 
Steele and E.G. Nishet, 1994a: A dramatic decrease in the 
growth rate of atmospheric methane in the Northern 
Hemisphere during 1992. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 45-48. 
Dlugokencky, E.J., J.M. Harris, Y.S. Chung, P.P. Tans and I. 
Fung, 1994b: The relationship between the methane seasonal 
cycle and regional sources and sinks at Tae-ahn Peninsula, 
Korea. Atmos. Em:, 27'A, 2115-2120. 
Dlugokencky, E.J., L.P. Steele, P.M. Lang and K.A. Masarie, 
1994c: The growth rate and distribution of atmospheric 
methane../. Geophys. Res, 99, 17021-17043. 
Donoso, L., R. Santana and E. Sanhueza, 1993: Seasonal 
variation of N-,0 fluxes at a tropical savannas site: Soil 
consumption of N,0 during the dry season. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 20, 1379-1382. 
Drummond, J.W., D.H. Ehhalt and A. Volz, 1988: 
Measurements of nitric oxide between 0-12 km altitude and 
67°N to 60°S latitude obtained during STRATOZ III. ./. 
Geophys. Res., 93, 15831-15849. 
Ehhalt, D.H., F. Rohrer and A. Wahner, 1992: Sources and 
distribution of NOx in the upper troposphere at northern 
mid-latitudes../. Geophys. Res., 97, 3725-3738. 
Elkins. J., J. Butler, S. Montzka, R. Myers, T. Thompson, T. 
Baring, S. Cummings, G. Dulton, A. Haydcn, J. Lobert, O. 
Holcomb, W. Sturges and T. Gilpin, 1993a: Nitrous Oxide and 
Halocarbons Division. Section 5 in: Climate Monitoring and 
Diagnostics 
Laboratory, 
Summary 
Report, 
1992, US 
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, pp. 59-75. 
Elkins, J., T. Thompson, T. Swanson, J. Butler, B. Hall, S. 
Cummings, 0. Fisher and A. Raffo, 1993b : Decrease in the 
growth rates of atmospheric chlorofluorocarbons-11 and -12. 
Nature, 364, 780-783. 
Elliot, S.M., 1984: The chemistry of some atmospheric gases in 
the ocean. Ph.D. Thesis, University of California, Irvine. 274 
pp. 
Elliot, S.M. and F.S. Rowland, 1993: Nucleophilic substitution 
rates and solubilities for methyl halides in seawater. Geophys. 
Res. Lett.. 20, 1043-1046. 
Erikson, D. and J. Taylor, 1992: Three-dimensional tropospheric 
CO, modelling: the possible influence of the ocean. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 19, 1955-1958. 
Etheridge, D.M., G.I. Pearman and F. de Silva, 1988: 

120 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
Atmospheric trace-gas variations as revealed by air trapped in 
an ice core from Law Dome, Antarctica. Annuls ofGlaciology, 
10, 28-33. 
Etheridge, DM., G.I. Pearman and P.J. Fraser, 1992: Changes 
in tropospheric methane between 1841 and 1978 from a 
high accumulation-rate Antarctic ice core. Tellus, 44B, 
2H2-294. 
Fabian, P., R. Borchers, B. Kringer and S. Lai, 1987: CF4 and 
C2F() in the atmosphere../. Geophys. Res, 92, 9831-9835. 
Fehsenfeld, F., J. Calvert, R. Fall, P. Goldan, A. Guenther, C.N. 
Hewitt, B. Lamb, S. Liu, M. Trainer, H. Westberg and P. 
Zimmerman, 1992: Emissions of volatile organic compounds 
from vegetation and the implications for atmospheric 
chemistry. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 6, 389-430. 
Fisher, D., T. Duafala, P. Midgley and C. Niemi, 1994: 
Production and emissions of CFCs, halons and related 
molecules. In: Concentrations, Lifetimes and Trends of CFCs, 
halons unci related Species, J. Kaye, S. Penkett and F. Ormond 
(eds), NASA Report no. 1339, 2.1-2.35. 
Fishman, J., K. Fakhruzzaman, B. Cms and D. Nganga, 1991: 
Identification of widespread pollution in the Southern 
Hemisphere deduced from satellite analysis. Science, 252, 
1693-1696. 
Fraser, P. and N. Derek, 1994: Halocarbons, nitrous oxide, 
methane and carbon monoxide - the GAGE program. In: 
Baseline 
91, C. Dick and J. Gras (eds), Bureau of 
Meteorology-CSIRO, 70-81. 
Fraser, P.J., P. Hyson, R.A. Rasmussen, A.J. Crawford and 
M.A.K. Khalil, 1986: Methane, carbon monoxide and 
methylchloroform in the Southern Hemisphere. ./. Atmos. 
Chan., 4, 3-42. 
Fraser, P., S. Penkett, M. Gunson, R. Weiss and F.S. Rowland, 
1994: Measurements. In: Concentrations, Lifetimes and Trends 
of C PCs, Halons and Related Species, J. Kaye, S. Penkett and 
F. Ormond (eds), NASA Report no. 1339, 1.1-1.68. 
Fuj>lestvedt, J.S., T.K.. Bentsen and I S A . Isaksen, 1993: 
Responses in tropospheric O,, OH and CH4 to changed 
emissions of important trace gases. Centre for Climate and 
Energy Research, Oslo, Report 1993, 4. 
Fuglestvedt. J.S.. J.E. Jonson and ISA. Isaksen, 1994: Effects 
of reductions in stratospheric ozone on tropospheric chemistry 
through changes in photolysis rates. Tellus, 46B, 172-192. 
Furrer, R„ W. Dohler. H. Kirsch, P. Plessing and U. Giksdorf, 
1992: Evidence for vertical ozone redistribution since 1967. J. 
Atmos. Tcrrcst. Physics, 11. 1423-1445. 
(•entile. I.A.. L. Ferraris and S. Crespi, 1989: The degradation of 
methyl bromide in some natural freshwaters. Influence of 
temperature, pH and light. Pestic. Sci., 25, 261-272. 
Gleason. J.F., P.K.Bhartia, JR. Herman, R. McPeters, P. 
Newman. R.S. Stolarski. L. Flynn, G. Labow, 0. Larko, C. 
Seftor. C. Wellemeyer, W.D. Komhyr. A.J. Miller and W. 
Planet. 1993: Record Low Global Ozone in 1992. Science, 
260. 523-526. 
Cold. S.. H. Barkhau, W. Shleien and B. Kahn, 1964: 
Measurement of naturally occurring radionuclides in air. In: 
The S'atimil Radiation Environment, J.A.S. Adams and W.M. 
Lowder. (eds). University of Chicago Press, pp.369-382. 
Gschwandtner. G.. K. Gschwandtner. K. Eldridge, C. Mann and 
D. Mobley. 1986: Historic emissions of sulphur and nitrogen 
oxides in the U.S. from 1980 to 1990. J. Air Pollut. Contr. 
Assoc. 36, 19. 
Graedel, T.E., T.S. Bates, A.F. Bouwman, D. Cunnold, J. 
Dignon, I. Fung, D.J. Jacob, B.K. Lamb, J.A. Logan, G. 
Marland, P. Middleton, J.M. Pacyna, M. Placet and C. Veldt. 
1993: A compilation of inventories of emissions to the 
atmosphere. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 7,1-26. 
Hameed, S. and R. Cess, 1983: Impact of global warming on 
biospheric sources of methane and its climate consequences. 
Tellus, 358, 1-7. 
Hameed, S. and J. Dignon, 1991: Global emissions of nitrogen 
and sulphur oxides in fossil fuel combustion 1970-1986. J. Air 
Waste Manage. Assoc, 42, 159-163. 
Hao, W. and D. Ward, 1993: Methane production from global 
biomass burning. J. Geophys. Res. 98, 20657-20661. 
Harris, N.R.P., G. Ancellet, L. Bishop, D.J. Hofmann, J.B. Kerr, 
R.0. McPeters, M. Prendez, W. Randel, J. Staehlin, B.H. 
Subbaraya, A.Volz-Thomas, J.M. Zawodny and C.S. Zerefos. 
1994: Ozone Measurements. In: Scientific Assessment of ozone 
depletion: 1994, Rep. 37, WMO Global Ozone Res. and Mon. 
Project, Geneva. (In press) 
Harriss, R., K. Bartlett, S. Frolking and P. Crill, 1993: Methane 
emissions from northern high latitude wetlands. In: 
Biogeochemistry of Global Change: Radiatively Active Trace 
Gases, R.S. Oremland (ed.), Chapman and Hall, New York. 
pp. 449-486. 
Hauglustaine, D.A., C. Granier, G.P. Brasseur and G. Megie. 
1994: The importance of atmospheric chemistry in the 
calculation of radiative forcing on the climate system../. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 1173-1186. 
Hofmann, D.J., S.J. Oltmans, J.M. Harris, W.D. Komhyr, J.A. 
Lathrop, T. DeFoor and 0. Kuniyuki, 1993: Ozonesonde 
measurements at Hilo, Hawaii following the eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 1555-1558. 
Hofmann, D.J., S.J. Oltmans, A.O. Langford, T. Deshler, B.J. 
Johnson, A. Torres and W.A. Matthews, 1994a: Ozone loss in 
the lower stratosphere over the United States in 1992-93: 
Evidence for heterogenous chemistry on the Mt. Pinatubo 
aerosol. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 65-68. 
Hofmann, D.J., S.J. Oltmans, J.A. Lathrop, J.M. Harris and H. 
Voemel, 1994b: Record low ozone at the South Pole in the 
spring of 1993. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 421-424. 
Holton, J.R., 1990: On the global exchange of mass between the 
stratospheric and troposphere, J. Atmos. Set., 47, 392-395. 
Hutsch, B.W., C.P. Webster and OS. Powlson, 1993: Long-term 
effects of nitrogen fertilisation on methane oxidation in soil of 
the broadbalk wheat experiment, Soil Biology ami 
Biochemistry, 25, 10, 1307-1315. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: 
Climate Change: the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, 
1.1. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, B A 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds). Cambridge University Pi\ --s. 
Cambridge, UK. 
Isaksen. I.S.A. and O. Hov, 1987: Calculation of trends in he 
tropospheric concentration of 03, OH, CH4, and NOx. Te!:«. 
398.271-285. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
121 
Jacob, D.J., J.A. Logan, G.M. Gardner, R.M. Yevich, CM. 
Spivakovsky, S.C. Wofsy, J.M. Munger, S. Sillman and M.J. 
Prather, 1993: Factors regulating ozone over the United States 
and its export to the global atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 
14817-14826. 
Jeffers, P.M., L.M. Ward, L.M. Woytowitch and N.L. Wolfe, 
1989: Homogeneous hydrolysis rate constants for selected 
chlorinated methanes, ethanes, ethenes, and propanes. Environ. 
Sci. Technol., 23(8), 965-969. 
Johnson, C.E., J. Henshaw and G. Mclnnes, 1992: Impact of 
aircraft and surface emissions of nitrogen oxides on 
tropospheric ozone and global warming. Nature, 355, 69-71. 
Jouzel, J., N.I. Barkov, J.M. Barnola, M. Bender, J. Chappellaz, 
C. Genthon, V.M. Kotlyakov, V. Lipenkov, C. Lorius, JR. 
Petit, D. Raynaud, G. Raisbeck, C. Ritz, T. Sowers, M. 
Stievenard, F. Yiou and P. Yiou, 1993: Extending the Vostok 
ice-core record of palaeoclimate to the penultimate glacial 
period. Nature, 364, 407-412. 
Judd, A.G., R.H. Charlier, A. Lacroix, G. Lambert and C. 
Rowland, 1993: Minor Sources of Methane; Sources, Sinks 
and Role in Global Change, NATO ASI Series , Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, pp 432-456. 
Kanakidou, M. and P.J. Crutzen, 1993: Scale problems in global 
tropospheric chemistry modelling: comparison of results 
obtained with a 3-D model, adopting longitudinally uniform 
and varying emissions of NOx and NMHC. Chemosphere, 26, 
787-801. 
Kanakidou, M., H.B. Singh, K.M. Valentin and P.J. Crutzen, 
1991: A two-dimensional study of ethane and propane 
oxidation in the troposphere. J.Geophys. Res., 96, 15,395-
15,413. 
Kasibhatala, P., 1993: NO from subsonic aircraft emissions: a 
global three-dimensional model study. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 
1707-1710. 
Kato, N. and H. Akimoto, 1992: Anthropogenic emissions of 
S02 and NOx in Asia: Emission inventories. Atmos. Env., 26A, 
2997-3017. 
Kaye, J., S. Penkett and F. Ormond, 1994: Report on 
Concentrations, Lifetimes and Trends of CFCs, Halons, and 
Related Species, NASA Reference Publication 1339, NASA 
Office of Mission to Planet Earth, Science Division, 
Washington DC. 
Keller, M. and P. Matson, 1994: Biosphere - atmosphere 
exchange of trace gases in the tropics : evaluating the effects of 
land-use changes. In: Global 
Atmospheric-Biospheric 
Chemistry, R. Prinn (ed), Plenum Press, New York and 
London, pp.103-118. 
Keller, M., M.E. Mitre and R.F. Stallard, 1990: Consumption of 
atmospheric methane in soils of central Panama: effect of 
agricultural development. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 4, 21-
27. 
Keller, M., E. Veldkamp, A. Weltz and W. Reiners, 1993: Effect 
of pasture age on soil trace-gas emissions from a deforested 
area of Costa Rica. Nature, 365, 244-246. 
Kerr, J.B. and C.T. McElroy, 1993: Evidence for large upward 
trends of ultraviolet-B radiation linked to ozone depletion. 
Science, 262, 1032-1034. 
Kerr, J.B., D.I. Wardle and D.W. Tarasick, 1993: Record low 
ozone values over Canada in early 1993. Geophys. Res. Lett.. 
20, 1979-1982. 
Khalil. M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1985: Atmospheric carbon 
tetrafluoride (CF4): sources and trends. Geophys. Res. Lett., 12, 
671-672. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1988a: Nitrous oxide: 
trends and global mass balance over the last 3000 years. 
Annals ofGlaciology 10, 73-79. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1988b: Carbon monoxide 
in the Earth's atmosphere: Indications of a global increase. 
Nature, 332, 242-245. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1992: The global sources 
of nitrous oxide. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 14,651-14,660. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1993: Decreasing trend of 
methane: unpredictability of future 
concentrations, 
Chemosphere, 26, 803-814. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1994: Global decrease of 
atmospheric carbon monoxide, Nature, 370, 639-641. 
Khalil, M.A.K., R.A. Rasmussen, M.J. Shearer, S. Ge and J.A. 
Rau, 1993a: Methane from coal burning. Chemosphere, 26, 
473-477. 
Khalil, M.A.K., R.A. Rasmussen and R. Gunawardena, 1993b: 
Atmospheric methyl bromide: Trends and global mass balance. 
J. Geophys. Res., 98, 2887-2896. 
Kim, K-R. and H. Craig, 1993: Nitrogen-15 and oxygen-18 
characteristics of nitrous oxide: A global perspective. Science, 
262, 1855-1857. 
Kirchgessner, DA., S.D. Piccot and J.0. Winkler, 1993: 
Estimate of global methane emissions from coal mines. 
Chemosphere, 26, 453-472. 
Kirchhoff, V.W. and E.V. Marinho, 1989: A survey of 
continental concentrations of atmospheric CO in the Southern 
Hemisphere. Atmos. Env., 23, 461-466. 
Kirchhoff, V.W.J.H., A.W. Setzer and M.C. Pereira, 1989: 
Biomass burning in Amazonia: Seasonal effects on 
atmospheric 0 3 and CO. Geophys. Res. Lett., 16, 469-472. 
Kley, D., H. Geiss and V.A. Mohnen, 1994: Tropospheric ozone 
at elevated sites and precursor emissions in the United States 
and Europe. Atmos. Env., 28, 149-158. 
Ko, M.K.W., N.D. Sze and D.K. Weisenstein, 1991: Use of 
satellite data to constrain the model-calculated atmospheric 
lifetime for N20: Implication for other gases. J. Geophys. Res., 
96, 7547-7552. 
Ko, M., N.D. Sze, W-C. Wang, G. Shia, A. Goldman, F. 
Murcray, 0. Murcray and C. Rinsland, 1993: Atmospheric 
sulphur hexafluoride: sources, sinks and greenhouse warming. 
./. Geophys. Res., 98, 10499-10507. 
Komhyr, W.D., R.D. Grass, R.D. Evans, R.K. Leonard, 0.M. 
Quincy, D.J. Hofmann and G.L. Koenig, 1994: Unprecedented 
1993 ozone decrease over the United States from Dobson 
spectrophotometer observations. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 210-
214. 
Koppman, R., F. Johnen, C. Plass-Dulner and J. Rudolph, 1993: 
Distribution 
of 
methylchloride, 
dichloromethane, 
trichlooroethane and tetrachloroethane over the North and 
South Atlantic. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 20,517-20,526. 
Krieleman, G. and A. Bouwman, 1994: Computing land-use 
emissions of greenhouse gases. J. Water, Air and Soil 
Pollution, 76,231-258. 
Kvenvolden, K.A. and T.D. Sorenson, 1993: Methane in 

722 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
permafrost: Preliminary results from coring at Fairbanks, 
Alaska. Chemosphere, 26, 609-616. 
Labitske, K. and M.P. McCormick, 1992: Stratospheric 
temperature increases due to Mt. Pinatubo aerosols. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 19,207-210. 
Lai, S., S. Venkataramani and B. Subbaraya, 1993: Methane flux 
measurements from paddy fields in the tropical Indian region. 
Atmos. Env., 27A, 1691-1694. 
Lambert, G. and S. Schmidt, 1993: Re-evaluation of the oceanic 
flux of methane: Uncertainties and long-term variations. 
Chemosphere, 26, 579-589. 
Lassey, K.R., DC. Lowe, C.A.M. Brenninkmeijer and A.J. 
Gomez, 1993: Atmospheric methane and its carbon isotopes in 
the Southern Hemisphere: their time-series and an instructive 
model. Chemosphere, 26, 95-109. 
Law, C.S. and N.J.P. Owen, 1990: Significant flux of 
atmospheric nitrous oxide from the north-west Indian Ocean. 
Nature, 346, 826-828. 
Law, K.S. and J.A. Pyle, 1993: Modeling trace gas budgets in the 
troposphere, 2: CH4 and CO. J. Geophys. 
Res., 98, 
18401-18412. 
Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: Role of deep cloud 
convection in the oxone budget of the troposphere. Science, 
264, 1759-1761. 
Leuenberger, M. and U. Siegenthaler, 1992: Ice-age 
atmospheric concentration of nitrous oxide from an Antarctic 
ice core. Nature, 360, 449-451. 
Levine, J.S., 1994: Biomass burning and the production 
of greenhouse gases. In: Climate Biosphere Interaction: Bio-
genic Emissions and Environmental 
Effects on Climate 
Change, R.G. Zepp (ed.), John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New 
York, pp. 139-159. 
Levine, J., W. Cofer and J. Pinto, 1994: Biomass burning. 
Chapter 14 in Atmospheric Methane: Sources, Sinks and Role 
in Global Change, M. Khalil (ed.), NATO ASI series, 299-
313. 
Liu, S.C. and M. Trainer, 1988: Responses of tropospheric ozone 
and odd hydrogen radicals to column ozone change. J. Atmos. 
Chem., 6,221-233. 
Liu, S.C, S.A. McKcen and S. Madronich, 1991: Effect of 
anthropogenic aerosols on biologically active ultra violet 
radiation. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 2265-2268. 
Lobert, J.M, T.J. Baring, J.H. Butler, S.A. Montzka, R.C. Myers 
and J.W. Elkins, 1993: Ocean-atmosphere exchange of trace 
compounds, 1992. Final Report to AFEAS on Oceanic 
Measurements of HCFC-22, Methylchloroform, 
and Oher 
Selected Halocarbons. NOAA/CMDL, Boulder, CO. 
Logan, J.A., 1983: Nitrogen oxides in the troposphere: global 
and regional budgets. J. Geophys. Res., 88, 10785-10807. 
Logan, J.A., 1994: Trends in the vertical distribution of ozone: 
An analysis of ozone sonde data. J. Geophys. Res. (In press) 
London, J. and S. Liu, 1992: Long-term tropospheric and lower 
stratospheric ozone variations from ozonesondes observations. 
J. Atmos. Terrest. Physics, 5, 599-625. 
Lowe, D C , C.A.M. Brenninkmeijer, G.W. Brailsford, K.R. 
Lassey, A.J. Gomez and E.G. Nisbet, 1994: Concentration and 
13C records of atmospheric methane in New Zealand and 
Antarctica: evidence for changes in methane sources. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 16913-16925. 
Lubkert, B. and K.H. Zierock 1989: European emission 
inventories - a proposal of international worksharing. Atmos. 
Env, 23, 37-48. 
Mabey, W. and T. Mill, 1978: Critical review of hydrolysis of 
organic compounds in water under environmental conditions. 
J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 7(2), 383-392. 
Machida, T., T.Nakazawa, M. Tanaka, Y. Fufii, S. Aoki and O. 
Watanabe, 1994: Atmospheric methane and ntrous oxide 
concentrations during the last 250 years deduced from H15 Ice 
Core, Antarctica, Proceedings International Symposium on 
Global Cycles of Atmospheric Greenhouse gases, Sendai, 
Japan, 7-10 March, 1994, 113-116. 
Mahlman, J., H. Levy and W. Moxim, 1986: Three-dimensional 
simulations of stratospheric N20: predictions for other trace 
constituents. J. Geophys. Res., 91, 2687-2707. 
Mak, J.E., C.A.M. Brenninkmeijer and M.R. Manning, 1992: 
Evidence for a missing carbon monoxide sink based on 
tropospheric measurements of 14CO. Geophys. Res. Lett, 14, 
1467-1470. 
Makide, Y., A. Yokohata, Y. Kubo and T. Tominaga, 1987: 
Atmospheric concentrations of halocarbons in Japan in 1979-
1986. Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan., 60, 571-574. 
Manley, S.L., K. Goodwin and W.J. North, 1992: Laboratory 
production of bromoform, methylene bromide and methyl 
iodide by macralgae and distribution in nearshore southern 
California waters. Limnol. Oceanogr., 37, 1652-1659. 
Mano, S. and M.O. Andreae, 1994: Emission of methyl bromide 
from biomass burning. Science, 263, 1255-1257. 
Marenco, A., J.C. Medale and S. Prieur, 1990: Study of 
tropospheric ozone in the tropical belt (Africa, America) from 
STRATOZ and TROPOZ campaigns. Atmos. Env., 24A, 2823-
2834. 
Martins, C , R. Wassmann, U. Thein, A. Bandeira, H. 
Rennenberg, W. Junk and W. Seller, 1993: Methane emission 
from wood-feeding termites in Amazonia. Chemosphere, 26, 
623-632. 
Matson, P. and P. Vitousek, 1990: Ecosystems approach to a 
global nitrous oxide budget. Bioscience, 40, 667-672. 
McCormick, M.P., R.E. Veiga and W.P. Chu, 1993: 
Stratospheric ozone profile and total ozone trends derived from 
the SAGE I and SAGE II data. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 269-
272. 
McCulIoch, A., 1992: Global production and emissions of 
bromochlorodifluoromethane and bromotrifluoromethanc 
(Halons 1211 and 1301). Atmos. Env., 26A, 1325-1329. 
Meyer, C, I. Galbally and Y. Wang, 1994: Recent advances in 
studies of regional greenhouse gas emissions: an Australian 
perspective. In: Global 
Warming 
issues 
in Asia, S. 
Bhattacharya et al., (eds), Asian Institute of Technology. 
Bangkok, Thailand, pp.125-138. 
Midgley, P. and D. Fisher, 1993: The production and release in 
the atmosphere of chlorodifluoromethane (HCFC-22). Atmo\. 
Env., 21K, 2215-2223. 
Minami, K., J. Goudriaan, E. Lantinga and T. Kimura, 1993: 
Significance of grasslands in emissions and absorption if 
greenhouse gases. Proc. XVII International 
Grasslam,; 
Congress, ppl231-1238. 
Minschwaner, K., R.J. Salawitch and M.B. McElroy, 199 
Absorption of solar radiation by 0 2: Implications for 0 3 ai 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
123 
lifetimes of N20, CFC13 and CF2C12. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 
10,543-10,561. 
Montzka, S.A., R.C. Myers, J.H. Butler and J.W. Elkins, 1993: 
Global tropospheric distribution and calibration scale of 
HCFC-22. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 703-706. 
Montzka, S.A., R.C. Myers, J.H. Butler and J.W. Elkins, 1994: 
Early trends in the global atmospheric abundance of 
hydrofluorocarbon-141b and -142b. Geophys. Res. Lett. (In 
press) 
Moore, R.M. and R. Tokarczyk, 1993: Volatile biogenic 
halocarbons in the north-west Atlantic. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 7(1), 195-210. 
Mosier, A., M. Stillwell, W. Parton and R. Woodmanse, 1981: 
Nitrous oxide emissions from native shortgrass prairie. J. Soil 
Sci.Soc.Am., 45, 617-619. 
Mosier, A., D. Schimel, D. Valentine, K. Bronson and W. 
Parton, 1991: Methane and nitrous oxide emissions in native, 
fertilised and cultivated grasslands. Nature, 350, 330-332. 
Moraes, F. and M.A.K. Khalil, 1993: Permafrost methane 
content: 2. Modeling theory and results. Chemosphere, 26, 
595-607 
Miiller, J.F., 1992: Geographical distribution and seasonal 
variation of surface emissions and deposition velocities of 
atmospheric trace gases. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 3787-3804. 
Nakazawa, T., T. Machida, M. Tanaka, Y. Fujii, S. Aoki and O. 
Watanabe, 1993: Differences of the atmospheric CH4 
concentration between the Arctic and Antarctic regions in 
pre-industrial/agricultural era. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 
943-946. 
Novell!, P.C., LP. Steele and P.P. Tans, 1992: Mixing ratios of 
carbon monoxide in the troposphere. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 
20731-20750. 
Novell!, P.C., K. Masarie, P.P. Tans and P. Lang 1994 : Recent 
changes in atmospheric carbon monoxide. Science, 263, 1587-
1590. 
Ojima, D.S., D.W. Valentine, A.R. Mosier, W.J. Parton and D.S. 
Schimel, 1993: Effect of land-use change on methane 
oxidation in temperate forest and grassland soils. 
Chemosphere, 26, 675-685. 
Oltmans, S.J. and H. Levy II, 1994: Surface ozone 
measurements from a global network. Atmos. £/;v.(In press) 
Oltmans, S.J., D.J. Hofmann, W.D. Komhyr and J.A. Lathrop, 
1994: Ozone vertical profile changes over South Pole. Proc. 
1992 Quad. Ozone Symp., Charlottesville, VA, 13 June 1992, 
NASA CP-3266, pp578-581. 
Oremland, R.S., L.G. Miller, P.M. Blunden, S.W. Culbertson 
and M.D. Coulatkis, 1993a: Degradation of atmospheric 
halogenated methanes. I; Activity of soil methanotrophic 
bacteria. Submitted to Environ. Sci. Technol. 
Oremland, R.S., L.G. Miller and F.E. Strohmaier, 1993b: 
Degradation of atmospheric halogenated methanes. II: 
Chemical and bacterial attack of methyl bromide in aneorobic 
sediments. Submitted to Environ. Sci. Technol. 
Penkett, S., N. Prosser, R. Rasmussen and M. Khalil, 1981: 
Atmospheric measurements of CF4 and other fluorocarbons 
containing the CF3 group. J. Geophys. Res., 86, 5162-5178. 
Penkett, S., B. Jones, B. Rycroft and D. Simmons, 1985: An 
interhemispheric comparison of the concentration of bromine 
compounds in the atmosphere. Nature, 318. 550-553. 
Penkett, S., J.H. Butler, M.J. Kurylo. C.E. Reeves, J.M. 
Rodriguez, H. Singh, 0. Toohey, R. Weiss, MO. Andreae, 
N.J. Blake, R.J. Cicerone, T. Duafala, A. Golombek, M.A.K. 
Khalil, J.S. Levine, M.J. Molina and S.M. Schauffler, 1994: 
Methyl Bromide. Chapter 10 of Scientific Assessment of Ozone 
Depletion, 1994, UNEP/WMO. (In press) 
Penner, J.E., C.S. Athcrton, J. Dignon, S.J. Ghan, J.J. Walton 
and S. Hameed, 
1991: Tropospheric 
nitrogen: A 
three-dimensional study of sources, distributions, and 
deposition. J. Geophys. Res, 96, 959-990. 
Pickering, K.E., A.M. Thompson, JR. Scala, W-K. Tao, R.R. 
Dickerson and J. Simpson, 1992: Free tropospheric ozone 
production following entrainment of urban plumes into deep 
convection./ Geophys. Res., 97, 17985-18000. 
Placet, M., R.E. Battye, F.C. Fehsenfeld and G.W. Basset), 1990: 
Emissions involved in acidic deposition processes. State-of-
science/technology report 1. National Acid Precipitation 
Assessment Program. US Government Printing Office, 
Washington DC. 
Polian, G., G. Lambert, B. Ardouin and A. Jegou, 1986: Long-
range transport of radon in subantarctic and antarctic areas. 
Tellus, 38B, 178-189. 
Pollock, W., L. Heidt, R. Lucb, J. Vedder, M. Mills and S. 
Solomon, 1992: On the age of stratospheric air and ozone 
depletion potentials in polar regions. ./. Geophys. Res., 97, 
12993-12999. 
Poulida, O., R.R. Dickerson, B.G. Doddrige, J.Z. Holland, R.G. 
Wardell and J.G. Watkins, 1991: Trace gas concentrations and 
meteorology in rural Virginia, 1. Ozone and carbon monoxide. 
J. Geophys. Res., 96, 22461-22476. 
Prather, M.J., 1994: Lifetimes and cigenstates in atmospheric 
chemistry. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 801-804. 
Prather, M.J. and CM. Spivakovsky, 1990: Tropospheric OH 
and the lifetimes of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). ./. 
Geophys. Res., 95, 18723-18729. 
Prather, M.J. and E.E. Remsberg, 1993: (eds): The atmospheric 
effects of stratospheric aircraft: Report of the 1992 Models and 
Measurements Workshop, NASA Reference Publication,1292. 
Prinn, R., D. Cunnold, R. Rasmussen, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea, 
A. Crawford, P. Fraser and R. Ramussen, 1990: Atmospheric 
emissions and trends of nitrous oxide deduced from 10 years of 
ALE-GAGE data../. Geophys. Res, 95, 18369-18385. 
Prinn, R., 0. Cunnold, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea, R. Boldi, A. 
Crawford, P. Fraser, 0. Gutzlcr, D. Hartley, R. Rosen and R. 
Rasmussen, 1992: Global average concentration and trend for 
hydroxyl radicals deduced from ALE/GAGE trichloroethane 
(methylchloroform) data for 1978-1990.7. Geophys. Res., 97, 
2445-2461. 
Rasche, M.E., MR. Hyman and D.J. Arp, 1990: Biodegradation 
of halogenated hydrocarbon fumigants by nitrifying bacteria. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 56(8), 2568-2571. 
Rasmussen, R.A. and M.A.K. Khalil, 1986: Atmospheric trace 
gases: trends and distributions over the last decade. Science, 
232, 1623-1624. 
Rasmussen, R.A., M.A.K. Khalil and F. Moraes, 1993: 
Permafrost methane content: 1. Experimental data from sites in 
Northern Alaska. Chemosphere, 26, 591-594. 
Ravishankara, A.R., S. Solomon, A.A. Turnipseed and R.I'. 
Warren, 1993: Atmospheric lifetimes of long-lived 

724 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
halogcnated species. Science, 259, 194-199. 
Reeburgh, W.S., N.T. Roulel and B.H. Svensson, 1993: 
Terrestrial biosphere-atmosphere exchange in high latitudes. 
In: Global Atmospheric-Biospheric Chemistry: R.G.Prinn(ed.), 
Plenum Press, New York and London, pp.165-178. 
Reeves, C.E. and S.A. Penkett, 1993: An estimate of the 
anthropogenic contribution to atmospheric methyl bromide. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 1563-1566. 
Reichle, H.G., V.S. Connors, J.A. Holland, R.T. Sherrill, HA. 
Wallio, J.C. Casas, E.P. Condon, B.B. Gormsen and W. Seller, 
1990: The distribution of middle tropospheric carbon 
monoxide during early October 1984. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 
9845-9856. 
Rinsland, C, M. Gunson, M. Abrams, L. Lowes, R. Zanden and 
E. Mahieu, 1993: ATM OS/ATLAS 1 measurements of sulphur 
hexafluoride (SF()) in the lower stratosphere and upper 
troposphere. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 20491-20497. 
Rohrer, F., D.H. Ehhalt, E.S. Grobler, A.B. Kraus and A. 
Wahner, 1993: Model calculations of the impact of nitrogen 
oxides emitted by aircraft in the upper troposphere at northern 
mid-latitudes. Proc of the 6th European Symposium on the 
Physico-chemical 
Behaviour of Atmospheric 
Pollutants. 
Vareses, Italy. 
Roulet, N., T. Moore, J. Bubier and P. Lafleur, 1992: Northern 
fens: methane flux and climatic change. Tellus, 44B, 100-105. 
Roulet , N.T., R. Ash, W. Quinton, and T. Moore, 1993: 
Methane flux from drained northern peatlands: effect of a 
persistent water table lowering on flux. Global Biochemical 
Cycles, 7, 749-769. 
Rowland, F.S., C. Wang and D. Blake, 1994: Reduction in the 
rates of growth of global atmospheric concentrations for 
CC13F(CFC-11) and CC12F2(CFC-12) during 1988-1993. 
Proceedings International Symposium on Global Cycles of 
Atmospheric Greenhouse gases, Sendai, Japan, 7-10 March, 
1994, pp38-51. 
Rudolph, J., A. Khedim, R. Koppman and B. Bonsang, 1994: 
Field study of the emissions of methylchloride and other 
halocarbons from biomass burning in equatorial Africa. J. 
Atmos. Chem. (In press) 
Sandholm, ST, J.D. Bradshaw, G. Chen, H.B. Singh, R.W. 
Talbot, G.L. Gregory, DR. Blake, G.W. Sachse, E.V. Browell, 
J.D. Barrick, M.A. Shipham, A.S. Bachmcier and D. Owen, 
1992: Summertime tropospheric observations related to N O 
distributions and partitioning over Alaska: Arctic Boundary 
Layer Expedition (ABLE) 3A. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 16481-
16509. 
Sandholm, S., J. Olson, J. Bradshaw, R. Talbot, H. Singh, G. 
Gregory. D. Blake, B. Anderson, G. Sachse, J. Barrick, J. 
Collins. K. Klemm, B. Lefer, O. Klcmm, K. Gorzelska, D. 
Herlth and D. O'Hara, 1994: Summertime partitioning and 
budget of NOy compounds in the troposphere over Alaska and 
Canada: ABLE 38../. Geophys. Res., 99, 1837-1861. 
Sanhueza, E., 1992: Biogenic emissions of NO and N20 from 
tropical savanna soils. In: Proceedings 
International 
Symposium on Global Change (IGBP), Tokyo, Japan, 27-29 
March . 1992, pp24-34. 
Scheel. HE.. E.G. Brunke and W. Seller. 1990: Trace gas 
measurements at the monitoring station Cape Point, South 
Africa, between 1978 and 1988.7. Attn. Chem., 11. 197-210. 
Scheel, H.E., R. Sladovic and W. Seller, 1993: Ozone-related 
species at the stations Wank and Zugspitze: trends, short-term 
variations and correlations with other parameters. In: Photo-
oxidants: Precursors 
and Products, 
Proc. 
EUROTRAC 
Symp.1992, 
P.M. Borrell, P. Borrell, T. Cvitas and W. 
Seiler(eds), Acad. Publ. The Hague, pp.104-108. 
Schoeberl, M.R., P.K. Bhartia and E. Hilsenrath, 1992: Tropical 
ozone loss following the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo, Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 20, 29-32. 
Seller, W. and J. Fishman, 1981: The distribution of carbon 
monoxide in the free troposphere. J. Geophys. Res., 86, 7255-
7265. 
Shao, Z., Xingsheng Li, Xiuji Zhou and Mulin Wang, 1994: 
Gradient measures of methane flux in Linan rice paddies, Acta 
Meteorologica Sinica . (In press) 
Shearer, M. and M. Khalil, 1994: Rice agriculture: emissions. 
Chapter 12 in Atmospheric Methane: Sources, Sinks and Role 
in Global Change, ed. M. Khalil, NATO ASI series, pp230-
253. 
Simmonds, P., D. Cunnold, F. Alyea, C. Cardelino, A. Crawford. 
R. Prinn, P. Eraser, R. Rasmussen and R. Rosen, 1988: Carbon 
tetrachloride lifetimes and emissions determined from daily 
global measurements. J. Atm. Chem., 7, 35-58. 
Simmonds, P., D. Cunnold, G. Dollard, T. Davies, A. McCulloch 
and R. Derwent, 1993: Evidence of the phase-out of CFC use 
in Europe over the period 1987-1990. Atmos. Env., 27A. 
1397-1407. 
Simpson, D., 1993: Photochemical model calculations over 
Europe for two extended summer periods: 1985 and 1989. 
Model results and comparison with observations. Atmos.Env., 
27A, 921-943. 
Singh, H.B. and M. Kanakidou, 1993: An investigation of the 
atmospheric sources and sinks of methyl bromide. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 20, 133-136. 
Singh, H.B., L.J. Salas and R.E. Stiles, 1983: Methyl halides in 
and over the eastern Pacific (40°N-32°S). J. Geophys. Res., 88. 
3684-3690. 
Singh, H.B., D. Herlth, D. O'Hara, K. Zahnle, J.D. Bradshaw. 
S.T. Sandholm, R. Talbot, G.L. Gregory, G.W. Sachse, D.R. 
Blake and S.C. Wofsy, 1994: Summertime distribution of PAN 
and other reactive nitrogen species in the northern high 
latitudes atmosphere of eastern Canada. J. Geophys. Res., 99. 
1821-1835. 
Smith, R.C., B.B. Prezlin, K.S. Baker, R.R. Bidigare, N.P. 
Boucher, T. Coley, D. Karentz, S. Maclntyre, H.A. Matlick, D. 
Menzies, M. Onderusek, Z. Wan and K.J. Waters, 1992: Ozone 
depletion: ultraviolet radiation and phytoplankton biology in 
Antarctic waters. Science, 255, 952-959. 
Spivakovsky, CM., R. Yevich, J.A. Logan, S.C. Wofsy and 
M.B. McElroy, 1990: Tropospheric OH in a three-dimensional 
chemical tracer model: an assessment based on observation of 
CH3CCI3. J.Geophys. Res., 95, 18441-18471. 
Staehelin, J., J. Thudium, R. Biihler, A. Volz-Thomas and W. 
Graber, 1994: Trends in surface ozone concentrations at Arosa 
(Switzerland). Atmos. Env., 28, 75-87. 
Steele, LP., E.J. Dlugokencky, P.M. Lang, P.P. Tans, R.( 
Martin and K.A. Masarie, 1992: Slowing down of the glob.l 
accumulation of atmospheric methane during the 1981' 
Nature, 358, 313-316. 

Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
125 
Strand, A., and O. Hov, 1994: A two-dimensional global study of 
the tropospheric ozone production. J. Geophys. Res. (In press) 
Sturges, W.T., C.W. Sullivan, R.C. Schnell, L.E. Heidt, W.H. 
Pollock and C.E. Quincy, 1993: Bromoalkane production by 
Antarctic ice algae: a possible link to surface ozone loss. 
Tellus, 45B, 120-126. 
Subak, S., P. Raskin and D. Hippel, 1993: National greenhouse 
gas accounts : current anthropogenic sources and sinks. 
Climate Change, 25, 15-58. 
Swain, C.G. and C.B. Scott, 1953: Quantitative correlation of 
relative rates. Comparison of hydroxide ion with other 
nucleophilic reagents toward alkyl halides, esters, epoxides 
and acyl halides. J. Am. Chem. Soc, 75, 141-147. 
Sze, N.D., 1977: Anthropogenic CO emissions: implications for 
the atmospheric CO-OH-CH4 cycle. Science, 195, 673-675. 
Talbot, R.W. J.D. Bradshaw, S.T. Sandholm, H.B. Singh, C.W. 
Sachse, J. Collins, G.L. Gregory, B. Anderson, D. Blake, J. 
Barrick, E.V. Browell, K.I. Klemm, B.L. Lefer, O. Klemm, K. 
Gorzelska, J. Olsen, D. Herlth and D. O'Hara, 1994: 
Summertime distribution and relations of reactive odd nitrogen 
species and NO in the troposphere over Canada. J. Geophys. 
Res., 99, 1863-1885. 
Tarasick, D.W., D.I. Wardle, J.B. Kerr, J.J. Bellefleur and J. 
Davies, 1994: Tropospheric ozone trends over Canada: 1980-
1993. Geophys. Res. Let. (Submitted) 
Thompson, A.M. and R.J. Cicerone, 1986: Possible 
perturbations to atmospheric CO, 
CH4and OH. J. Geophys. Res., 91, 10853-10864. 
Tohjima, Y. and H. Wakita, 1993: Estimation of methane 
discharge from a plume: a case of landfill. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
20, 2067-2070. 
Tokarczyk, R. and R. Moore, 1994: Production of volatile 
organohalogens by phytoplankton cultures. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 21, 285-288. 
Torres, A.L. and A.M. Thompson, 1993: Nitric oxide in the 
equatorial Pacific boundary layer: SAGA 3 measurements. J. 
Geophys. Res., 98, 16949-16954. 
Volz, A., D.H. Ehhalt and R.G. Derwent, 1981: Seasonal and 
latitudinal variation of l4CO and tropospheric concentration of 
OH radicals. 7. Geophys. Res., 86, 5163-5171. 
Wahner, A., F. Rohrer, D.H. Ehhalt, B. Ridley and E. Atlas, 
1994: Global measurements of photochemically active 
compounds, Proceedings of 1st 1GAC Scientific Conference: 
Global Atmospheric-Biospheric Chemistry, Eilat/Israel, pp205-
222. 
Wallace, D.W.R., P.Beinung and A.Putzka, 1994: Carbon 
tetrachloride and chlorofluorocarbons in the South Atlantic 
Ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 7803-7819. 
Wang, M-X., Shangguan Xingjian, Shen Renxing, R. Wassman 
and W. Seller, 1993a: Methane production, emission and 
possible control measures in the rice agriculture. Advances in 
Atmospheric Sciences, 10, 307-314. 
Wang M-X., Dai Aiguo, Huang Jun, Ren Lixin, Shen Renxing, 
H. Schutz, H. Rennenberg, W. Seiler, R.A. Rasmussen and 
M.A.K. Khalil, 1993b: Estimate on methane emission from 
China. Chinese Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, 17, 49-62. 
Warneck, P., 1988: Chemistry of the Natural 
Atmosphere. 
/nternational Geophysics Series, Vol. 41. Academic Press, 
Inc., San Diego, 757pp. 
Wassmann, R.. H. Papen and H. Rennenberg, 1993: Methane 
emission from rice paddies and possible mitigation strategies. 
Chemosphere. 26,201-217. 
Wege, K., H. Claude and R. Harlmannsgruber. 1989: Several 
results from the 20 years of ozone observations at 
Hohenpeissenberg. In: Ozone in the Atmosphere, R.0. Bojkov 
and P. Fabian (eds.), Deepak publ.. Hampton, VA., pp 109-112. 
Weiss, R. F.,1994: Changing global concentration of atmospheric 
nitrous oxide. Proceedings International Symposium on Global 
Cycles of Atmospheric Greenhouse gases, Sendai, Japan, 7-10 
March, 1994, pp78-8(). 
Whalen, S.C. and W. Reeburgh, 1992: Interannual variations in 
tundra methane emission: A 4-year time-series at fixed sites. 
Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 6, 139-159. 
Williams, E.J., 0.11. Hutchinson and F.C. Fehsenfeld, 1992: NOv 
and N^O emissions from soils. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 6, 
351-388. 
Wine, PH. and W.L. Chameides, 1990: Possible atmospheric life-
times and chemical reaction mechanisms for selected HCFCs, 
HFCs, CHjCCI, and their degradation products against 
dissolution and/or degradation in seawater and cloudwater, pp. 
271-295 in WMO/UNEP report 20, vol.2, appendix. 
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), 1986: Scientific 
Assessment of Atmospheric Ozone: 1985, Rep. 16, WMO 
Global Ozone Res. and Man. Project, Geneva. 
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), 1990: Scientific 
Assessment of Stratospheric Ozone: 1989, Rep. 20, WMO 
Global Ozone Res. and Man. Project, Geneva. 
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), 1992: Scientific 
Assessment of Ozone Depletion : 1991, Rep. 25, WMO Global 
Ozone Res. and Man. Project, Geneva. 
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), 1994: Scientific 
Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1994, Rep. 37, WMO Global 
Ozone Res. and Mon. Project, Geneva, (in press). 
Worthy, 0., N. Trivett, K. Higuchi, J. Hopper, E. Dlugokencky, 
M. Ernst and M. Glumpak, 1994: Six years of in situ 
atmospheric methane measurements at Alert, N.W.T., Canada, 
1988-1993; seasonal variations, decreasing growth rate and 
long-range transport. Proceedings International Symposium on 
Global Cycles of Atmospheric Greenhouse gases, Sendai, 
Japan, 7-10 March, 1994, pp 130-133. 
Wuebbles, D.J., 0.E. Kinnison, K.E. Grant and J. Lean, 1992: 
The effect of solar flux variations and trace gas emissions on 
recent trends in stratospheric ozone and temperature. J. 
Geomagnetism and Geoelectricity, 43, 709-718. 
Zander, R., Ph. Demoulin, D.H. Ehhalt, U. Schmidt and C.P. 
Rinsland, 1989: Secular increases in the total vertical 
abundance of carbon monoxide above central Europe since 
1950.7. Geophys. Res., 94, 11021-11028 
Zander, R., C.P. Rinsland and P. Demoulin, 1991: Infrared 
spectrascopic measurements of the vertical column abundance 
of sulphur hexafluoride from the ground. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 
15447-15454. 
Zander, R., D.H. Ehhalt, C.P. Rinsland, U. Schmidt, E. Mahicu, 
J. Rudolph, P. Demoulin, G. Roland, L. Delbouille and A. 
Sauval, 1994: Secular trend and seasonal variability of the 
column abundance of N-,0 above the Jungfraujoch station 
determined by IR solar spectra, ./. Geophys. Res, 99, 16745-
16756. 

726 
Other Trace Gases and Atmospheric Chemistry 
Zardini, D., D. Raynaud, D. Scharffe and W. Seller, 1989: N20 
Zhou, X., C. Luo, G. Ding, J. Tang and Q. Liu, 1993: 
of air extracted from Antarctic ice cores: implication on 
Preliminary analysis of the variations of surface ozone and 
atmospheric N20 back to the last glacial-interglacial transition. 
nitric oxides in Lin'an. Acta Meteo. Sinica, 7, 287-294. 
J. Atmos. Chem., 8, 189-201. 

3 
Aerosols 
P.R. JONAS, R.J. CHARLSON, H. RODHE 
Contributors: 
T.L. Anderson, M.O. Andreae, E. Dutton, H. Graf, Y. Fouquart, H. Grassl, 
J. Heintzenberg, P V. Hobbs, D. Hofmann, B. Huebert, R. Jaenicke, M. Jietai, 
J. Lelieveld, M. Mazurek, M.P. McCormick, J. Ogren, J. Penner, E Raes, L. Schiitz, 
S. Schwartz, G. Slinn, H. ten Brink. 


CONTENTS 
Summary 
3.1 Introduction 
3.1.1 Radiative Forcing by Aerosols 
131 
133 
133 
3.2 Aerosol Sources and Types 
134 
3.2.1 Soil Dust 
134 
3.2.2 Sea Salt Aerosols 
135 
3.2.3 Volcanic Dust 
136 
3.2.4 Primary Organic Aerosols 
136 
3.2.5 Industrial Dust 
136 
3.2.6 Soot 
136 
3.2.7 Biomass Burning 
136 
3.2.8 Oxidation of Precursor Gases 
136 
3.3 Aerosol Transformation Processes 
137 
3.3.1 Processes Relevant to Radiative Forcing 
137 
3.3.2 Why Particle Size is Important 
138 
3.3.3 Accumulation Mode Particles as the Repository 
of Most Anthropogenic Aerosol Substances 
139 
3.4 Aerosol Sinks and Lifetimes 
139 
3.5 Properties, Measurements and Budgets of 
Atmospheric Aerosols 
140 
3.5.1 Aircraft, Satellite and Remote Sensing 
Measurements 
140 
3.5.2 Regional and Global Models and Budgets of 
Anthropogenic Aerosol 
140 
3.5.3 Measured Trends 
141 
3.6 Stratospheric Aerosols 
142 
3.6.1 Sources, Sinks and Lifetimes 
142 
3.6.2 Size Distributions, Compositions and Optical 
Depths 
143 
3.6.3 Interaction with the Troposphere 
143 
3.7 Optical Properties of Aerosols Determining 
the Direct Radiative Effect 
144 
3.7.1 Spatial Scales 
144 
3.7.2 Local Optical Properties (Two Approaches) 
144 
3.7.2. 1 Dependence of local integral optical 
properties on size and composition 
146 
3.7.3 Column Properties 
146 
3.8 Causes of Uncertainty in Calculating Direct Forcing 
by Aerosols 
147 
3.8.1 Local vs. Regional vs. Global Models and Effects 147 
3.8.2 Coupled Chemical/Radiative Transfer Models 
148 
3.8.3 Causes of Uncertainty in Calculating the Direct 
Forcing by Anthropogenic Aerosol 
149 
3.9 Influence of Anthropogenic Aerosol on Clouds 
(Indirect Effect) 
150 
3.9.1 Cloud Formation 
150 
3.9.2 Cloud Concentration Nuclei (CCN) Population 
and Aerosol Sources 
151 
3.9.2.1 Sulphates and nitrates 
151 
3.9.2.2 Organics 
152 
3.9.2.3 Soot 
152 
3.9.2.4 Mineral dust 
152 
3.9.2.5 Sea salt 
152 
3.9.3 Cloud Radiative Properties 
152 
3.9.3.1 Water clouds 
152 
3.9.3.2 Ice clouds 
152 
3.9.4 The Indirect Effect of Anthropogenic CCN 
on Cloud Albedo 
153 
3.9.5 Precipitation Formation and Cloud Lifetime 
154 
3.10 Future Trends 
154 
3.10.1 Industrialisation 
154 
3.10.2 Feedbacks 
155 
3.11 Likely Developments 
155 
3.11.1 Local Measurements 
156 
3.11.2 Ground-based and Satellite Monitoring 
156 
3.11.3 Modelling 
157 
References 
157 


SUMMARY 
• 
Atmospheric aerosol in the troposphere influences 
climate in two ways, directly through the reflection 
and absorption of solar radiation, and indirectly 
through modifying the optical properties and lifetime 
of clouds. 
• 
Estimation of aerosol radiative forcing is more 
complex and hence more uncertain than radiative 
forcing due to the well-mixed greenhouse gases (see 
Chapter 4) for several reasons: 
(i) 
Both the direct and indirect radiative effect of 
aerosol particles are strongly dependent on 
particle size and chemical composition and 
cannot be related to aerosol mass source 
strengths in a simple manner. 
(ii) 
The indirect radiative effect of aerosols 
depends on complex processes involving 
aerosol particles and the nucleation and growth 
of cloud droplets. 
(iii) Aerosols in the troposphere have short 
lifetimes (around a week) and therefore their 
spatial distribution is highly inhomogeneous 
and strongly correlated with their sources. 
• 
The net (direct and indirect) global mean radiative 
forcing due to the increase in anthropogenic aerosol 
since pre-industrial times is negative and the 
magnitude is significant; while forcing due to 
changes in sulphate and organic aerosols is negative, 
that due to soot carbon is probably positive although 
present estimates suggest the latter is relatively small 
(see Chapter 4 for more details). 
Direct radiative effect 
• 
There are many lines of evidence suggesting that 
anthropogenic aerosol has increased the optical 
depth over and downwind of industrial regions and 
that this increase is very large compared with the 
natural background in these regions. 
• 
The major contributions to the anthropogenic 
component of the aerosol optical depth arise from 
sulphates (produced from sulphur dioxide released as 
a result of fossil fuel combustion) and from organics 
released by biomass burning. 
• 
Owing to the effect of size and chemical 
composition, anthropogenic aerosol contributes 
approximately 50% to the global mean aerosol 
optical depth but only around 20% to the mass 
burden. 
Indirect radiative effect 
• 
The impact of aerosol on the optical properties of 
low level clouds has been demonstrated in localised 
observations but the global impact has yet to be 
quantified. The effect is expected to be smaller for 
additional aerosol introduced into already polluted 
air. 
• 
There is some observational evidence suggesting that 
mean sizes of cloud droplets are larger in the 
Southern Hemisphere (where tropospheric aerosol 
concentration is generally lower) than in the 
Northern Hemisphere (where aerosol concentration 
is generally higher). 
Stratospheric aerosols 
• 
Large volcanic eruptions, such as Mt. Pinatubo, 
significantly influence the aerosol in the stratosphere 
and the effects persist over several years. 
• 
Stratospheric aerosol has a longer lifetime (of order 
1 year) than aerosol in the troposphere and is 
therefore more uniformly distributed. The amount of 
sunlight reflected by aerosols over industrial regions 
is comparable with the peak effects of volcanic 
aerosols. 
Stabilisation of aerosol concentration 
• 
Future concentrations of anthropogenic sulphate 
aerosols will depend on both fossil fuel use and 
emission controls. Even if the globally averaged 
concentration were stabilised - through stabilisation 
of total global emissions- the geographical 
distribution of the S0 2 emissions, and hence the 
aerosol concentration, would be likely to exhibit 
major changes. 

Aerosols 
133 
3.1 Introduction 
Aerosols in general, and anthropogenic aerosols in 
particular, are thought to exert a radiative influence on 
climate directly, through the reflection and absorption of 
solar radiation, and indirectly, through modifying the 
optical properties and lifetimes of clouds. The atmospheric 
loading of anthropogenic aerosols and the resultant 
radiative influence have increased over the industrial 
period roughly in parallel with that of the greenhouse gases 
and these aerosol particles could have exerted a significant 
radiative forcing over this period. 
This chapter reviews the relevant physics and chemistry 
of atmospheric aerosol in order to provide the context for 
describing the climatic influence of anthropogenic aerosols 
(discussed in Chapter 4). It is demonstrated that: 
(a) 
there is sound physical and chemical evidence 
supporting the existence of anthropogenic sulphate 
and organic aerosol radiative forcing which is 
negative in sign; 
(b) 
uncertainty in calculating the magnitude of the 
forcing arises from a lack of observations of the 
chemical and physical properties of aerosol particles 
as well as their spatial and temporal distribution. 
Aerosols present a large source of uncertainty in 
calculating radiative forcing over the industrial period. The 
effect of anthropogenic aerosol may help explain the 
differences between observed climate change over the 
industrial era and the best estimates of such change from 
model calculations which are based only on the effects of 
greenhouse gases. However, at the present time, the 
climatic effects of aerosols can only be estimated with 
considerable uncertainty (+Hansen et ai, 1990) due to the 
lack of sufficient detailed observations. A quantitative 
estimate of the uncertainty can be made only for direct 
forcing by sulphate and organic aerosols; other aerosol 
types, e.g., soil dust and soot, cannot yet be quantified. 
3.1.1 Radiative Forcing by Aerosols 
Atmospheric aerosol particles are conventionally defined 
as those particles suspended in air having diameters in the 
range 10"3 to 10 fan.1 They are formed by the reaction of 
gases in the atmosphere (gas to particle conversion), or by 
the dispersal of material at the surface. Although forming a 
small part of the mass of the atmosphere, around 1 part in 
109, they have the potential significantly to influence both 
radiative transfer through the atmosphere and the 
atmospheric water cycle. The best understood mechanism 
by which aerosol particles can influence climate is by 
scattering incoming solar radiation, thereby increasing the 
Earth's albedo (the direct effect). Absorption of solar 
radiation, for example by soot, may cool the surface while 
heating the atmosphere. Direct aerosol forcing is primarily 
a short-wave forcing process, and is therefore expected to 
dominate in the daytime and summer months (e.g., Karl el 
«/., 1991; Engardt and Rodhe, 1992; Hunter el «/.. 1993). 
Although aerosol particles may absorb long-wave 
radiation, this effect is believed to be small for 
anthropogenic aerosols other than soot. Anthropogenic 
aerosol particles acting as cloud condensation nuclei 
(CCN) are believed to increase the number concentration 
of cloud droplets, increasing cloud albedo (the indirect 
effect) e.g., SMIC, 1971; Twomey, 1977; Twomey ci at.. 
1984. The corresponding decrease in cloud droplet size 
may inhibit precipitation formation, extending cloud 
lifetime. Long-wave absorption by wet aerosol particles 
(Marley el al., 1993) may be a significant factor in the 
overall radiation balance but estimates of the magnitude of 
this effect are only preliminary. 
In contrast to greenhouse gases, atmospheric aerosol 
particles are short-lived in the troposphere with lifetimes 
of around a week , while they have lifetimes of a year or 
more in the stratosphere. The short lifetimes, together with 
the highly non-uniform geographical distribution of 
aerosol sources, results in a highly non-uniform 
geographical distribution of anthropogenic aerosols. This 
non-uniformity results in very different patterns of 
radiative forcing and may result in different climate 
response patterns compared with greenhouse gases which 
are well-mixed. 
Figure 3.1 is a schematic representation of typical 
aerosol particle mass and number distributions above 0.01 
/<m diameter as functions of particle diameter, with peaks 
corresponding to aerosol produced by gas-to-particle 
conversion and by disruption of the Earth's surface 
respectively. Although the fine and coarse modes account 
for most of the aerosol mass, there are many smaller 
particles and a graph of number concentration shows a 
further peak around 0.02 fim, the nucleation mode. The 
spectrum also shows a peak at a diameter smaller than the 
lower limit of the graph but particles of this size are not 
believed to have climatic effects. 
The estimation of radiative forcing caused by 
tropospheric aerosol is fundamentally different from that 
caused by well-mixed greenhouse gases because: 
(i) 
The aerosol mass and size distribution show 
considerable temporal and spatial variability due to 
the relatively short lifetime and localised nature of 
the sources and sinks. There are substantial 
differences in the distributions of both anthropogenic 
and natural aerosols between the Northern and 
Southern Hemispheres owing to the different 
anthropogenic sources and different distribution of 
land masses. 
1 fim = 1 micrometre = 1 millionth of a metre. 

134 
Aerosols 
condensates: 
sulphates 
organics 
soot 
Diameter (^.m) 
Fine particles 
Coarse particles 
Figure 3.1: Schematic diagram showing the main features of the 
aerosol size distribution as a function of (a) mass and (b) number. 
The distributions have been plotted such that the area under the 
curve corresponds to the total mass and number concentrations 
respectively. Although coarse particles contribute substantially to 
the aerosol mass, they form a very small part of the number of 
aerosol particles. 
(ii) 
Aerosols are not chemically homogeneous and are 
produced by a variety of processes including 
chemical reactions between gases in the air. Such 
heterogeneity makes it difficult to prescribe particle 
size distributions and optical properties of given 
types of aerosol particles, for example in climate 
models. 
(iii) The radiative effects of aerosol are critically 
dependent on the size distribution, rather than simply 
on the total mass loading alone. Different sources 
have different aerosol size characteristics and the 
size distribution and chemical composition change as 
the aerosol ages. 
3.2 Aerosol Sources and Types 
Atmospheric aerosol particles may be emitted as particles 
(primary sources) or formed in the atmosphere from 
gaseous precursors (secondary sources). Some of the 
sources, e.g.. volcanic emissions and sea spray from the 
oceans, are clearly natural; others, for example industrial 
emissions, are purely anthropogenic. There are also 
sources, e.g., biomass burning and soil dust emissions, 
where, although the distinction between natural and 
anthropogenic processes may be clearly defined, there is 
often insufficient information to apportion particular 
sources. 
Table 3.1 (modified from Andreae, 1995) summarises 
the estimated annual emissions into the troposphere or 
stratosphere from the major sources of atmospheric 
aerosol. Emission of mineral aerosols from soil dust has 
been classified as a natural source, although a certain 
influence from anthropogenic processes, e.g., agriculture, 
is likely to exist. Likewise, biomass burning is not purely 
anthropogenic. The large upper estimates for sea salt and 
volcanic dust include large particles with very short 
atmospheric lifetimes. It should be noted that particle mass 
flux is not a good measure of either the mass loading or the 
instantaneous effect of the aerosol particles, for reasons to 
be discussed later. Further, the quantities shown are highly 
disparate in magnitude and uncertainty so that the totals 
are only intended to demonstrate that anthropogenic 
aerosols are a significant contribution to the total aerosol 
burden. 
Owing to the short lifetime of aerosol particles in the 
troposphere and the non-uniform distribution of sources, 
their geographical distribution is highly non-uniform. As a 
consequence, the relative importance of the various 
sources shown in Table 3.1 varies considerably over the 
globe. For example, within and around the most 
industrialised regions in Europe and North America the 
industrial sources are relatively much more important. The 
nature of the various emissions is briefly summarised 
below. 
3.2.1 Soil Dust 
Atmospheric mineral dust is found all around the globe. 
This is due to long-range transport over thousands of 
kilometres within the general circulation of the 
atmosphere. Major sources of the particulate matter are the 
arid and semi-arid regions, where the material is 
continuously produced by bulk to particle conversion 
caused by physical and chemical weathering of soils and 
rock. The diameter of windblown soil dust ranges from 
less than 1 /an to 100 ^m or more. The largest particles fall 
out rapidly and are of no concern in this context. The mass 
median diameter of that fraction which is transported over 
appreciable distances (several 100 km) is about 2-4 /itn 
(Buat-Menard et al., 1983; Dulac et al., 1989, 1992), i.e. in 
the coarse range. The contribution of fine particles i 
enhanced during intense dust events compared to modem! 
dust rising conditions. 
The main sources of soil dust are surfaces wit 
unconsolidated material and areas with active weatherin. 

Aerosols 
135 
Table 3.1: Global emission estimates for major aerosol types in the 1980s. Sulphates and nitrates are assumed to occur 
as ammonium salts. Modified from Andreae (1994). 
Units: Tg/yr (dry mass) 
Source 
Natural 
Primary 
Soil dust (mineral aerosol) 
Sea salt 
Volcanic dust 
Primary organic aerosols 
Secondary 
Sulphates from biogenic gases 
Sulphates from volcanic S0 2 
Organic matter from biogenic VOC* 
Nitrates from NOx 
Sum of Natural Sources 
Anthropogenic 
Primary 
Industrial dust (except soot) 
Soot (includes biomass burning) 
Biomass burning(except soot)+ 
Secondary 
Sulphates from S0 2 
Nitrates from NOx 
Organic matter from biogenic VOC* 
Sum of Anthropogenic Sources 
TOTAL 
low 
1,000 
1,000 
4 
26 
60 
4 
40 
10 
2,144 
40 
5 
50 
120 
20 
5 
240 
2,384 
Estimated flux 
high 
3,000 
10,000 
10,000 
80 
110 
45 
200 
40 
23,475 
130 
25 
140 
180 
50 
25 
550 
24,025 
"best" 
1,500 
1,300 
33 
50 
90 
12 
55 
22 
3,062 
100 
10 
80 
140 
40 
10 
380 
3,442 
Particle size category 
( coarse: lfrni diameter 
fine: 1/rni diameter) 
mainly coarse 
coarse 
coarse 
coarse 
fine 
fine 
fine 
mainly coarse 
coarse and fine 
mainly fine 
fine 
fine 
mainly coarse 
fine 
* VOC = Volatile Organic Carbon 
+ Also forms secondary particles 
(Pye, 1987). These are alluvial fans, outwashes, wadis, etc. 
Only a minor fraction of the total desert area can be 
considered as a source for airborne material. The annual 
global emission amounts to about 1500 Tg, which is of the 
order of the global sea salt production. Mineral dust 
particles originate mainly from the great desert areas of 
Northern Africa and Asia (Prospero, 1990). The largest 
source is probably the Sahara. Despite the inefficient light 
scattering by coarse particles, mineral dust does have an 
appreciable effect on the planetary radiation balance due to 
the large amounts involved (see section 3.7.3). For 
example, desert dust is clearly seen from space in satellite 
imagery (Durkee et ai, 1991; Jankowiak and Tanre, 1992). 
Dust originating from the Asian continent causes a 
decrease in visibility over large regions of Japan and China 
(Kai et al., 1988). 
Anthropogenic forcing due to mineral dust emissions 
by industrial, agricultural and vehicle activities has not 
yet been well quantified but is believed to be relatively 
small. 
3.2.2 Sea Salt Aerosols 
Sea salt, resulting from the evaporation of sea-spray 
droplets, is a major component of natural aerosol. The 
largest droplets, containing most of the mass injected into 
the air, are so large that they return to the ocean almost 
immediately. Smaller droplets may stay airborne long 

/J6 
Aerosols 
enough to dry out and shrink, whereby they then can 
remain airborne even longer. This inverse relationship 
between mass and atmospheric lifetime has resulted in 
estimates of the amount of these aerosols injected into the 
atmosphere which range from 1,000 to 10,000 Tg/yr 
(SMIC, 1971; Blanchard, 1983). The mass median 
diameter of sea salt aerosol near the sea surface is of the 
order of 8 jum and, because of their short lifetime and 
inefficient light-scattering, the largest particles are of little 
importance to radiative forcing of climate change. 
Therefore, in Table 3.1 a value of 1,300 Tg/yr is suggested 
as representative for that fraction of the sea salt aerosol 
which can be transported throughout the lower marine 
troposphere (Petrenchuk, 1980; Andreae, 1986). 
3.2.3 Volcanic Dust 
Volcanic emissions consist of solid particles (ash) and 
gases (mainly water vapour (H-,0), sulphur dioxide (S02) 
and carbon dioxide (CO?)) in very variable concentrations. 
S02 is a precursor to aerosol formation by gas to particle 
conversion. The ash particles are mainly in the coarse 
particle range. Most of the known active volcanoes are in 
the Northern Hemisphere, and only 18% are between 10°S 
and the South Pole (Simkin et ai, 1981; Simkin and Sibert, 
1984). In regions with frequent volcanic activity, the 
emission of sulphur and other aerosol components may be 
important (e.g., Hobbs et ai, 1982). For example, Allard et 
al. (1991) estimate the sulphur emission of Etna/Sicily to be 
0.7 TgS (sulphur)Zyr averaged over the years 1975 to 1987. 
The global volcanic emission of SO, has been estimated 
to be 3.5 TgS/yr from effusive degassing and, on average, 
about 6 TgS/yr from erupting volcanoes (Stoiber et al., 
1987). On average, less than 10% of this amount reaches 
the stratosphere. This number may vary by an order of 
magnitude in individual years, for example following 
explosive eruptions like Mt. Pinatubo (9 TgS in 1991) and 
El Chichon (3.5 TgS in 1982). 
3.2.4 Primary Organic Aerosols 
Natural emissions of particulate organic carbon (POC) are 
produced by marine and continental sources. Global 
emissions of POC from ocean regions are estimated to be 
slightly larger than from continental natural sources (Duce, 
1978). Particles with nominal diameters > 1 /xm account 
for 90% of the POC emitted from both source categories. 
The ocean is a large source of POC owing to the injection 
of naturally derived marine surfactants from bubble bursting 
processes (Monahan, 1986). Terrestrial sources of primary 
POC include natural products emitted from vegetation such 
as Cw to CMr terpenes, plant waxes, and macromolecular 
plant fragments (Graedel 1979; Simoneit and Mazurek 
1981). POC may also be emitted by combustion processes. 
3.2.5 Industrial Dust 
Primary aerosol particles originate from the incombustible 
material present as inorganic impurities in the fuel which 
passes through the combustion process and from 
incomplete fuel combustion. The amount of aerosol 
material produced from coal is much larger than from oil. 
The result of more efficient particle removal systems is 
that emissions from modern coal-fired installations are an 
order of magnitude lower than those of a few decades ago. 
However, for many developing countries the conditions 
appropriate to the older installations probably apply. In 
addition to combustion sources, industrial dust may be 
produced by other processes. The size of the emitted 
industrial dust particles depends on, among other things, 
the efficiency of the filtering process. Most of the 100 
Tg/yr listed in Table 3.1 is likely to be in the coarse mode. 
3.2.6 Soot 
Because of the unique properties (light absorbing 
efficiency) of the soot fraction of industrial aerosol, this 
fraction is given a separate estimate in Table 3.1. Soot 
particles absorb solar radiation very efficiently. Most of 
the soot particles lie in the fine category. The estimates are 
based on Ogren and Charlson (1983), Turco et al. (1983) 
and Penner et al. (1992). 
3.2.7 Biomass Burning 
Biomass burning is likely to be the next largest source of 
fine mode anthropogenic aerosols, after sulphate (Andreae, 
1991). Most of the precursors are carbon, sulphur and 
nitrogen compounds which form organic sulphate and 
nitrate aerosols. Another important component is soot and 
tar condensates (Cachier et al., 1989). The types of 
aerosols formed depend to a great extent on the 
combustion characteristics and have not been fully 
characterised (Levine, 1991). 
3.2.8 Oxidation of Precursor Gases 
Natural gases which are precursors of aerosol particles 
include sulphur compounds (mainly dimethyl sulphide 
(DMS) and S0 2), hydrocarbons (HC) and oxides of 
nitrogen (NO and N02, known collectively as NOJ, and 
HN03. Oxidation of these precursors occurs both in the 
gas phase (mainly through oxidation processes initiated by 
the OH and other atmospheric radicals) and in liquid 
droplets. In this oxidation process low volatility products 
are formed which either condense onto pre-existing aerosol 
particles (including droplets) or form new particles. Mos: 
of the aerosol mass produced by this process is in the fim 
size range. In-cloud processes have a significant effect or 
the aerosol size distribution. 

Aerosols 
137 
The dominant part of the sulphate from biogenic gases is 
derived from DMS emitted from the oceans where it is 
formed by biological processes (Andreae, 1995). Natural 
sources of NOx include soil exhalation (about 10 TgN/yr) 
(Galbally and Roy, 1978), and lightning (2-20 TgN/yr) 
(Warneck, 1988). It is estimated that about half of the NOv 
is oxidised to nitric acid (HN03) which is present in both 
the gas and the condensed phase (in aerosols and droplets). 
Part of the gas phase HN03 is deposited directly at the 
Earth's surface or scavenged by precipitation. The fraction 
of the HN0 3 that contributes to the aerosol mass (or 
number) is uncertain. There is a tendency for the aerosol 
nitrate to occur as coarse particles, which are not so 
important from a climatic point of view except possibly as 
CCN. 
The contribution of natural non-methane hydrocarbons 
(NMHC) to the aerosol mass and number concentration is 
likely to be very significant, especially in coniferous 
forests where emissions of terpenes and other 
hydrocarbons are large. The global emission of natural 
NMHC is estimated to be about 700 Tg/yr out of which 
about 10% may be converted to aerosols (Andreae, 1995). 
Carbonaceous aerosol particles either emitted directly from 
natural and anthropogenic sources or produced from 
precursor gases have highly complex chemical 
compositions that contain varying proportions of elemental 
and organic carbon. The scattering and absorption 
characteristics depend strongly on the proportion of 
elemental and organic carbon. Natural aerosols contain 
essentially no elemental carbon except for smoke aerosols 
from wild fires. Anthropogenic particles produced from 
combustion processes contain substantial quantities of 
elemental carbon relative to organic carbon, depending 
on the source type (Hildemann et al., 1991; Cachier et al, 
1989). 
Today, industrial and other anthropogenic sources of 
precursor gases represent a very substantial addition to the 
natural precursors (see Table 3.1). The largest contribution 
comes from industrial S02. For a few decades, this source 
of gaseous sulphur has surpassed the natural emission of 
such gases (mainly DMS from the oceans and S02 from 
volcanoes). The current industrial S0 2 emission is about 
70 - 90 TgS/yr (see e.g., Muller, 1992; Spiro et al, 1992), 
roughly half of which is oxidised to aerosol sulphate 
before being deposited (Langner and Rodhe, 1991). 
Approximately 90% of the emissions are from industrial 
regions in the Northern Hemisphere, and little of this S02 
or of the resulting sulphate aerosol is transported to the 
Southern Hemisphere. 
Whereas most of the natural sources of aerosols can be 
expected to have changed only moderately during past 
centuries, anthropogenic emissions have grown 
dramatically especially during the 20th century. While 
industrial sulphur aerosol loadings have doubled since 
1950, following a slow increase over the preceding 100 
years, loadings from biomass burning have undergone a 
steady increase over the last 150 years (Andreae, 1991). 
Figure 3.2 shows the rapid increase in anthropogenic SO-, 
emissions over this period, although as will be shown later, 
the rate of increase in emissions shows large regional 
variations, resulting in changes in the geographical 
distribution of aerosol. Emissions associated with eruptive 
volcanoes represent a special case with highly variable 
source strength. 
3.3 Aerosol Transformation Processes 
3.3.1 Processes Relevant to Radiative Forcing 
Aerosol transformation processes are of particular 
importance to the problem of climatic effects, because 
these processes are the major determinants of aerosol 
optical and cloud droplet-nucleating properties. The size-
100 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
-
-
-
-
-
-
Global 
natural flux 
^ ^ 
i 
^Northern Hemisphere 
natural flux 
i 
i 
i 
i 
1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 
1980 
Year 
Figure 3.2: Time history of global emission of S0 2 (in TgS/yr) 
and estimates of the global and Northern Hemisphere natural flux 
(from Charlson et al., 1992). Anthropogenic sulphur is emitted 
mainly (-90% ) in the Northern Hemisphere and emissions 
greatly exceed the natural emissions. Width of shading represents 
the uncertainty. 

/_?& 
Aerosols 
dependent properties of the particles that govern the direct 
and indirect radiative effects are: 
number, surface area and mass concentration; 
refractive index (determined by chemical composition); 
particle shape and morphology; 
water solubility; 
surface chemical properties; 
location in the atmosphere. 
Because the radiative effects of aerosol vary strongly as 
a function of particle size, it is necessary to focus on the 
processes that determine the above variables as functions 
of size. 
3.3.2 Why Particle Size is Important 
Major changes of aerosol production and transformation 
processes occur at particle diameters around 0.1 and 1.0 
jum. Table 3.2 compares a variety of aerosol properties 
above and below 1 /im diameter, and illustrates the very 
large differences that exist across this size range. Below 
0.1 ,wm, particle behaviour is dominated by Brownian 
motion and by large ratios of surface area to volume (>30 
m2 cm"3). Nuclei mode (smaller than ~ 0.02 jum) particles 
are freshly produced new particles from condensation at 
low temperature (atmospheric reactions) or high 
temperature (fire), and their presence in air is transitory 
(minutes to days). The accumulation mode (0.1 to 1.0 ^m 
diameter) is so named because mass accumulates by 
Brownian coagulation, condensation of products of gas-
phase reactions, and aqueous phase reactions. Nuclei mode 
and accumulation mode particles are together referred to as 
fine particles (see Figure 3.1). The bulk of the aerosol 
mass resides in accumulation and coarse modes. Because 
Brownian motion becomes unimportant as particle size 
grows above about 0.1 fim diameter, accumulation mode 
particles do not readily become attached to coarse mode 
particles. This prevents the chemical substances of the 
accumulation mode (e.g., H2S04) from reacting with those 
in the coarse mode (e.g., basic soil dust). This mixture of 
coarse and fine particle aerosol is chemically 
heterogeneous and exhibits features that are the 
consequence of size dependent source, sink and 
transformation processes. 
The general form of size distribution in Figure 3.1 
(adapted from Andreae, 1995) is based on large amounts 
of data from both continental and marine locations. 
Chemical species in the accumulation mode particles thus 
must dominate the CCN concentration and, most 
significantly, anthropogenic changes in it. Because 
the number concentration is dominated by particles 
less than about 0.1 fim diameter, the chemical substances 
in fine mode particles must dominate the process of 
cloud nucleation even though the coarse mode particles 
contribute more to the aerosol mass. Similarly, but 
not quite so thoroughly, fine mode substances must 
dominate the direct optical effects as will be discussed in 
Section 3.7. 
This complex but constant general form of size 
distribution is both the consequence and the controller of 
the chemical and physical processes that occur in the 
atmosphere. Several of these processes can be noted as of 
Table 3.2: Comparison of properties of coarse and fine aerosol particles 
Property/Attribute 
Coarse (greater than 1 fim diameter) 
Fine (accumulation plus nuclei) 
(less than 1 fim diameter) 
Production mechanism 
Number concentration 
Motion 
Cloud-nucleating characteristic 
In-situ modification mechanism 
pH 
Mechanical 
Small; usually less than 1 cm"3 
Dominated by sedimentation of 
larger particles; easily impacted, 
e.g., by falling raindrops 
Growth at low supersaturation but 
concentrations are small 
Mixing with other aerosol solutes via 
cloud coalescence and multiphase 
chemical reactions; uptake of acidic gases 
Generally alkaline 
Nucleation, condensation; multiphase 
chemical processes; small amounts 
mechanically produced 
Large; ranges from 10s to 1000s cm"3 
Brownian motion; no sedimentation or 
impaction 
Requires higher (up to -1%) supersaturation 
but usually dominates the number population 
ofCCN 
Condensation of products of gas phase 
reactions; multiphase reactions in particles 
and in clouds and mixing via Brownian 
coagulation; uptake of alkaline gases 
Acidic 

Aerosols 
139 
central importance to those aerosol properties that are 
relevant for radiative forcing: 
• 
chemical production of water soluble condensates 
such as H2S04 and (NH4)2S04. These particles can 
act as cloud condensation nuclei, are hygroscopic or 
deliquescent, and have large light scattering 
efficiency due to particle size and to hygroscopic 
growth. 
• 
accumulation of mass by numerous processes in the 
size range 0.1 and 1 jum. This is the size range for 
CCN and for maximum efficiency for scattering 
solar radiation. 
• 
modification of the shape of the size distribution by 
multiple-passages of aerosol particles through clouds 
in which aqueous-phase chemical reactions occur. 
This increases the light-scattering efficiency 
(Lelieveld and Heintzenberg, 1992). 
• 
rapid removal of coarse particles. As a result, a large 
mass source strength does not necessarily result in 
large climatic effects (Andreae, 1995). 
3.3.3 Accumulation Mode Particles as the Repository of 
Most Anthropogenic Aerosol Substances 
In Section 3.2, five key types of contemporary aerosol 
substances were identified as having a substantial 
anthropogenic component: 
• 
sulphates from the oxidation of sulphur-containing 
gases; 
• 
nitrates from gaseous nitrogen species; 
• 
organic materials from biomass combustion and 
oxidation of reactive volatile hydrocarbons; 
• 
soot from combustion; 
• 
mineral dust from aeolian processes. 
Because these substances constitute major additions to 
both the number and mass concentrations of the pre-
existing natural aerosol, they are the cause of both a 
secular trend and temporal and geographical variability in 
aerosol properties, transformations and effects. Sulphate 
ion typically comprises around 25-50% of the 
anthropogenic accumulation mode aerosol mass, when 
it has been measured, and is, probably, the best under-
stood (Heintzenberg, 1989). Much of the subsequent 
discussion will therefore concentrate on the effects of 
sulphate aerosol. 
It is of particular importance to reiterate that the 
processes of particle formation, growth by deposition of 
vapour and by Brownian motion, and processes in clouds 
result in the bulk of anthropogenic sulphates, organic and 
soot aerosol mass being concentrated in the diameter range 
between 0.1 and 1.0 fim. The maximum increase in particle 
number concentrations due to anthropogenic effects occurs 
at a diameter range roughly an order of magnitude below 
that. The reason for the relevance of this peculiar size 
dependence lies in two factors which will be discussed in 
Sections 3.7 and 3.9 respectively: 
Particles in the 0.1 to 1.0//m diameter range have the 
highest efficiency per unit mass for optical 
interactions with sunlight (due to the similarity of 
particle size and wavelength of light); 
• 
Particles of sizes around 0.1 fxm diameter composed 
of water soluble substances, like sulphates, are 
highly effective as cloud condensation nuclei. 
3.4 Aerosol Sinks and Lifetimes 
Whereas the number of aerosol particles and their surface 
area can be reduced by coagulation processes within the 
atmosphere, removal of aerosol mass is mainly achieved 
by transfer to the Earth's surface or by volatilisation. Such 
transfer is brought about by precipitation ("wet 
deposition") and by direct uptake at the surface ("dry 
deposition"). The efficiency of both these deposition 
processes is strongly dependent on particle size, especially 
in the diameter range 0.1-10 fim ( Slinn, 1983). For 
particles in the accumulation mode, wet deposition is the 
major removal process. The lifetime of nuclei mode particles 
is determined by coagulation which reduces the number of 
particles but does not reduce the total particle mass. 
The time spent in the atmosphere by an aerosol particle 
is a complex function of its physical and chemical 
characteristics (e.g., size, hygroscopic properties, etc.) and 
the time and location of its release. For sulphate particles 
in the diameter range 0.01-1.0//m (fine mode) released or 
formed in the mid-latitude boundary layer, an average 
lifetime is typically of the order of several days (Junge, 
1963; Rodhe, 1978; Chamberlain, 1991). This time scale is 
dominated mainly by the frequency of recurrence of 
precipitation. Particles transported into, or formed in the 
upper troposphere are likely to have a longer lifetime 
(weeks to months) because of less efficient precipitation 
scavenging ( Balkanski et al., 1993). Many estimates of 
atmospheric lifetimes or aerosol particles have been based 
on measurements of radio nuclides bound to aerosols; for 
example Cambray et al. (1987) estimated a lifetime of nine 
days for l37Cs from the Chernobyl accident. The global 
model simulation of Langner and Rodhe (1991) gave a 
global average lifetime of sulphate aerosol of about five 
days. It should be noted that the atmospheric lifetime of 
aerosol particles in the troposphere is much smaller than 
the lifetimes of the main greenhouse gases (see Chapters 1, 
2 and 5). The implications of this difference are discussed 
further in Sections 3.8 and 3.10. Aerosol particles injected 
into, or formed in, the stratosphere have lifetimes of order 
one year, much longer than those of tropospheric particles. 
This is largely due to the absence of precipitation 
scavenging and limited vertical turbulent transport. 

140 
Aerosols 
3.5 Properties, Measurements and Budgets of 
Atmospheric Aerosols 
In order to evaluate how aerosols influence the climate, it 
is necessary to know the cloud nucleating and optical 
properties of those types of anthropogenic and natural 
aerosols expected to have a significant climatic effect, in 
addition to the microphysical and chemical properties 
discussed earlier. 
3.5.7 Aircraft, Satellite and Remote Sensing 
Measurements 
A large number of aircraft measurements is available that 
provides information on aerosol loading and chemical and 
microphysical properties. However, difficulties in the 
sampling of aerosols from aircraft (e.g., Huebert et al., 
1990) raise concerns over the accuracy of these 
measurements. Moreover, the lack of integrated data sets 
including all, or most, of the important quantities identified 
later in Table 3.3, makes it difficult to use such 
observations in radiative forcing calculations. 
Remote-sensing of aerosol properties poses challenges 
that to date have been addressed only to a very limited 
extent (Penner et al., 1994). A change in the radiation field 
caused by aerosols can be of a magnitude that is significant 
for climate perturbation but is barely visible in typical 
remote sensing images. 
While a number of techniques for retrieval of aerosol 
properties from satellite measurements have been 
investigated, the only instruments thus far flown which 
were specifically designed to provide aerosol information 
are SAGE I, SAGE II and SAM II. These experiments use 
photometers to observe the solar occultation at each 
satellite sunrise-sunset and thus determine the vertical 
profile of aerosol extinction at 1 ^m wavelength in the 
stratosphere, and, in the absence of high-altitude clouds, in 
the upper troposphere ( McCormick et al., 1979; Yue et 
al., 1989; Kent et al., 1991). Occultation observations are a 
particularly sensitive method for aerosol measurement 
because of the enhanced aerosol effects with the large path 
length at the limb and the self-calibrating nature of such 
measurements. However, the restriction to satellite sunrise-
sunset locations leads to a sparse distribution of aerosol 
profiles and restricted ability to probe the atmosphere 
below about 7 km altitude although realisation of the full 
potential of satellite monitoring of aerosol optical depths, 
particle size shape and refractive index will depend on 
concurrent monitoring of aerosol profiles from fixed 
ground sites to provide calibration and to allow detailed 
process studies. 
Except during periods following volcanic eruptions that 
significantly increase aerosol loading in the stratosphere, 
the largest contribution to the total column aerosol amount 
is from the lower troposphere, below the lowest altitude 
that the occultation method can probe easily even in cloud-
free conditions. Most techniques proposed for retrieving 
the tropospheric aerosol from satellite observations rely 
upon the increase in solar radiation reflected by the Earth's 
surface and atmosphere caused by the additional 
backscattering from the aerosol. Since this increase may 
often be modest, such an approach is best suited for 
conditions where the surface has a low albedo that can be 
accurately estimated a priori, for example, observations 
over the ocean well away from sun glint (Durkee et al., 
1991; Kaufman and Nakajima, 1993; Kaufman et al., 
1990; Kaufman, 1993). Lidar holds great promise for 
sensing tropospheric aerosols and providing vertical 
soundings. Unfortunately little analysis of such data has 
yet been published. 
3.5.2 Regional and Global Models and Budgets of 
Anthropogenic Aerosol 
Models of the distribution and budget of sulphur and 
nitrogen species within regions of a few thousand square 
kilometres have been formulated in several parts of the 
world, mainly in the polluted regions in the Northern 
Hemisphere (for a recent review see Galloway and Rodhe, 
1991). Such budgets indicate that dry and wet deposition, 
in roughly similar proportions, account for 50-75% of the 
removal of the anthropogenic emissions within the 
polluted regions (a few thousand km across), the rest being 
exported further away. About half of the anthropogenic 
S02 is estimated to be transformed to aerosol sulphate in 
the atmosphere. 
Hemispheric or global scale models of the distribution 
of aerosol sulphate (and its precursors) have been 
formulated during the past few years (Erickson et al., 
1991; Langner and Rodhe, 1991; Luecken et al., 1991; 
Tarrason and Iversen, 1992; Taylor and Penner, 1994). 
Figure 3.3 shows a model calculation of the annual mean 
distribution of the vertically integrated anthropogenic 
burden of sulphate aerosol, from Langner and Rodhe 
(1991). Such models indicate that industrial emissions arc 
having a dramatic impact on the sulphate aerosol 
concentrations, not only within the industrialised regions, 
but over a large part of the Northern Hemisphere. 
Figure 3.4 depicts the estimated division of global 
sulphur fluxes through the atmosphere between the major 
oxidation and deposition pathways (Langner et al., 1992). 
Note the important role played by oxidation in clouds lor 
producing aerosol sulphate. 
To our knowledge no attempt has yet been made to 
model the global distribution of aerosols in general. 
including sources and sinks of primary and secondary 
aerosols and their precursors. A different approach was 
used by d'Almeida et al. (1991) who estimated, direc-iy 
from observations, a global distribution of 11 differ, it 

Aerosols 
141 
90°S-f 
180° W 
Longitude 
180° E 
Figure 3.3: Calculated distribution of the vertically integrated amount of sulphate aerosol due to anthropogenic emissions only (from 
Langner and Rodhe, 1991: slow oxidation case). Values are annual averages expressed as mg sulphate per square metre and the 
maxima are associated with main industrialised regions. No comparable results are available for aerosol from biomass combustion. 
types of aerosols based on a combination of observations 
and modelling, although owing to the limited database the 
representativeness of the observations is doubtful. 
3.5.3 Measured Trends 
The growth of anthropogenic aerosol sources over the past 
150 years is indisputable, but direct evidence for an 
increase in aerosol concentrations in the atmosphere is 
scarce since, owing to the large variability of aerosol 
concentrations in space and time, secular time trends are 
much more difficult to observe than for the long-lived and 
relatively evenly distributed greenhouse gases. 
Measurements of optical depth at some remote mountain 
top sites over several decades have not shown any 
significant trends (Ellis and Pucschel, 1971; Roosen et al., 
1973; Charlson, 1988) due to the limited period of the 
record. No obvious trend in atmospheric turbidity was 
observed by Helmes and Jaenicke (1988) in their analysis 
of sunshine records and cloudiness over the past two 
decades. There is, however, a clear change evident in some 
statistical analyses of aerosol or haze occurrence in more 
directly polluted areas (Yamamoto et al., 1971; Husar et 
al., 1979, 1981). For example, Husar and Patterson (1987) 
document a considerable increase over the past two 
decades. A trend of increasing aerosol concentration has 
natural 
emissions 
25 
(25) 
natural+ 
anthropogenic 
emissions 
80 
50 
(10) (16) 
dry+ 
wet 
deposition 
dry 
deposition 
9 
46 
(3) (15) 
wet 
deposition 
/4%%%&%^^4^%^^%^%%%%^%^^^4%<^^/ 
Figure 3.4: Schematic representation of fluxes of atmospheric sulphur species (excluding sea salts and soil dust) in different parts of 
the sulphur cycle. Numbers represent fluxes in TgS/yr. Natural (pre-industrial) fluxes are shown in parentheses (from Langncr et al., 
1992). Much of the sulphate aerosol results from sulphur dioxide emissions which have been oxidised by in-cloud processes. 

742 
Aerosols 
also been demonstrated from balloon measurements by 
Hofmann (1993). However, Kaminski and Winkler (1988) 
show that as a result of control measures, the contribution 
of sulphate to the aerosol mass is decreasing in some parts 
of Europe although the total mass is increasing. 
Field measurements of aerosol composition in remote 
regions also show the influence of anthropogenic 
emissions in areas far from continental sources (Lawson 
and Winchester, 1979; Andreae et al., 1984; Warneck, 
1988; Savoie and Prospero, 1989; Church et al., 1991; 
Duce et al., 1991; Losno et al., 1992). Satellite 
measurements of light-scattering over the North Atlantic 
have shown that haze-forming aerosol particles can be 
transported for great distances over the oceans and still 
produce an easily detectable impact on the scattering 
properties of the atmosphere (Eraser et al., 1984). Based 
on aircraft measurements, Andreae et al. (1988) showed 
that mid-tropospheric sulphate concentrations over the 
North Pacific off the west coast of the United States were 
dominated by long-range transport from Asia. In addition, 
ground-based observations suggest that long-range 
transport of Asian dust is seasonally dependent. 
The increase in CCN above natural levels due to 
anthropogenic emissions is well documented in 
industrialised regions (Warner and Twomey, 1967; Hobbs 
et al., 1970; Braham, 1974; Schmidt, 1974; Twomey et al., 
1978). That elevated sulphate levels over the North 
Atlantic are correlated with an increase in CCN is 
suggested by the data of Hoppel (1979), who finds that 
CCN concentrations over the North Atlantic are typically 
three or more times greater than over the Southern 
Hemisphere oceans (Twomey et al., 1984). A pronounced 
upward trend (~ 10%/yr) in condensation nuclei (particles 
larger than 0.01 urn) over the past eight years at a site in 
Antarctica has been reported, although the cause has not 
been determined and the effect on CCN concentrations is 
unclear. It is possible that these changes, and small 
decreases in aerosol concentration at the South Pole 
(Samson et al., 1990) may reflect changing dynamical 
factors. At Cape Grim, Tasmania (41 °S), the only site with 
an extended record, Gras (1994) reported a significant 
decrease in CCN concentrations of around 3%/yr during 
1981-91 while the concentration of condensation nuclei 
(CN) increased by 1.2%/yr. Hobbs et al. (1970) have also 
shown that ice nuclei may be transported long distances 
from their sources. This demonstrates the complexity of 
interactions between aerosol sources, sinks and transport 
processes. 
Soot, a tracer of combustion-derived aerosols, has also 
been found at significant concentrations over many remote 
marine and continental areas (Heintzenberg, 1982; 
Andreae. 1983; Andreae et al., 1984; Clarke. 1989; Ogren 
and Charlson. 1983; Warren and Clarke, 1990; *Hansen et 
al.. 1990). Clarke and Charlson (1985) cited the presence 
of light-absorbing material in the mid-tropospheric aerosol 
at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, as evidence for the long-range 
transport of soot and other anthropogenic aerosols, which 
results in a pervasive anthropogenic haze in the Northern 
Hemisphere. The transport of carbon and sulphate aerosols 
from mid-latitude sources in Eurasia results in the 
formation of Arctic haze observed at high latitudes in 
winter (Stonehouse, 1986). 
Strong evidence for a large-scale increase in the 
atmospheric burden of anthropogenic aerosols can also be 
found in the record of atmospheric composition preserved 
in glacier ice cores. In the Greenland ice sheet, non-sea salt 
sulphate (and nitrate) show a pronounced increase (from 
about 20 to over 100 ng/g in the case of sulphate) over the 
past century (Figure 3.5; Mayewski et al., 1986, 1990). 
Similar data from Antarctica show no such increase 
(Legrand and Delmas, 1987). Lead found in snow layers of 
the Greenland ice sheet is a good tracer of anthropogenic 
aerosol and records a 200-fold increase in lead 
concentrations since the beginning of the industrial era. 
However, there has been a reduction by a factor of 7.5 over 
the last 20 years (Boutron et al., 1991) reflecting both the 
introduction of lead-free fuels and the rapid response of 
aerosol to emission controls. 
3.6 Stratospheric Aerosols 
3.6.1 Sources, Sinks and Lifetimes 
The stratospheric aerosol record reveals at least three 
components: episodic volcanic enhancements; polar 
1750 1781 1812 1844 1875 1906 1937 1969 2000 
Figure 3.5: Concentration of sulphate in Greenland ice 
corresponding to the past 200 years (from Mayewski et al.. 
1990). The dotted and dashed curves show the anthropogenic 
SO, emissions worldwide and over the USA, respectively (from 
Andreae 1993). While the secular trend is of anthropogenic 
origin, the larger spikes result from natural (volcanic) emissions 

Aerosols 
143 
stratospheric clouds (PSCs) and clouds just above the 
tropical tropopause. A background concentration of 
sulphuric acid droplets also appears to be present. At 
normal stratospheric temperatures, aerosols are most likely 
supercooled solution droplets of H2S04.H20, with an acid 
weight fraction of 55 to 80%. The primary source of 
stratospheric aerosols is volcanic eruptions that are strong 
enough to inject S0 2 (sometimes H2S) buoyantly into the 
stratosphere. After an eruption, and following conversion 
to H 2S0 4 (gas) and subsequently to sulphuric acid 
aerosols, aerosol loading decreases with a half life of 6 to 9 
months, although this appears quite variable with altitude 
and latitude. The decay is most likely due to a combination 
of sedimentation, subsidence and exchange through 
tropopause folds. The net effect of this post-volcanic 
dispersion and natural cleansing is a greatly enhanced 
aerosol concentration in the upper troposphere after a 
major eruption, especially poleward of about 30° latitude. 
Except immediately after an eruption, stratospheric aerosol 
droplets tend to be concentrated into three distinct 
latitudinal bands, one over the equatorial region (between 
30°N and 30°S ) and the others over each high latitude region 
(50° to 90°N and S). Following a low latitude eruption, 
aerosol is dispersed into both hemispheres, whereas 
following a mid-to-high latitude eruption, aerosols tend to 
stay primarily in the hemisphere of the eruption. Potential 
sources of a background aerosol component include 
carbonyl sulphide from the oceans, low level S02 emissions 
from volcanoes, and various anthropogenic sources, 
including industrial and aircraft emissions. Measurements 
of aerosols in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere 
using balloon sondes, commencing in 1960 (Hofmann, 
1991) suggest a 5%/year increase in non-sea-salt sulphate 
that might be attributed to jet aircraft emissions. If the 
concentrations increase with anticipated increases in air 
traffic they could have significant climatic implications, 
and furthermore water vapour from aircraft emissions may 
increase the numbers of atmospheric ice particles. 
Stratospheric 
aerosol 
loading 
in 
1979 
was 
approximately 0.5 Tg of sulphate, thought to be 
representative of background aerosol conditions. The 
present status of the aerosol is one of enhancement due to 
the June 1991 eruption of Mt. Pinatubo (15.1°N, 120.4°E), 
which produced on the order of 30 Tg of new aerosol in 
the stratosphere, about three times that of the 1982 
eruption of El Chichon. The Mt. Pinatubo perturbation 
appears to be the largest of the century, perhaps the largest 
since the 1883 eruption of Krakatoa. By early 1993, 
stratospheric loading had decreased to approximately 13 
Tg, about equal to the peak loading values after El 
Chichon, although the aerosol optical depth associated 
with the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo was comparable with 
that following El Chichon due to the differing aerosol 
distribution. 
3.6.2 Size Distributions, Compositions and Optical 
Depths 
Stratospheric aerosol sizes range from hundredths of a 
micrometre to several micrometres. Although there is 
some variability, especially just after a volcanic eruption, 
two log normal size distributions of spherical, 
submicrometre particles appears to be an apt description of 
the aerosol. Just after an eruption, the previously 
monomodal size distribution becomes bimodal, and some 
particles are non-spherical because of the addition of 
crustal material. While there arc relatively few 
measurements of the size distribution, the volcanically 
perturbed/climatically important aerosol is currently 
described as having a bimodal number distribution. The 
smaller mode has a geometric mean diameter by number of 
0.1 ^m and a concentration of 10 cm"3, and the larger mode 
is characterised by a mean diameter of 1 //m, and a 
concentration of 1 cm"3 (Hofmann, 1993, personal 
communication). Given this size distribution, the larger 
mode accounts for almost all of the mass as well as the 
optical effects. In terms of optical extinction, stratospheric 
aerosols of this sort demonstrate very little light absorption 
at solar wavelengths, with a scattering coefficient around 
1-2 x 10"s nr1 at 550 nm. For aerosol layers of several to 
perhaps 10 km depth, this results in optical depths of 0.1 to 
0.2, as indeed was observed in 1992 over much of the 
globe. This is a large excursion compared with < 0.01 for 
the volcanically unperturbed case. Figure 3.6 from Button 
and Christy (1992) shows the observed optical depth at 
Mauna Loa, Hawaii illustrating the magnitude and 
systematic decay following both the El Chichon (1982) 
and Mt. Pinatubo (1991) eruptions. As is indicated in 
Chapter 4, there is evidence of significant warming of the 
stratosphere following both eruptions. 
3.6.3 Interaction with the Troposphere 
Just as stratospheric aerosol is derived from substances 
transported upward through the troposphere, the sink for it 
is transport back into the troposphere via sedimentation, 
subsidence and exchange through tropopause folds and 
turbulence in the vicinity of jet streams. This flux of 
aerosol material, particularly sulphates, directly into the 
upper troposphere represents a substantial local source of 
aerosol. The above estimate for the Mt. Pinatubo aerosol of 
30 Tg SO\ , decaying with a half life of 6-9 months, can be 
compared to estimates of the current natural non-volcanic 
and anthropogenic global annual fluxes of 30 and 140 Tg 
of SO] , respectively. Thus, the extra flux of sulphate mass 
represents a short-lived addition to the tropospheric 
sulphate burden that is substantial on a global basis and 
may be a major contribution at locations remote from 
anthropogenic sources. On the other hand, the large 
particle size of most of the mass, increased substantially by 

144 
Aerosols 
0.3 
0.25 
g-
"O 
s 
5. 0 15 
o 
8 
2 
3 
0.2 
0.1 
0.05 -|t 
380 nm 
500 nm 
778 nm 
El Chichon 
Pinatubo 
Figure 3.6: Variation of aerosol optical depth following the Mt. 
Pinatubo and El Chichon eruptions (from Button and Christy, 
1992), showing the removal of aerosol over several years 
following the eruptions. 
k in the solar wavelength range. The aerosol optical depth 
is the vertical integral of the aerosol extinction coefficient, 
°e (= °Sp + % ' where a 
is the aerosol light scattering 
coefficient and a 
is the aerosol light absorption 
coefficient). The single-scatter albedo is a measure of the 
relative importance of scattering and absorption by the 
particles, and is defined as Q = o/ae. 
The extinction co-
efficient and its components are often approximated 
as being proportional to X.& where a is the Angstrom 
exponent. The amount of light scattered through some 
angle (j) from the incident beam is described by the angular 
scattering phase function (3((|)). Simple parametrizations of 
P(<|>) are the ratio of the hemispheric back scatter to the 
total scatter, R, or the asymmetry parameter which ranges 
from -1 (complete backscatter) to +1 (complete forward 
scatter). 
3.7.1 Spatial Scales 
To quantify the direct radiative forcing due to 
anthropogenic aerosol, it is necessary to define the optical 
properties on two spatial scales: 
the higher humidity of the troposphere makes these 
particles substantially less important per unit mass to 
optical effects than ordinary accumulation mode sulphate, 
by around a factor of five. As a result, this sulphate aerosol 
does not substantially add to the global mean negative 
radiative forcing of the tropospheric aerosol and its effects 
are limited mainly to the time when it is in the 
stratosphere. 
Of potentially larger importance are the local effects of 
this aerosol in the upper troposphere which normally has 
very low aerosol number and mass concentrations. The 
possibility exists that stratospheric aerosol particles 
injected at very low temperatures near the tropopause 
could act as nuclei of formation of cirrus cloud ice 
particles. More nuclei in the upper troposphere owing to 
volcanic eruptions and effects of aircraft would probably 
mean more but smaller cirrus particles, a higher solar 
albedo and, likely, decreased infrared absorption but this 
has not been quantified (see Chapter 2 for a discussion of 
the chemical effects on stratospheric ozone). In addition to 
aerosol from the stratosphere, the upper troposphere may 
be influenced significantly by particles and water vapour 
from high altitude commercial aircraft, although this has 
not been properly quantified. 
3.7 Optical Properties of Aerosols Determining the 
Direct Radiative Effect 
The simplest set of parameters describing the direct 
interaction of aerosol particles with solar radiation includes 
the aerosol optical depth (6), single-scatter albedo (Q), and 
asymmetry parameter (g), all as a function of wavelength, 
• 
local, microphysical properties, 
• 
column integrated properties. 
In-situ 
observations at the surface are potentially 
influenced strongly by source and removal processes at or 
near the surface, and measurements of the entire air 
column above are needed to evaluate the represent-
ativeness of the surface-based observations. Aircraft 
observations play an important role here, but remote 
sensing of the aerosol from ground level also provides 
important information. Table 3.3 summarises the range of 
optical properties observed in the troposphere along with 
other relevant integral properties. While the values that are 
currently available can be, and have been, used to estimate 
the magnitude of radiative forcing by aerosol particles, 
uncertainties will remain without an integrated set of 
simultaneous observations of the optical, chemical, and 
microphysical properties of the particles in key locations. 
3.7.2 Local Optical Properties (Two Approaches) 
Two complementary approaches exist for determining the 
local optical properties that are needed for calculating 
radiative forcing: 
• 
Measure the key properties directly at representative 
locations and extrapolate to other locations (e.g.. 
Charlson et al., 1991); 
Measure the size distribution and the chemical 
composition, make certain assumptions regarding 
particle shape, morphology and distribution e 
properties with size, then calculate the optic; 
properties (e.g., Kiehl and Briegleb, 1993). 

Aerosols 
145 
Table 3.3: Typical range of observed integral properties of lower tropospheric aerosols (optical properties for 
500-550 nm wavelength at low relative humidity). Entries indicate the range of observations. 
Parameter 
Optical depth, 8 
Single-scatter albedo, Q 
Back/total scatter, R 
Light scattering 
coefficient, asp (Mm"1) 
Light absorption 
coefficient, o (Mm') 
Submicrometre mass 
concentration (fig m'3) 
CCN number concentration, 
0.7-1% supersaturation (cm-3) 
Angstrom exponent, & 
Polluted continental air 
(non-urban) 
0.2-0.8 
0.8-0.95 
0.1-0.2 
50-300 
5-50 
5-50 
1,000-5000 
1-2 
Clean continental air 
(minimal anthro-pogenic 
perturbation) 
0.02-0.1 
0.9-0.95 
Not available 
5-30 
1-10 
1-10 
100-1,000 
1-2 
Clean marine air 
(negligible anthro-pogenic 
perturbation) 
0.05-0.1 
close to 1 
0.15 
5-20 
0.01-0.05 
1-5 
10 - 200 
1.5-2.1 
Note: Mm = 106 m 
For purposes of coupling radiative transfer models to 
chemical models (which calculate aerosol species mass 
concentrations) it is necessary to relate the scattering and 
absorption coefficients to measures of the aerosol 
concentration and composition. Three quantities are in 
common use to relate measurements of the scattering and 
absorption characteristics of an aerosol to its fine particle 
component (subscript / denotes fine particles, subscript / 
denotes chemical species). 
(i) 
the fine particle scattering coefficient, 
W"V 
(3.1) 
where m, is the mass concentration of fine particles 
(defined as having diameters less than 1 fan) and af is the 
scattering efficiency. Typically, a, s 3 m2g"' at relative 
humidities less than 40% but is dependent on the size 
distribution and molecular chemical composition. 
(ii) 
the absorption coefficient for visible light (usually 
dominated by elemental or black carbon , C(0)) 
(3.2) 
o«p" V c ( 0 ) 
where /wC(0\ is the mass of elemental or black carbon and 
aaC is its absorption efficiency. 
(iii) the scattering coefficient for all particles summed 
over all chemical species present in the aerosol, 
o,,"Z«,^,°ro,^=Za,/n,y. (3-3) 
Here, the assumption is made that o , and o 
are 
independent and that the scattering by different chemical 
species also are independent and additive. In all instances, 
a, and aaC are evaluated by simultaneous measurement of 
a , a , m, and the fine particle mass concentration of 
individual chemical species ;', mif. Very substantial 
amounts of data of this sort have already been acquired, 
but not on a global scale. Most data were acquired at the 
Earth's surface and few exist from airborne platforms. 
The alternative to direct measurement of the optical 
properties and scattering and absorption efficiencies is to 
calculate the optical properties from measured or assumed 
particle 
size 
distributions, 
compositions 
and 
concentrations. Results obtained using these approaches, 
however, are almost wholly dependent on assumptions, 
many of which are not based on observations. Nonetheless, 
it is necessary to show that both of the approaches yield 
the same answer in order to demonstrate internal 
consistency and to define the sensitivity of the measured or 
calculated optical properties to input quantities, whether 
they are measured or assumed. Blanchet (IVH9) has 
demonstrated this consistency for a limited number of 
cases. Much of the progress in estimating radiative forcing 
by anthropogenic aerosol has resulted from the use of both 
approaches simultaneously. 
It is necessary to recognise that all of the factors 
controlling the optical properties are functions of particle 
size and wavelength and therefore so are the optical 
properties themselves. Figure 3.7 is an example of the 
distribution over particle size of mass scattering efficiency 
at 500 nm. Having measured the size distribution and 
knowing the refractive index of the aerosol one can thus 
determine the distribution of scattering efficiency by 
I 

146 
Aerosols 
particle size, the integral of which is the scattering 
efficiency used in radiative transfer calculations. 
3.7.2.1 Dependence of local integral optical properties on 
size and composition 
It is convenient to subdivide the aerosol properties by 
region, size class and by chemical species, insofar as that 
is possible, and also to compare calculated and measured 
properties. While very substantial amounts of data exist, 
primarily at polluted or industrial-region surface locations, 
there have been almost no efforts to measure 
simultaneously all of the quantities. Thus, it is not yet 
possible to examine the data sets for internal consistency. 
Also, because of a lack of standardisation, for example, of 
selection of particle-size ranges, it is difficult to compare 
data sets. 
White (1990) determined the contributions of individual 
compounds to a 
and a 
in various urban and non-urban 
E 
o 
I 
1 
w 
•& 
o 
s 
6 -
-
-
-
1 
1 1 1 I I M | 
1 1 
m =1.5 -0.02/ 
Absorption // 
i 
i i i j-rrtT 
i 
i 
1 1 l l l l | 
1 1 1 1 llll| 
/V»^ Extinction 
/ / n \ 
Scattering 
i 
1 
i 
i i ™« 
i 
i i 
-
-
-
2 -
0.01 
0.1 
1.0 
10 
Particle diameter (|j.m) 
50 
Figure 3.7: Aerosol volume size distribution and the calculated 
extinction, scattering and absorption cross sections per unit 
aerosol volume at a wavelength of 500 hm, calculated by Covert 
ct al. (1980), using Mie theory and an assumed refractive index 
of m = 1.5 - 0.02i. Note that the major contribution to aerosol 
scattering is not associated with the part of the size distribution 
contributing most to the aerosol mass loading. 
locations in the USA. Table 3.4 summarises the 
contributions of scattering by fine and coarse particles and 
absorption by particles to the aerosol component of the 
extinction coefficient. While relative humidity (RH) was 
not controlled or measured in those measurements, it is 
likely that a temperature increase of a few degrees 
occurred during the measurement, yielding RH values in 
the instruments that were less than ambient. Note that the 
single scattering albedo values are in the range 0.8 to 0.95 
in industrialised regions; the small amount of absorption is 
mainly attributed to soot. Table 3.4 generally supports the 
notion that scattering by fine particles dominates the 
aerosol contribution to extinction. It further suggests that 
scattering dominates over absorption, especially when the 
increased scattering at ambient RH is taken into account, 
and that the main effect of the combined aerosol is 
therefore cooling. 
As expected, the dominant chemical species in the 
industrialised eastern USA is sulphate which, along with 
"organic" material, comprises about 84% of the mass when 
the sulphate compound is assumed to be (NH4)2S04. The 
residual material includes fine soil dust, water, nitrates and 
other, unidentified, materials. Caution is needed in 
interpreting these data because the chemical analyses were 
not often complete. In the western USA, SO \~ accounts for 
a smaller fraction (about 35%) and organics and soil dust 
are relatively more important. White (1990) also used data 
from simultaneous observations of sulphur in a multiple 
regression analysis against measured light scattering at low 
relative humidity which gave a squared correlation 
coefficient of 0.948. This clearly implicates sulphates and 
organics as consistently dominant contributors to a , at 
least over the USA. 
While the similarity of chemical inputs and physical 
processes in other locations (e.g., Europe and Asia) and the 
high correlation coefficient suggest that these USA data 
may be applicable for models over the globe, there are 
currently few data from outside the USA against which to 
verify this idea. It is important to discover if source factors 
are sufficiently different in other locations or aloft to cause 
significant departures from White's (1990) results. Recent 
results reported by Nyeki et al. (1994) tend to support the 
wider application of White's results. 
Table 3.5 briefly summarises the present estimates of 
o , hemispheric backscatter fraction and fractional 
increase of a , due to hygroscopic growth to 80% RH. 
/(RH 80). 
3.7.3 Column Properties 
Integration of the local aerosol properties over altituii 
yields the key column properties used in radiative transl. 
models. The most important of these properties is tl 
aerosol optical depth. Global mean optical depth (Tah; 

Aerosols 
147 
Table 3.4: Percentage contributions to aerosol extinction coefficient in rural areas of the Eastern and Western USA, 
from White (1990). 
Locale 
asp(fine) 
% 
91 
69 
asp (coarse) 
% 
3 
17 
°aP 
ae 
% 
6 
14 
Single scattering 
albedo of fine 
particles (RH < 40%) 
0.94 
0.86 
Eastern USA 
Western USA 
Notes: a 
Fine/coarse separation at diameter - 2.5 fan. 
b 
RH low, but not measured, 
c 
All data corrected to K <= 525 nm. 
Table 3.5: Observed integral optical properties of anthropogenic sulphate, organic carbon and soot and for the fine 
aerosol mass at 525 nm (adapted from Penner et al., 1994). See Section 3.7 for a definition of the terms used. 
Integral optical property 
so: 
-ORG 
Soot 
Fine aerosol mass 
c^mV 1 
R 
flm = 80%) 
5 (3.6-7) 
0 
0.15(0.12-0.19) 
1.7 (1.4 - 4.0) 
-
5 (3.0-7) 
0 
0.15(0.11-0.2) 
1.7(1.4-4.0) 
-
3 
10 (8-12) 
-
(0-1.7) 
-
3 (2-4) 
- (0 - 10) 
0.15(0.11 -0.2) 
1.7(0-4.0) 
1 -2 
Note: The indicated range (in brackets) represents the approximate standard deviation of the available data. For sulphate (SO^~), 
and organic carbon, C0RG, a is the effective scattering efficiency given as the cross section per unit mass of the indicated species. 
This is higher than the ratio of scattering to fine aerosol mass (last column), because gas-to-particle conversion of anthropogenic 
S02 combines sulphur with oxygen, hydrogen and/or ammonia to form an acidic and hygroscopic aerosol. The radiative effect of 
adding particulate sulphate mass to the atmosphere thus is a combination of scattering by the sulphate mass itself plus the additional 
mass of ammonia and/or water. Hegg el al. (1993) suggest that a value of 3 m2 g"1 is appropriate for sulphate alone, based on 
assumptions that all submicron mass scatters with equal efficiency and that the sulphate ionic mass concentration is independent of 
the mass of other aerosol substances. 
3.6) can be estimated using simple geochemical mass 
balances (e.g., Andreae, 1995). The largest contributions to 
the optical depth from natural sources are soil dust, 
sulphates and organic matter from volatile organic 
compounds. These values are calculated using best 
estimates in Table 3.1, the uncertainty associated with each 
parameter reflects the spread of fluxes shown in Table 3.1. 
Anthropogenic sulphate and material from biomass 
burning make similar contributions to the optical depth 
even though the source strengths and burdens are smaller 
than those of the natural aerosol. 
Large amounts of data exist on measured optical depths, 
some of which (having been largely acquired by the use of 
hand-held sun photometers) is of unknown or dubious 
quality. Figure 3.8, showing atmospheric optical depths 
over the USA, derived from turbidity measurements, 
clearly demonstrates the region of high anthropogenic 
aerosol content. Such observations can also show the 
impact of emission control measures at specific locations 
(Kaminski and Winkler, 1988). Satellite observation can 
provide information on the global distribution of upwelling 
radiation but the derivation of aerosol optical depth from 
such information is complex and requires many, unproven, 
assumptions. 
3.8 Causes of Uncertainty in Calculating Direct Forcing 
by Aerosols 
3.8.1 Local vs. Regional vs. Global Models and Effects 
Prior to about 1990, several disparate views prevailed as to 
the direct radiative effects of aerosol. Anthropogenic 
physical effects were viewed as local perturbations on a 
global background aerosol. Descriptions of the latter were 
given as temporally static (see for example Toon and 
Pollack, 1976; Coakley el ai, 1983). On the other hand, 
global chemical models, e.g., of the sulphur cycle, that 
included the secular trend of anthropogenic aerosol, did 
produce useful simulations of acidic precipitation but 
failed to include a coupling to aerosol physics or physical 
properties (see e.g., Rodhe and Isaksen, 1980). One effort 

/4& 
Aerosols 
Table 3.6: Source strength, atmospheric burden and optical depth at 550 nm wavelength due to the various types of 
aerosols hydrated at 70 - 80% RH (after Andreae, 1994). 
Source 
Natural 
Primary 
Soil dust (mineral aerosol) 
Sea salt 
Volcanic dust 
Biological debris 
Secondary 
Sulphates from biogenic gases 
Sulphates from volcanic S0 2 
Organic matter from biogenic NMHC1 
Nitrates from NOx 
Total natural 
Anthropogenic 
Primary 
Industrial dust etc. 
Black carbon (soot and charcoal) 
Secondary 
Sulphates from S0 2 
Biomass burning (w/o black carbon) 
Nitrates from NOx 
Organic from anthropogenic NMHC1 
Total anthropogenic 
TOTAL 
Anthropogenic fraction 
Emissions 
Tg/yr 
1500 
1300 
33 
50 
90 
12 
55 
22 
3060 
100 
20 
140 
80 
36 
10 
390 
3450 
11% 
Lifetime 
days 
4 
1 
4 
4 
5 
5 
7 
4 
4 
6 
5 
8 
4 
7 
Column burden 
mg/m2 
32.2 
7.0 
0.7 
1.1 
2.4 
0.3 
2.1 
0.5 
46 
2.1 
0.6 
3.8 
3.4 
0.8 
0.4 
11.1 
57 
19% 
Mass extinction 
efficiency m2/g 
0.7 
0.4 
2.0 
2.0 
5.1 
5.1 
5.1 
2.0 
2.0 
10.0 
7.1 
8.0 
2.0 
8.0 
Optical depth 
0.023 
0.003 
0.001 
0.002 
0.014 
0.011 
0.001 
0.055 
0.004 
0.006 
0.019 
0.017 
0.002 
0.002 
0.050 
0.105 
48% 
NMHC: Non-methane hydrocarbons 
did include a rudimentary regional scale chemical model 
along with regional scale calculation of loss of solar 
irradiance (Ball and Robinson, 1982). Global two-
dimensional models treating aerosol formation from 
sulphate of anthropogenic origin, as well as the 
modification of cloud properties (Rodhe and Isaksen, 
1980: Rehkopf, 1984) showed a strong anthropogenic 
impact on fine particles. 
The introduction around 1990 of a three-dimensional 
global model of the sulphur cycle (Zimmermann, 1987; 
Langner and Rodhe, 1991) along with great improvements 
in the quantification of both natural and anthropogenic 
gaseous sulphate aerosol precursors made it possible to 
develop rudimentary models that coupled the geographical 
and altitudinal chemical fields to local, column, 
hemispheric and global radiative effects. For estimation of 
the direct forcing, the key variable for achieving this 
coupling is the specific scattering efficiency, a(S05") 
Table 3.5 shows values of the key parameters for different 
aerosol species and for all fine particles. 
3.8.2 Coupled Chemical/Radiative Transfer Models 
A hierarchy of models has evolved recently which includes 
the necessary coupling of chemical processes and 
properties with radiative effects. The simplest of these 
serves to illustrate and define the controlling variables. 
Local chemical concentrations and integral properties arc 
related to column integral properties over altitude, and then 
to the column burden of fine-particle S04" (e.g., derived 
from a chemical model, or integrated from a measured 
vertical profile of SO4 ). The scattering coefficient is 
treated similarly. In the first crude estimates (Charlson a 
al., 1990), the Northern Hemisphere mean burden of 
anthropogenic SO4 was estimated to be 6.6 x 10° g m";: 
from measured values of a(SOf) and/(RH), the Northern 
Hemisphere mean optical depth due to anthropogenic SO 
(°SOf) was estimated to be 0.066. 
To connect this optical depth estimate to radiativ 
forcing, a simple radiative transfer model was usee 
deliberately disregarding the influence of aerosol in clow 

Aerosols 
149 
Figure 3.8: Annual average values of atmospheric optical depth 
over the USA. Redrawn from Flowers et al. (1969) and showing 
a pronounced maximum in the industrialised regions. 
areas. For the simplest case, the loss of solar irradiance 
from the ground, L, becomes 
6-(l-/t,,)R(26sor)~0.8% 
(3.4) 
where Ac is the global average fractional cloud cover and 
R «• 0.15 is the measured fraction of o , in the backward 
hemisphere. The factor of two accounts for the average of 
the secant of zenith angle over the sunlit hemisphere. Thus, 
if solar irradiance incident upon the aerosol layer is 200 
Wm"2, a hypothetical loss to space of 1.6 Wm~2 would 
exist (Charlson et al, 1990). This value is rather high for a 
variety of reasons and values based on more detailed 
model calculations are described in Chapter 4. 
Much more sophisticated models have evolved; 
however, all of them depend on a geochemical mass 
balance model for the column burden of sulphate, SsOf 
Some of the models still disregard microphysical 
considerations and base the values of a, R and Q on 
measurements (Charlson et al., 1991). Others take a 
different approach and calculate the optical properties from 
assumed size distributions (Kiehl and Briegleb, 1993). The 
two approaches give significant differences in the value for 
the direct forcing. All of these models fail to account for 
correlations that influence the forcing, such as that 
between BgQ2- and cloud cover. Current, more 
sophisticated models, some of which are still in the 
developmental stage, can address such correlations with 
varying degrees of realism. 
3.8.3 Causes of Uncertainty in Calculating the Direct 
Forcing by Anthropogenic Aerosol 
It is necessary to recognise that besides the problem of 
correlations among controlling variables, there are both 
chemical and physical factors that contribute uncertainty to 
the estimates of forcing by anthropogenic aerosol. Again, 
using anthropogenic sulphate as an example (because it is 
better understood than other types of aerosol) the 
geographically averaged mean forcing can be used to 
identify the key variables (Charlson et al.. 1992) using a 
combination of a simple radiative transfer equation and a 
chemical box-model describing material balance: 
Af^ . -0.5/y:(l-/l,.)( l-/y2/)«(so,)/(RW) 
x Oso/soj rsoj/4 
(3.5) 
AFR 
is the areal mean short-wave radiative forcing due 
to the aerosol in Wm"2. 
-JFJ. 
is the global mean top of the atmosphere radiative 
flux in Wm"2. 
Ac 
is the fractional cloud cover. 
T 
is the fraction of incident light transmitted by the 
atmosphere above the aerosol. 
Rs 
is the albedo of the underlying surface. 
P 
is the upward fraction of the radiation scattered by 
the aerosol, calculated from an aerosol model 
or measured values of hemispheric backscatter 
ratio, R. 
a(so-,") ' s l n c scattering efficiency of fine-particle sulphate 
at a reference low (e.g., 30%) relative humidity, 
m2g'. 
f(RH) 
accounts for the relative increase in scattering due 
to relative humidity above the reference value. 
Qso 
is the source strength of anthropogenic SO, in 
gs/yr-
yso> 
is the fractional yield of emitted SO-, that reacts to 
produce sulphate aerosol. 
TSO=- 
is the sulphate lifetime in the atmosphere in yrs. 
A 
is the area of the geographical region under 
consideration in nr. 
This equation represents the simplest way of estimating 
uncertainty; it neglects, for example, direct radiative 
forcing in regions containing cloud. Table 3.7 lists the 
uncertainties in quantities used in the example rudimentary 
model calculations (the uncertainty factor is used here to 
define the upper and lower limits of the range by 
multiplication/division of the most probable value). For 
anthropogenic SO f the total resultant uncertainty factor is 
estimated to be 2.2, not including consideration of spatial 
or temporal correlations. Thus the overall uncertainty is as 
yet not fully defined. The uncertainty factor for aerosol 
from biomass burning has been estimated by Penner et al. 
(1994), using similar techniques, as 2.7. 
In contrast to greenhouse gases, atmospheric aerosol 
particles are relatively short-lived in the atmosphere. This 
property, together with the highly 
non-uniform 
geographical distribution of sources, results in a highly 
non-uniform geographical distribution of anthropogenic 
aerosols, which results in very different geographical 
patterns of radiative forcing by aerosols and greenhouse 
gases (see Chapter 4). Likewise, the aerosol radiative 

150 
Aerosols 
Table 3.7: Evaluation of uncertainties of global mean direct radiative forcing due to anthropogenic sulphate. 
Quantity 
Uncertainty factor 
1-& 
1.1 
T 
1.15 
1-*, 
1.05 
R 
1.3 
«(so3) 
1.4 
# " ) 
1.2 
Osoz 
1.15 
)sor 
1.5 
tscf 
1.4 
AFR 
2.2 
Note: Total uncertainty factor evaluated as f, = exp [ 2(log f;)2 ]1/2 = 2.2. 
forcing is largely a short-wave forcing dependent on 
sunlight and therefore exhibits different diurnal and 
seasonal patterns from long-wave greenhouse gas forcing. 
The pattern is described in more detail in Chapter 4 and 
raises the question as to whether global mean forcing 
which has proved useful when comparing the radiative 
forcing of different greenhouse gases is equally useful in 
describing the direct forcing due to anthropogenic aerosol. 
3.9 Influence of Anthropogenic Aerosol on Clouds 
(Indirect Effect) 
In addition to the direct aerosol radiative forcing effect, 
aerosol particles modify the properties of clouds which are 
known to be a significant component in the climate system 
and hence there exists a potential indirect aerosol effect. 
While the physical basis for such an effect is well 
established, attempts to quantify the effect are at present 
limited. It is demonstrated in this section that: 
• 
The change in cloud droplet concentration is related 
to aerosol particle concentration and mass in a non-
linear manner which is also dependent on cloud type 
and the chemical composition and age of the aerosol. 
• 
Natural aerosol sources have a substantial impact on 
clouds and some of these sources are sensitive to 
climate, so allowing a climate feedback. 
The sensitivity of ice clouds to aerosol has not been 
quantified. 
• 
The impact of aerosol on cloud cover and lifetime 
has been demonstrated although the climatic impact 
cannot be assessed at present. 
3.9.1 Cloud Formation 
In clouds, condensation occurs on particles which act as 
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). The critical 
supersaturation at which a particle will act as a nucleus for 
drop formation depends on the size and chemical 
composition of the particle. As the air is cooled and the 
supersaturation increases, more nuclei are activated until 
there are sufficient droplets to achieve a balance between 
water which is condensed, and that made available by 
cooling. Subsequent cooling then results in increased 
droplet sizes, although the concentration remains more or 
less constant. Since the peak supersaturation in clouds 
seldom exceeds 0.05%, at which only aerosol particles 
with dry diameters larger than around 0.1 jxm become 
activated, it is the concentration of aerosol particles larger 
than this radius that is important for the determination of 
the cloud microphysical properties. 
The fact that increasing aerosol particle concentrations 
can affect the microphysical and radiative properties of 
clouds is seen by the formation of ship tracks in extensive 
sheets of layer cloud (e.g., Radke et al, 1989, King et al., 
1993). The increased aerosol loadings due to the passage 
of the ship give rise to increases in the droplet 
concentration and to reduced droplet sizes, as seen in 
Figure 3.9. The relation between droplet concentration and 
aerosol concentration is complex, since it depends on the 
updrafts in the clouds, the degree of mixing between the 
cloud and its environment and the ability of the aerosol 
particles to act as CCN (for a more complete review, see 
Fouquart and Isaka, 1992). Initial cloud droplet 
concentration is determined by the CCN contained in the 
air prior to cloud formation and by the vertical velocity of 
the air; this process is well understood and confirmed by 
observations (Hudson and Rogers, 1986; Leaitch et al., 
1986). Further evolution of cloud droplet spectra depends 
on mixing and entrainment processes in the cloud layer. 
Observations (Austin et al., 1985; Cooper, 1989; 
Brenguier,1990) show that some CCN contained in the 
entrained air can become activated, leading to complex 
droplet spectra. Since cloud reflectance is most sensitive to 
the droplet population near cloud top, mixing processes 
considerably degrade the ability of simple models to 
predict the influence of changes in aerosol concentration or 
cloud optical properties. 
As a result of many observational studies (e.g., Leaitch 
et al., 1986; Leaitch and Isaac, 1994; Martin et al., 1994 
and Raga and Jonas, 1993), empirical relationships have 
been derived between droplet concentration (and hence 
size) and aerosol number concentration below cloud base. 
These results show a correlation between aerosol particle 
number concentration and the cloud droplet concentration. 
although the form of the relationship is dependent on cloud 
type. Typically, an order of magnitude increase in the 
aerosol number concentration (in the diameter range 0.! -
3.0 jam) results in a factor of 2 to 5 increase in drop i 

Aerosols 
151 
150 
40 
60 
Distance (km) 
Figure 3.9: Observations of the changes in microphysical 
properties of stratocumulus clouds on a level flight through cloud 
in which ship tracks are present (from Radke et ai, 1989). The 
ship tracks contain high aerosol particle and cloud droplet 
concentrations leading to increased cloud water content. 
concentration; it implies a decrease in the droplet radius at 
cloud top of 1.0 - 2.0/mi, depending on cloud thickness. 
3.9.2 Cloud Concentration 
Nuclei (CCN) Population 
and 
Aerosol 
Sources 
Aerosol particles which have the potential to act as CCN 
are produced by a variety of processes, some of which are 
subject to anthropogenic influence. The relation between 
the CCN activity spectrum and the aerosol mass loading is 
complex since, as aerosol ages, more of the mass resides in 
particles which can act as CCN at low supersaturations. 
3.9.2.1 Sulphates and Nitrates 
Although the oxidation of precursor gases is a minor 
source of total aerosol mass, the resulting particles can be 
very effective as CCN because they are hygroscopic and 
their small size enables them to be transported up to cloud 
height in large numbers. This is particularly the case for 
aerosols derived from S 0 2 and NOx emissions or from 
natural DMS emissions. Positive correlations between 
CCN and sulphate have been observed: the scatter in the 
data however shows that other factors influence this 
relationship (Nguyen et al., 1983). 
It may be inferred from the measurements of Hudson 
(1991) that growth of CCN is rapid in the case of 
anthropogenic CCN, but slower for natural CCN. Model 
calculations show that the time needed to transform DMS 
into CCN active at 0.2-0.3% supersaturation can be 1-7 
days, depending on the oxidation mechanism assumed (Lin 
and Chameides, 1993; Raes, 1993). This difference is 
important since the time would be either smaller or larger 
than the time-scales of synoptic meteorological processes. 
Charlson et al. (1987) postulated a potential feedback 
mechanism since the DMS source might be temperature or 
radiation sensitive. Certain links of this mechanism have 
received observational support (Ayers and Gras, 1991; 
Hegg et al., 1991) and support from calculations (Raes, 
1993) showing a positive correlation between CCN and 
DMS emissions. Satellite observations by Durkee et al. 
(1991) show plumes of aerosol extending downwind from 
urban pollution sources and also from regions which 
would be expected to act as source regions for DMS. The 
analysis highlighted aerosol smaller than about 0.5 fim; if 
such aerosol is composed of sulphate particles, it would be 
expected that these plumes would be regions of high CCN 
concentration. The multi-year observational programme at 
Cape Grim has yielded a data set showing clear seasonal 
correlations between DMS, sub-micrometer sulphate 
aerosol, CCN and cloud optical depth (Ayers et al., 1991, 
Ayers and Gras, 1991, Boers et al., 1994). Nitrates 
produced by gaseous reactions are highly soluble in water 
and hence would be expected also to act as good CCN. 

152 
Aerosols 
CCN may also be enhanced by the presence of gas phase 
nitric acid in heavily polluted air (Kulmala et al., 1993). 
3.9.2.2 Organics 
The type of organic aerosols produced by combustion are 
related to the composition of the fuel consumed. 
Hydrophilic properties of the combustion aerosol depend 
on the relative oxygen content of the fuel, which may be 
hydrogen rich fossil fuel or oxygen enriched terrestrial 
biofuels including fossil sources. Smoke particles 
produced from combustion of woody materials contain 
polar organic compounds (Simoneit et al., 1993) and are 
effective CCN. Hudson et al. (1991) show that while most 
of the particles in smoke produced by burning vegetation 
act as CCN, only 1-2% of the particles produced by 
burning jet fuel were active under identical conditions. 
This probably is a result of the former containing soluble 
material which improves the effectiveness of the particle to 
act as a CCN. Novakov and Penner (1993) have shown 
that organic condensates, some from biomass burning, can 
also play a role in the CCN budget, and may be at least as 
important as sulphate aerosols in some regions; Rogers et 
al. (1991) also suggest that biomass burning is a major 
source of CCN. 
J.P.2J Soof 
Soot produced by biomass burning will contain 
hydrophobic and hydrophilic components and its ability to 
form CCN will depend on the fuel consumed. However, 
the incorporation of soot into cloud droplets may reduce 
the albedo (Kaufman and Nakajima, 1993) owing to its 
strong absorbing properties although the small number of 
measurements made to date do not indicate a significant 
contribution by soot to short-wave absorption by clouds 
(Heintzenberg, 1988; Twohy et al., 1989; Charlson and 
Heintzenberg, 1995). 
3.9.2.4 Mineral Dust 
Mineral dust aerosol is usually formed in the coarse mode 
and such particles are generally insoluble. They are 
therefore less effective as CCN than many of the soluble 
particles. However, mixed particles formed from mineral 
dust with a soluble coating resulting from gas-particle 
conversion processes may be very effective as CCN. At 
the present time the importance of such particles as CCN is 
not known. 
3.9.2.5 Sea Salt 
Aerosol particles, composed largely of sodium chloride, 
are produced by the evaporation of droplets formed at the 
surface by bubble bursting or during the formation of spray 
droplets under strong wind conditions. Latham and Smith 
(1990) suggest that, due to the dependence of the activity 
spectrum of the sea salt aerosol on the wind speed, a 
potential climate feedback exists, although the relative 
importance of sea salt aerosol and sulphate from DMS in 
the marine atmosphere has not been fully quantified. 
3.9.3 Cloud Radiative Properties 
The effect of clouds on radiative transfer is dependent on 
the distribution of water between liquid and ice as well as 
on the cloud particle size distribution and shape. It is 
through its effect on these parameters that aerosol may 
indirectly influence radiative transfer. 
3.9.3.1 Water Clouds 
For visible wavelengths, scattering dominates the radiative 
transfer and, for the same water content, an increase in 
droplet concentration and reduction in the mean droplet 
size leads to an increased reflectivity, as shown in Figure 
3.10. For a cloud layer with a typical thickness of 100-200 
m, the change from a maritime to a continental droplet 
population will increase the reflectivity from less than 60% 
to more than 70%. Charlson et al. (1987) suggested that a 
30% increase in the droplet concentration in marine 
stratocumulus could increase the planetary solar albedo by 
around 0.02. For such clouds having optical thicknesses in 
the range 5 to 50, characteristic of much low level stratus 
and stratocumulus cloud, the changes in albedo are only 
weakly dependent on cloud optical thickness and the solar 
zenith angle (Fouquart et al., 1990). 
At infrared wavelengths, the main effect of water cloud 
is to absorb and emit radiation, scattering is generally 
unimportant. Since absorption and emission are dependent 
on the liquid water content and only weakly on the droplet 
size distribution, at least for cloud droplet radii less than 
about 10 jum, the effects of changes in the spectrum due to 
changes in CCN are small, except where the changes lead 
to an increase in cloud water content or lifetime. However. 
Kaufman and Nakajima (1993) have demonstrated that the 
interaction of aerosols from biomass burning with clouds 
may result in a large increase in absorption due to the 
presence of particles containing carbon. 
3.9.3.2 Ice Clouds 
As the formation of water clouds depends on the presence 
of CCN, so the formation of ice clouds often depends on 
the presence of particles which act as ice nuclei. In the 
absence of such nuclei, clouds would exist in the form <>; 
supercooled water at temperatures warmer than about 
-40°C. The presence of ice significantly modifies ti: 

Aerosols 
1 
0.8 
fo.6 
1 
ffl0.4 -
DC 
0.2 1-
50 m 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
Drop cooceotratioo (cm-3) 
Figure 3.10: Calculated reflectance of horizontally uniform 
cloud layers of thickness 500 and 50 m, each with a water content 
of 1 g m"3, as a function of assumed droplet concentration (from 
Bohren, 1987). 
precipitation growth processes, often leading to more rapid 
growth of large particles. 
Atmospheric aerosol particles may also be important in 
determining the radiative properties of cirrus. Unlike low 
level water clouds, the temperature difference between ice 
clouds and the surface is large, so they have a significant 
greenhouse effect which is sensitive to ice crystal 
concentration. The presence of small crystals, observed by 
Wielicki et al. (1990), and others, will also be sensitive to 
ice nucleus concentration; such particles have a significant 
effect on the albedo of cirrus. Quantification of these 
effects awaits further research. 
Sassen et al. (1989) have reported the occurrence of 
very thin "sub-visible" cirrus with optical thicknesses less 
than 0.03 which have a measurable effect on the long-
wave radiation budget. Other observations have also 
indicated that such clouds are composed of small ice 
particles. The occurrence and properties of such clouds 
will be particularly sensitive to aerosol in the upper 
troposphere resulting from volcanic eruptions as well as 
tropospheric sources such as aircraft emissions. 
3.9.4 The Indirect Effect of Anthropogenic CCN on 
Cloud Albedo 
The global radiative forcing due to the effect of 
anthropogenic aerosols on cloud albedo has not yet been 
calculated in a rigorous way. Estimates are based on the 
notion that anthropogenic emissions lead to an increase in 
the aerosol number concentration, and eventually to an 
increase in cloud droplet number concentrations. For a 
constant liquid water content, an increase in cloud droplets 
reduces their mean radius and results in an increase of the 
cloud albedo (Twomey, 1977). Grassl (1988) suggested 
that this could be more important than the direct aerosol 
153 
effect. This phenomenon is readily demonstrated by the 
impact of ship emissions on the reflectivity of overlying 
clouds (see Figure 3.9 and Coakley ct al., 1987). Applying 
this to marine stratiform clouds, which cover 25% of the 
Earth, Charlson et al. (1987) calculated that an increase of 
30% in the droplet population would yield a global forcing 
of about -1.7 Wm"2. Similar estimates have been obtained 
from sensitivity studies with general circulation models 
(Slingo, 1990). A study by Han et al. (1994), based on 
satellite data, showed that mean cloud droplet radii in the 
Northern Hemisphere are 0.8 //m smaller over land and 0.4 
fim smaller over the ocean than in the Southern 
Hemisphere. If these differences were due only to excess 
anthropogenic aerosols, and applying this again to marine 
stratiform clouds, it would correspond to an increase in the 
number concentration of around 15% and a forcing of -0.8 
Wm"2 in the Northern Hemisphere. Calculations by Jones 
et al. (1994) using a general circulation model suggest that 
the effect of anthropogenic aerosol is to reduce the 
effective droplet radius in low level clouds in the Northern 
Hemisphere by more than 2 fim compared with the 
Southern Hemisphere, and over continental regions by 
more than 1 fim compared with the Northern Hemisphere 
ocean regions. 
The estimates above suggest that the climate system 
could react significantly to changes in global CCN or 
cloud droplet number concentrations of several tens of 
percent. There is abundant evidence that industrial 
emissions and biomass burning increase CCN and cloud 
droplet concentrations by up to several orders of 
magnitude (Leaitch et al., 1986, Pucschel et al., 1986, 
Kaufmann and Nakajima, 1993), suggesting that the 
indirect effect might indeed be very important. However, 
questions remain concerning the geographical extent of 
these aerosol increases and how they might eventually 
contribute to the global burden. Although it is possible to 
calculate the change in aerosol mass during long-range 
transport, it is still difficult to do the same for the aerosol 
and CCN number concentration; coagulation and 
coalescence in clouds will reduce the aerosol number 
concentration but growth within cloud increases the 
number of CCN at lower supersaturations for subsequent 
clouds. The lifetime of CCN number concentration is 
therefore expected to be shorter than that of the associated 
aerosol mass, which would limit the geographical extent of 
the anthropogenic indirect effect. 
The different dynamics of aerosol mass and aerosol 
number concentration is the main reason why both the 
direct and indirect effect cannot be related in a linear way 
to the source strength of pollutants. For a constant aerosol 
mass, changes in the size distribution of the aerosol can 
still result in changes in the optical and activation 
properties of the aerosol. This dependence on the size 
distribution is critical when determining the number of 

154 
Aerosols 
CCN, since a single aerosol particle will either be activated 
or not. The dependence is somewhat less critical when 
determining the scattering coefficient since a single 
particle always scatters a range of wavelengths. Dealing 
with aerosol dynamics in global circulation models is one 
of the major difficulties which prevents an ab initio 
calculation of the radiative forcing by aerosols and 
involves the use of incomplete and unverified physical 
models. 
The measurements reveal that the CCN-sulphate mass 
relationship is sub-linear, so that a doubling in the sulphate 
mass does not double the population of CCN. Two factors 
that may reduce the indirect effect as the aerosol 
concentration is increased are: 
i) 
the availability of water vapour which, at high CCN 
concentrations, limits the fraction of CCN that is 
activated to cloud droplets, 
ii) 
the saturation in the cloud reflectivity for increasing 
cloud droplet concentrations (see Figure 3.10). 
The indirect effect is expected to be largest for 
emissions into unpolluted air (Twomey, 1991) while the 
direct effect is expected to keep increasing with increased 
emissions. 
3.9.5 Precipitation Formation and Cloud Lifetime 
The growth of cloud particles to form precipitation-sized 
particles is a complex and poorly quantified process. The 
speed of growth depends on the size spectrum of the cloud 
drops and is slower if the cloud is composed of large 
numbers of relatively small droplets. Consistent with this, 
precipitation is often observed to fall from low level 
maritime clouds with a water content of less than 0.1 g m"3, 
whereas precipitation is seldom observed from continental 
clouds with water contents below 0.3 g m"3 (e.g., Hobbs 
and Rangno, 1985). 
The role of ice nuclei in the precipitation process is even 
less clear than that of CCN. Although there is evidence 
that the initiation of the ice phase depends on the presence 
of such particles (Vali, 1985), secondary processes are also 
important. These secondary processes are sensitive to the 
drop size distribution (Mossop, 1978) and hence 
potentially sensitive to CCN concentrations. Albrecht 
(1989) and Liou and Ou (1989) pointed out that since 
increasing aerosol concentration would lead to reduced 
droplet sizes, it would also lead, if the liquid water content 
remained constant, to reduced precipitation efficiency and 
increased cloud lifetime. It is of note that the ship track 
observations of Radkc et al. (1989) show drizzle formation 
is inhibited by the presence of high concentrations of 
aerosol. Fravalo et al. (1981) and Turton and Nicholls 
(1987) showed that the diurnal variation of marine 
stratocumulus was dependent on the liquid water content 
and that changes in water content could have a significant 
effect on the diurnal variation of the solar radiation 
reaching the surface. 
Another possibility is that surface-active materials (e.g., 
polar organic molecules) might change the evaporation 
rates of droplets, thereby changing the longevity of 
droplets themselves. This presumably could lead to 
changes in the lifetime of clouds and thus the cloud cover. 
The effects of increases in aerosol concentration on 
cloud lifetime are not confined to water clouds. Mitchell 
and Carter (1993) have calculated the effect of changes in 
the CCN population on the microphysical development of 
mixed phase clouds. It was shown that, in a non-steady 
state situation, an increase in the concentration of CCN 
typical of those observed in polluted areas could reduce the 
snowfall rate by almost 25%. Under steady state 
conditions, the precipitation rate must balance the 
condensation rate, but an increase in CCN resulted in a 
50% increase in the cloud liquid water content. The 
climatic impact of increased particle concentration and 
increased lifetime of high level cirrus clouds could be of 
opposite sign to similar changes in low-level clouds. 
Existing measurements of global cloud properties do not 
have sufficient accuracy to determine long-term change: 
thus the global significance of aerosol effects on clouds 
has been conjectural. It has been shown however that 
widespread observations of a reduction in the diurnal cycle 
of surface air temperature over land (Karl et al., 1993) 
implies an increase in low level cloud cover since 1950. 
largely confined to land areas (Hansen et al, 1994) which 
agrees with observations (Henderson-Sellars, 1992). 
Although the observations and their analysis do not 
identify a specific cause for the change, the restriction of 
cloud cover changes to land areas suggests that it may he 
related to increased anthropogenic aerosol concentrations. 
3.10 Future Trends 
3.10.1 Industrialisation 
Table 3.1 shows that approximately 10% of the mass of the 
aerosol entering the atmosphere is of anthropogenic origin 
and that much of this is due to industrial sources, although 
changes in agricultural practice, including extensive 
biomass burning, are also significant sources. However, in 
some regions, the mass of anthropogenic aerosol 
dominates over natural aerosol. Increasing industrialisation 
could therefore lead to increases in aerosol loadings. 
although improved technology (electrostatic precipitators 
to remove solid particles and flue gas scrubbers to remo\ e 
the gases which create aerosol through gas-particle 
conversion) has the potential to reduce the strength oi 
some industrial sources. Due to the relatively short lifetime 
of aerosol particles in the atmosphere (even of tho-
injected into the stratosphere) the effects of changes i« 

Aerosols 
155 
source strengths will be seen fairly quickly. In this respect, 
the effects of aerosol are very unlike those of most 
anthropogenic greenhouse gases. 
Future changes in the radiative forcing by aerosol 
particles are most likely to result from changes in the 
industrial sulphur dioxide emissions and, to a smaller 
degree, in the pattern of biomass burning. Changes in the 
natural emissions of aerosols and aerosol precursors 
caused, for example, by changes in climate may also occur 
(see e.g., IPCC, 1990). The current trends in anthropogenic 
sulphur dioxide emissions are downwards in Europe and 
North America: between 1980 and 1990 the emissions in 
these regions decreased by 28% and 15% respectively 
(Schang et al., 1994; NAPAP, 1990). On the other hand, 
emissions in China, India and several other Asian countries 
are increasing rapidly (Foell and Green, 1990). 
World Energy Council Scenarios (WEC, 1993) (Table 
3.8) suggest that over the period 1990-2020 sulphur 
emissions will decrease by at least 50% over North 
America and Western Europe while increasing by more 
than 200% over Africa and the East Asia region. 
Schematic projections into the future of anthropogenic 
sulphur dioxide emissions have also been made by 
Galloway (1989). 
In various scenarios formulated in the 1992 IPCC report 
(IPCC, 1992) the global sulphur dioxide emissions 
associated with fossil fuel combustion range from 76 Tg 
S/yr in 1990 to 82-141 TgS/yr in 2025 and 55-232 TgS/yr 
in the year 2100. More recent estimates of sulphur 
emissions (e.g., Muller, 1992; Spiro et al., 1992) suggest a 
slightly lower figure for 1990 emissions with a best 
estimate of about 70 TgS/yr. The projected values for 2025 
in the IPCC(1992) scenarios are quite high compared with 
Table 3.8. A factor influencing the emissions is likely to be 
concern over local environmental effects such as acid 
deposition. Although these figures relate to emissions, the 
short lifetime of aerosols suggests that the changes in 
emissions will give proportionate changes in atmospheric 
aerosol burdens. 
3.10.2 Feedbacks 
There are several processes by which 
aerosol 
concentrations are related to climate, hence providing the 
potential for climate feedback effects, although no strong 
feedback 
mechanisms 
have 
been 
conclusively 
demonstrated. Of the natural sources, those of marine 
aerosol and mineral dust would he expected to depend on 
local meteorological conditions and on climate-sensitive 
agricultural practices. The strengths of natural sources of 
several of the precursor gases are also dependent on 
meteorological conditions (e.g., stability, radiative flux and 
soil moisture) as well as on the local agricultural practice, 
while the major sink, precipitation scavenging, is 
dependent on rainfall patterns. These processes provide a 
further potential feedback mechanism, although over land 
the aerosol formed by gas-particle conversion comprises a 
small fraction of the total loading. The importance of these 
feedback processes has not yet been quantified. 
Some feedback processes are also possible with 
anthropogenic aerosol sources. Significant climate change 
could result in a redistribution of power and transport 
requirements as well as the location of industrial sources of 
aerosol. 
3.11 Likely Developments 
Although the general principles of the processes by which 
Table 3.8: Present and projected annual emissions of sulphur (Ml) from World Energy Council (WEC, 1993). Present 
figures relate to 1990 while maximum and minimum projections are shown for 2020, according to different control 
scenarios. 
Region 
1990 
2020 (min) 
3.0 
5.7 
2.2 
0.9 
2.3 
4.4 
3.6 
15.1 
5.7 
42.9 
2020 (max) 
6.2 
13.5 
4.6 
2.6 
9.5 
9.6 
10.8 
26.2 
17.8 
100.8 
North America 
Latin America 
Western Europe 
Central and Eastern Europe 
CIS 
Middle East and North Africa 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
Pacific 
South Asia 
World 
12.1 
3.2 
10.4 
3.9 
12.4 
2.2 
1.9 
15.1 
3.4 
64.6 

/56 
Aerosols 
aerosols affect climate are generally well established, there 
are many uncertainties involved in quantifying the effects, 
and 
many 
difficulties 
in the development 
of 
parametrizations for use by numerical models of climate. 
The problems of characterising the anthropogenic aerosol 
content by size and chemical composition, and the spatial 
and temporal variability of aerosol properties, are crucial 
to the development of improved estimates of direct 
radiative forcing. Further work is also needed to relate the 
physical properties of different types of aerosol particle to 
their radiative properties. The major problems in the 
estimation of the indirect radiative forcing concern the 
relationship between aerosol particle concentrations and 
cloud droplet or ice crystal populations and the impact of 
microphysical changes on the optical properties of clouds 
which often have considerable spatial and temporal 
variability. Developments over the next few years will help 
to resolve some of the outstanding problems through the 
combined use of in-situ observations, 
satellite 
measurements and numerical models. 
3.11.1 Local Measurements 
It is presently possible to make local measurements, in 
clear air, of the aerosol size distribution in the size range 
10"3 to 10 fim, together with the total number of particles, 
although there are problems measuring the concentration 
of interstitial aerosol particles in clouds. It is also possible 
to measure the mean particle composition within several 
particle size ranges and the total mass of aerosol. The 
development of improved techniques for size-resolved 
chemical analysis will clarify the relation between aerosol 
size distribution and source strengths. Ground based and 
satellite remote sensing is essential to relate the detailed 
local measurements to aerosol forcing on a regional or 
global scale and many developments are likely in the 
availability and scope of such measurements over the next 
few years. 
Detailed information on the height dependence of 
aerosol backscatter, absorption coefficient and optical 
depth can only be obtained using aircraft, although most of 
the necessary instrumentation is available. Aircraft 
observations are also necessary to clarify the way in which 
aerosol optical properties vary with humidity as the 
hygroscopic elements of the particles grow. Studies are 
already planned to make detailed measurements at a 
variety of locations where the aerosols are believed to have 
different origins and characteristics. One experiment is 
currently under way over the ocean near Tasmania, where 
anthropogenic influences are small, and another will be 
undertaken in the North Atlantic, where, depending on the 
air trajectory, both polluted and relatively clean conditions 
may be encountered. Clearly, such detailed observations 
are only feasible at a limited number of sites and it will be 
necessary to support these with observations which may be 
more limited in scope but global in coverage, if the global 
impact of aerosols is to be better quantified. 
Chemical characterisation of the climatically important 
aerosol types (sulphates, organics, anthropogenic soil dust 
and soot) is necessary both to allow the development of 
quantitative connections to aerosol or aerosol-precursor 
sources and to provide critical information on which to 
base estimates of particle refractive index. It is necessary 
to utilise appropriate sampling methods that allow the size 
dependence of composition and physical properties to be 
determined and to provide standardisation and 
intercalibration 
of 
measurement 
methods. The 
development of specialised techniques for molecular 
speciation of organics should occur over the next few 
years. 
3.11.2 Ground-based and Satellite Monitoring 
Long-term monitoring of aerosol profiles, for example the 
balloon-borne measurement programme at Laramie, 
Wyoming (Hofmann, 1993) and the CN/CCN monitoring 
programme at Cape Grim, Tasmania (Gras, 1994) have 
helped to quantify the local trends in aerosol. However it is 
necessary to measure the global and regional trends in the 
aerosol characteristics if their changing impact on the 
Earth's radiation budget is to be determined. 
Long-term monitoring of the global distribution of 
aerosols in the boundary layer is being developed by the 
WMO Global Atmosphere Watch and this network should 
provide geographical and seasonal distributions of 
aerosols. Instrumentation at some of these sites will also 
provide information on aerosol optical properties and on 
CCN as well as on the chemical composition of the 
aerosols. These sites will also provide calibration and 
verification of remote sensing techniques. 
Satellite remote sensing which enables aerosol size and 
loading to be estimated, is essential if the global impact of 
aerosols is to be properly assessed. Only satellite 
monitoring can achieve the global coverage and '.he 
necessary 
spatial 
resolution 
to 
measure 
such 
inhomogeneous fields as aerosols. However, remote 
sensing of aerosol properties poses many problems. Penner 
et al. (1994) identify a number of satellite instruments 
which will be flown within the next ten years and offer the 
possibility of improved measurements of aerosol physical 
properties on the global scale. The development of 
instruments which provide polarisation information will 
enable considerable advances to be made. However, it is 
essential that such measurements be combined with 
aerosol chemical measurements for which remote sensing 
is not presently feasible. 

Aerosols 
157 
3.11.3 
Modelling 
The integration of local measurements with global fields of 
aerosol properties requires the use of aerosol models which 
can then be used to estimate the contribution of different 
aerosols to the net aerosol forcing. Such models should 
include the variety of aerosol sources and removal 
processes. Present models rely on many empirical 
relationships and pay little attention to the variety of 
aerosol types. However, the developments outlined above 
should, over the next few years, provide the observational 
support necessary for the development of improved 
models. 
References 
Albrecht, B.A., 1989: Aerosols, cloud microphysics and 
fractional cloudiness. Science, 245, 1227-1230. 
Allard, P., J. Carbonelle, D. Dajlevic, J. LeBronec, P. Morel, 
M.C. Robe, J.M. Maurenas, R. Faivre-perret, D. Martin, J.C. 
Saubroux and P. Zettwoog, 1991: Eruptive and diffusive 
emissions of C0 2 from Mount Etna. Nature, 351, 387-391. 
Andreae, M.O., 1983: Soot carbon and excess fine potassium: 
Long-range transport of combustion-derived aerosols. Science, 
220,1148-1151. 
Andreae, M.O., 1986: The ocean as a source of atmospheric 
sulphur compounds. In: The Role of Ar-Sea Exchange In 
Geochemical 
Cycling . P. Buat-Menard (ed.), Reidel, 
Dordrecht, pp331-362. 
Andreae, M.O., 1991: Biomass burning : its history, use and 
distribution and its impact on environmental quality and global 
climate. In: Global Biomass Burning: Atmospheric, Climatic 
and Biospheric Implications. J.S. Levine (ed.), MIT Press, 
pp3-21. 
Andreae, M.O., 1993: Global distribution of fires from space. 
Eos Trans. AGU 74, 129-135. 
Andreae, M.O., 1995: Climate effects of changing atmospheric 
aerosol levels. In: World Survey of Climatology, Vol. XVI 
Future Climate of the World. A. Henderson-Sellers (ed), 
Elsevier, Amsterdam. (In press.) 
Andreae, M.O., T.W. Andreae, R.J. Ferek and H. Raemdonck, 
1984: Long-range transport of soot carbon in the marine 
atmosphere. Science of the Total Environment, 36, 73-80. 
Andreae, M.O., H. Berresheim, T.W. Andreae, M.A. Kritz, T.S. 
Bates and J.T. Merrill, 1988: Vertical distribution of 
dimethylsulphide, sulphur dioxide, aerosol ions, and radon 
over the north-east Pacific Ocean. J. Atmos. Chem., 6, 149-
173. 
Austin, P.H., M.B. Baker, A.M. Blyth and J.B. Jensen, 1985: 
Small scale variability in warm continental cumulus clouds. J. 
Atmos. Sci.,42, 1233-1138 
Ayers, G.P. and J.L. Gras, 1991: Seasonal relationship between 
cloud condensation nuclei and aerosol methane sulphonate in 
marine air. Nature, 353, 834-835. 
Ayers, G.P., J.P. Ivey and R.W. Gillett, 1991: Coherence 
between aerosol cycles of dimethylsulphide, methane 
sulphonate and sulphur in marine air. Nature, 349, 404-406. 
Balkanski, Y.J., D.J. Jacob, G.M. Gardner, W.C. Graustein and 
K.K. Turekian, 1993: Transport and residence times of 
continental aerosols inferred from a global three-dimensional 
simulation of :l,lPb../. Geophys. Res.. 98. 20,573-20,586. 
Boers. R„ G.P. Ayers and J.L. Gras, 1994: Coherence between 
seasonal variation in satellite-derived cloud optical depth and 
boundary layer CCN concentrations at a mid-lalitude Northern 
Hemisphere station. Tellus, 46B, 123-131. 
Ball, R.J. and G.0. Robinson, 1982: The origin of haze in the 
Central United States and its effect on solar irradiation. ./. 
Appl. Met., 21, 171-188 
Blanchard, D C , 1983. The production, distribution, and 
bacterial enrichment of the seasalt aerosol in air-sea exchange 
of gases and particles. In: Mr-Sea Exchange Of Gases And 
Particles,. P.S. Liss and W.G.N. Slinn (eds), Reidel, Boston. 
USA, pp 407-454. 
Blanchet, J-P., 1989: Towards estimation of climatic effects due 
to arctic aerosols. Atmos. Env., 11, 2609-2625. 
Bohren, C.F., 1987: Multiple scattering of light and some of its 
observable consequences. Amer../. Phys., 55, 524-533. 
Boutron, C.F., U. Gorlach, J.-P. Candelone, M.A. Bolshov and 
R.J. Delmas, 1991: Decrease in anthropogenic lead, cadmium 
and zinc in Greenland snows since the late 1960s. Nature, 353, 
153-156. 
Braham, R.R. Jr., 1974: Cloud physics of urban weather 
modification - a preliminary report. Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 55, 
100-106. 
Brenguier, J.L., 1990: Parametrization of the condensation 
process in small-scale non-precipitating cumuli../. Atmos. Sci., 
47, 1127-1148. 
Buat-Menard, P., U. Ezat and A. Gaudichet, 1983: Size 
distribution and mineralogy of aluminosilicatc dust particles in 
tropical Pacific air and rain. In: H.R. Pruppacher, R.G. 
Semonin and W.G.N. Slinn (eds), Precipitation Scavenging, 
Dry Deposition And Resuspension; ppl 259-1269, Elsevier. 
Cachier, H., M.P. Bremond and P. Buat-Menard, 1989: 
Carbonaceous aerosols from different tropical biomass burning 
sources. Nature, 340, 371-373. 
Cambray, R.S., P.A. Cawse, J.A. Garland, J.A. B. Gibson, P. 
Johnson, G.N.J. Lewis, D. Newton, L. Salmon and BO. Wade, 
1987: Observations on radioactivity from the Chernobyl 
accident. Nuclear Energy, 26, 77-110. 
Chamberlain, A C , 1991: Radioactive Aerosols. Cambridge 
University Press, 255pp. 
Charlson, R.J., 1988: Have the concentrations of troposphcric 
aerosol particles changed? In: F.S. Rowland and IS.A. Isaksen 
(eds )The Changing Atmosphere, 
J Wiley & Sons Ltd, 
Chichester, England pp79-90.. 
Charlson, R.J. and J. Heinlzcnbcrg (eds), 1995: Aerosol forcing 
of climate (Ch. 3) Proc. Dahlem Workshop, 24-29 April, 1994. 
J. Wiley & sons. Berlin. (In press.) 
Charlson, R.J., J.E. Lovelock, M.O. Andreae and S.G. Warren, 
1987: Oceanic phytoplankton, atmospheric sulphur, cloud 
albedo and climate. Nature, 326, 655-661. 
Charlson, R.J., J. Langner and II. Rodhe, 1990: Sulphate aerosol 
and climate. Nature, 348. 22. 
Charlson, R.J., J. Langner, H. Rodhe, C.'.B. Leovy and S.G. 
Warren, 1991: Perturbation of the Northern Hemisphere 
radiative balance by backscattering from anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosols. Tellus, 43A-I3, 152-163. 

7JW 
Aerosols 
Charlson, R.J., S.E. Schwartz, J.M. Hales, R.D. Cess, J.A. 
Coakley, J.E. Hansen and D.J. Hofmann, 1992: Climate 
forcing by anthropogenic aerosols. Science, 255, 422-430. 
Church, T.M., J.M. Taramontano, D.M. Whelpdale, M.O. 
Andreae, J.N. Galloway, W.C. Keene, A.H. Knap and J. 
Tokos, 1991: Atmospheric and precipitation chemistry over the 
North Atlantic Ocean; shipboard results from April-May 1984. 
J. Geophys. Res., 96, 18,705-18,725. 
Clarke, A.D., 1989: Aerosol light absorption by soot in remote 
environments. Aerosol Sci. Tech., 10, 161-171. 
Clarke, A.D. and R.J. Charlson, 1985: Radiative properties of 
the background aerosol: absorption component of extinction. 
Science, 229, 263-265. 
Coakley, J.A. Jr., R.D. Cess and F.B. Yurevich, 1983: The effect 
of troposphcric aerosols on the Earth's radiation budget: a 
parametrization for climate models. J. Atmos. Sci., 40, 116-
138. 
Coakley, J.A., R.L. Bernstein and P.A. Durkee, 1987: Effect of 
ship-track effluents on cloud reflectivity. Science, 237, 1020-
1022. 
Cooper, W.A., 1989: Effects of variable growth histories on 
droplet size distributions, Part 1, Theory, J. Atmos. Sci., 46, 
1301-1311 
Covert, D.S., A.P. Waggoner, RE. Weiss, N.C. Ahlquist and 
R.J. Charlson, 1980: Atmospheric aerosols, humidity and 
visibility. In The Character And Origins Of Smog Aerosols. A 
Digest 
Of Results 
From 
The 
California 
Aerosol 
Characterisation 
Experiment (ACHEX), G.M.Hidy, P.K. 
Mueller, 0. Grosjean, BR. Appel and J.J. Wesolowski (eds), 
Wiley and Sons, pp559-581. 
D'Almeida, G.A., P. Koepke and E.P. Schettle, 1991: 
Atmospheric Aerosols: Global Climatology And Radiation 
Characteristics. A Deepak Publ., Hampton, VA, USA. 
Duce, R.A., 1978: Speculations on the budget of particulate and 
water phase non-methane organic carbon in the global 
troposphere. Proc.Appl.Geophys., 116, 244-273. 
Duce, R.A., PS. Liss, J.T. Merrill, E.L. Atlas, P. Buat-Menard, 
B.B. Hicks, J.M. Miller, J.M. Prospero, R. Arimoto, T.M. 
Church, W. Ellis, J.N. Galloway, L. Hansen, T.0. Jickells, 
A.H. Knap and K.H. Reinhardt, 1991: The atmospheric input 
of trace species to the world ocean. Global Biogeochemical 
Cycles, 5, 193-259. 
Dulac, F., P. Buat-Menard, U. Ezat, S. Melki and G. Bergametti, 
1989: Atmospheric imput of trace metals to the western 
Mediterranean : uncertainties in modelling dry deposition from 
cascade impactor data. Tellus, 4IB, 262-378. 
Dulac. F., D. Tanre, G. Bergametti, P. Buat-Menard, M. Desbois 
and D. Sutton, 1992: Assessment of the African dust mass over 
the western Mediterranean Sea using Meteosat data. J. 
Geophys. Res., 97, 2489-2506. 
Durkee. PA., F. Pfeil, E. Frost and R. Shema, 1991: Global 
analysis of aerosol particle characteristics. J. Atmos. Env., 25A, 
2457-2471. 
Dutton. E.G. and JR. Christy, 1992: Solar radiative forcing at 
selected locations and evidence for global lower troposphcric 
cooling following the eruptions of El Chichon and Pinatubo. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 2313-2316. 
Ellis. II f. and R.F. Pueschel, 1971: Solar radiation: absence of 
air pollution trends at Mauna Loa. Science, 172, 845-846. 
Engardt, M.and H. Rodhe, 1992: A comparison between patterns 
of temperature trends and sulphur aerosol pollution. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 20,117-120 
Erickson, D.I., J.J. Walton, S.J. Ghan and J.E. Penner, 1991: 
Three dimensional modelling of the global sulphur cycle, a 
first step. Atmos. Env., 25A, 2513-2520. 
Flowers, E.C., R.A. McCormick and K.R. Kurfis, 1969: 
Atmospheric turbidity over the United States, 1961-1966. 
JAppLMet., 8, 955-962. 
Foell,W.K. and C.W. Green, 1990: Acid Rain In Asia: An 
Economic, Energy And Emission Overview. Paper presented at 
the Second Workshop on Acid Rain in Asia, Asian Inst, of 
Technology, Bangkok, 19-22 Nov 1990. 
Fouquart, Y. and H. Isaka, 1992: Sulphur emission, CCN. 
clouds and climate: a review. Annates Geophysicae, 10, 462-
471. 
Fouquart, Y., J.C. Buriez, M. Herman and R.S. Kandel, 1990: 
The influence of clouds on radiation: a climate-modelling 
perspective. Rev. Geophys., 28, 145-166. 
Fravalo, C, Y. Fouquart and R. Rosset, 1981: The sensitivity of 
a model of low stratiform clouds to radiation. J. Atmos. Sci., 
38, 1049-1062. 
Eraser, R.S., Y.J. Kaufman and R.L. Mahoney, 1984: Satellite 
measurements of aerosol mass and transport. Atmos. Env., 18. 
2577-2584. 
Galbally, I.E. and C.R. Roy, 1978: Exhalation of nitric oxide 
from soils. Nature, 256, 217-221. 
Galloway, J.N., 1989: Atmospheric acidification: predictions for 
the future. Ambio, 18, 161-166. 
Galloway, J.N. and H. Rodhe, 1991: Regional atmospheric 
budgets of S and N: how well can they be quantified? Proc. 
Roy. Soc. Edinburgh, 97B, 61-80. 
Graedel, T.E., 1979: Turpenoids in the atmosphere. Rev. 
Geophys. Space Phys., 17, 937-947. 
Gras, J.L., 1994: CN, CCN and particle size in Southern Ocean 
air at Cape Grim. Atmos.Res. (In press.) 
Grass!, H., 1988: What are the radiative and climatic 
consequences of the changing concentration of atmospheric 
aerosol particles? In: The Changing Atmosphere 
, F.S. 
Rowland and I.S.A. Isaksen (eds), J Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
Chichester, England, pp79-90. 
Han, Q.W., W.B. Rossow and A.A. Lacis, 1994: Near-global 
survey of effective droplet radii in liquid water clouds using 
ISCCP data. J. Climate, 7, 465-497. 
'Hansen, A.D.A., R.S. Artz, A.A.P. Pszenny and R.E. Larson. 
1990: Aerosol black carbon and radon as tracers for air mass 
origin over the North Atlantic Ocean. Global Biogeochemicul 
Cycles, 4, 189-199. 
+Hansen, J.E., W. Rossow and J. Fung, 1990: The missing data 
on global climate change. Issues in Science and Technology. 
62-69. 
Hansen, J.E., M. Sato and R. Ruedy, 1994: Long-term change 
of the diurnal temperature cycle: implications a bo in 
mechanisms of global climate change. In: US Dept of Energy 
Report., G. Kukla and T. Karl (eds). 
Hegg, DA., L.R. Radke and P.V. Hobbs, 1991: Measurements u: 
Aitken nuclei and cloud condensation nuclei in the marin. 
atmosphere and their relation to the DMS-cloud-clima 
hypothesis. J.Geophys.Re.s., 96, 18727-18773. 

Aerosols 
159 
Hegg, D.A., R.J. Ferek and P.V. Hobbs, 1993: Light scattering 
and cloud condensation nucleus activity of sulphate aerosol 
measured over the Northeast Atlantic Ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 
98, 14887-14894. 
Heintzenberg, J., 1982: Size-segregated measurements of 
particulate elemental carbon and aerosol light absorption at 
remote locations. Atmos. Env., 16, 2461-2469. 
Heintzenberg, J., 1988: A processor-controlled multi-sample 
sort photometer. Aerosol Sci. Technoi, 8, 227-233. 
Heintzenberg, J., 1989: Fine particles in the global troposphere: 
a review. Tellus, 41B, 149-160. 
Helmes, L. and R. Jaenicke 1988: Long-term scries of 
atmospheric turbidity estimated from records of sunshine 
duration and cloud cover. In: Aerosols and Climate, P.V.Hobbs 
and M.P.McCormick (eds), Deepak Publ. ppl39-146. 
Henderson-Seilars, A., 1992: Continental cloudiness changes 
this century. Geo. Journal, 27.3, 255-262. 
Hildemann, L.M., G.R. Markowski and G.R. Cass, 1991: 
Chemical composition of emissions from urban sources of fine 
organic aerosol. Envir. Sci. Tech., 25, 744-759. 
Hobbs, P.V. and A.L. Rangno, 1985: Ice particle concentrations 
in clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 42, 2523-2549. 
Hobbs, P.V., L.F. Radke and S.E. Shumway, 1970: Cloud 
condensation nuclei from industrial sources and their apparent 
influence on precipitation in Washington. J. Atmos. Sci., 27, 
81-89. 
Hobbs, P.V., JR. Tuell, D.A. Hegg, L.F. Radke and M.W. 
Elgrowth, 1982: Particles and gases in the emissions from the 
1980-81 volcanic eruption of Mt. St. Helens. J. Geophys. Res., 
87,11062-11086. 
Hofmann. D.J., 1991: Aircraft sulphur emissions. Nature, 349, 
659. 
Hofmann, D.J., 1993: Twenty years of balloon borne 
tropospheric aerosol measurements at Laramie, Wyoming. J. 
Geophys. Res., 98,12753-12766. 
Hoppel, W.A., 1979: Measurements of the size distribution and 
CCN supersaturation spectrum of sub-micron aerosols over the 
ocean. J. Atmos. Sci., 36, 2006-2015. 
Hudson, J.G., 1991: Observations of anthropogenic cloud 
condensation nuclei. Atmos. Env., 25A, 2449-2455. 
Hudson, J.G. and C.F. Rogers, 1986: Relationship between 
critical supersaturation and cloud droplet size; implications for 
cloud mixing processes. J. Atmos. Sci., 43, 2341-2359. 
Hudson, J.G., J. Hallett, and C.F. Rogers, 1991: Field and 
laboratory measurements of cloud-forming properties of 
combustion aerosols. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 10847-10859. 
Huebert, B.J., G. Lee and W.L. Warren, 1990: Airborne aerosol 
inlet passing efficiency measurements. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 
16369-16381. 
Hunter, D.E., S.E. Schwartz, R. Waggoner and CM. Benkovits, 
1993: Seasonal, latitudinal and secular variations in 
temperature trend: evidence for influence of anthropogenic 
sulphate. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 2455-2458. 
Husar, R.B. and D.E. Patterson. 1987: Haze climate of the 
United States. EPA/600/S3-86/071. 
Husar, R.B., D.E. Patterson, J.M. Holloway. W.E. Wilson and 
T.G. Ellestad, 1979: Trends of Eastern US haziness since 
1948. In Proc. Fourth Symp. on Atmos. Turbulence. Diffusion 
and Air Pollution, Reno, NV, Amer. Met.Soc. pp249-256. 
Husar, R.B., J.M. Holloway and D.E. Patterson, 1981: Spatial 
and temporal pattern of eastern US haziness: a summary. 
Atmos. Env. 15, 1919-1928. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1990: 
Climate Change: the IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton. B.A. 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds). Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
Jankowiak, I. and D. Tanre, 1992: Satellite climatology of 
Saharan dust outbreaks: method and preliminary results. 
./.Climate, 5, 646-656. 
Jones, A., D.L. Roberts and A. Slingo, 1994: A climate model 
study of the indirect radiative forcing by anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosols. Nature, 370, 450-463. 
Junge, C.E., 1963: Air Chemistry and Radioactivity. Academic 
Press, London. 
Kai, K., Y. Okada, O. Uchino, I. Tahata, H. Nakamura and T. 
Takasugi, 1988: Lidar observation and numerical simulation of 
a Kosa (Asian dust) over Tsukuba, Japan, during the spring of 
1986../. Met. Soc. Japan, 66, 812-828. 
Kaminski, U., and P. Winkler, 1988: Increasing submicron 
particle mass concentration at Hamburg. II, Source discussion. 
Atmos. Env., 22, 2879-2883. 
Karl, T.R., G. Kukla, V. Razuvayev, M.G. Changery, R.G. 
Quayle, R.R. Heim, DR. Easlerling and C.B. Fu, 1991: Global 
warming; evidence for asymmetric diurnal temperature change. 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 18, 2253-2256. 
Karl, T.R., P.O. Jones, R.W. Knight, G. Kukla, N. Plummcr, V. 
Razuvayev, K.P. Gallo, J. Lindseay, R.J. Charlson and T.D. 
Peterson, 1993: A new perspective on recent global warming. 
Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 74, 1007-1023. 
Kaufman, Y.J., 1993: Aerosol optical thickness and atmospheric 
path radiance. J.Geophys.Res, 98, 2677-2692. 
Kaufman, Y.J. and T. Nakajima, 1993: Effect of Amazon smoke 
on cloud microphysics and albedo: analysis from satellite 
imagery../. Appl. Met., 32, 729-744. 
Kaufman, Y.J., C.J. Tucker and I. Fung, 1990: Remote sensing 
of biomass burning in the tropics. J.Geophys.Res., 95, 9927-
9939. 
Kent, G.S., MP. MeCormick and S.K. Schaffner, 1991: Global 
optical climatology of the free tropospheric aerosol from 
1.0//m satellite occupation measurements. ./. Geophys. Res., 
96, 5249-5268. 
Kiehl, J.T. and B.P. Briegleb, 1993: The relative roles of sulphate 
aerosols and greenhouse gases in climate forcing. Science, 260, 
311-314. 
King, M.D., L.F. Radke and P.V. Hobbs, 1993: Optical 
properties of marine stratocumulus clouds modified by ships. 
./. Geophys. Res., 98, 2729-2739. 
Kulmala, M., A. Laaksonen, P. Korhonen, T. Vesala, T. Ahonen 
and J.C. Barrett, 1993: The effect of atmospheric nitric acid 
vapour on cloud condensation nucleus activation../. Geophys. 
Res., 98. 22949-22958. 
Langner, J. and H. Rodhe, 1991: A global three-dimensional 
model of the tropospheric sulphur cycle../. Atmos. Chem., 13, 
255-263. 

760 
Aerosols 
Langner, J., H. Rodhe, P.J. Crutzen and P. Zimmermann, 1992: 
Anthropogenic influence on the distribution of tropospheric 
sulphate aerosol. Nature, 359, 712-716. 
Latham, J. and M.H. Smith, 1990: Effect on global warming of 
wind-dependent aerosol generation at the ocean surface. 
Nature, 347, 372-373. 
Lawson, DR. and W. Winchester, 1979: Atmospheric sulphur 
aerosol concentrations and characteristics from the South 
American continent. Science, 205, 1267-. 
Leaitch, W. R. and G.A. Isaac, 1994: On the relationship 
between sulphate and cloud droplet number concentration. 
J.Climate, 7, 206-212. 
Leaitch, W.R., J.W. Strapp, G.A. Isaac, and J.G. Hudson, 1986: 
Cloud droplet nucleation and cloud scavenging of aerosol 
sulphate in polluted atmospheres. Tellus, 38B, 328-344. 
Lelieveld, J. and J. Hcintzenberg, 1992: Sulphate cooling effect 
on climate through in-cloud oxidation of anthropogenic SO-,. 
Science, 258, 117-120. 
Legrand, M. and R.J. Delmas, 1987: A 220 yr continuous record 
of volcanic H,S04 in the Antarctic Ice Sheet. Nature, 327, 
671-676. 
Levine, J.S.(ed) 1991: Global Biomass Burning; Atmospheric, 
Climatic And Biospheric Implications. MIT Press, pp.xxv-xxx 
and other chapters. 
Lin, X. and W.L. Chameides, 1993 : CCN formation from DMS 
oxidation without S0 2 acting as an intermediate. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 20,579-582 
Liou, K.-N. and S.-C. Ou, 1989: The role of cloud microphysical 
processes in climate: an assessment from a one-dimensional 
perspective. J.Geophys. Res., 15, 8599-8607. 
Losno, R., G. Bergametti and P. Carlier, 1992: Origins of 
atmospheric particulate matter over the North Sea and the 
Atlantic Ocean. J. Atmos. Chem., 15, 333-352 
Luecken, D.J., CM. Berkowitz and R.C. Easter, 1991: Use of a 
three dimensional cloud chemistry model to study trans-
Atlantic transport of soluble sulphur species. J. Geophys. Res., 
96, 22477-22490. 
Marley, N.A., J.S.Gaffney and M.M. Cunningham, 1993: 
Aqueous greenhouse species in clouds, fogs and aerosols. 
Envir. Sci. Teclmol., 27, 2864-2869. 
Martin, G.M., D.W. Johnson and A. Spice, 1994: The 
measurement and parametrization of effective radius of 
droplets in warm stratocumulus clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 
1823-1842. 
Mayewski, P.A., W.B. Lyons, M.J. Spencer, M. Twickler, W. 
Dansgaard, B. Koci, C.I. Davidson and RE. Honrath, 1986: 
Sulphate and nitrate concentrations from a South Greenland ice 
core. Science 232, 975-977. 
Mayewski, P.A., W.B. Lyons, M.J. Spencer, M. Twickler, C.F. 
Buck and S. Whitlow, 1990: An ice core record of atmospheric 
response to anthropogenic sulphate and nitrate. Nature, 346, 
554-556. 
McCormick, M.P., P. Harnill, T.J. Pepin, W.P. Chu, T. Swissler 
and L.R. McMastcr, 1979: Satellite studies of the stratospheric 
aerosol. Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 60. 1038-1046. 
Mitchell, D.A., and E.J. Carter, 1993: The dependence of cloud 
LWC and precipitation rate on CCN and the resulting effect on 
chemical wet deposition fluxes. IAMAPIIAHS 
Joint 
Symposium. Yokohama, Japan. 11-23 June. 1993. 
Monahan, E.C., 1986: The ocean as a source for atmospheric 
particles. In: The Role of Air-Sea Exchange in Geochemical 
Cycling. NATO-ASI series(C) vol. 185, P. Buat-Menard (ed.), 
Reidel. ppl29-163. 
Mossop, S.C., 1978: The influence of drop size distribution on 
the production of secondary ice particles during graupel 
growth. Quart. J. R. Met.Soc, 104, 1-13. 
Muller, J.-F., 1992: Geographical distribution and seasonal 
variation of surface emissions and deposition velocities of 
atmospheric trace gases. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 3787-3804. 
NAPAP, 1990: Acidic deposition: State of Science and 
Technology Report 24. US Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 129 pp. 
Novakov, T. and J.E. Penner, 1993: Large contribution of 
organic aerosols to closed condensation nuclei concentrations. 
Nature, 365, 823-826. 
Nguyen, B.C., B. Bonsang and A. Gaudry, 1983: The role of the 
ocean in the global atmospheric sulphur cycle. J. Geophys. 
Res., 88, 10903-10914. 
Nyeki, S.A.P., I. Colbeck, R.M. Harrison and T. Hall, 1994: A 
multi-channel integrating nephelometer to measure real-time 
atmospheric aerosol scattering co-efficients. Meas. Sci. 
TechnoL, 5, 593-599. 
Ogren, J.A. and R.J. Charlson, 1983: Elemental carbon in the 
atmosphere: cycle and lifetime. Tellus 35B, 241-254. 
Penner, J.E., RE. Dickinson and C.A. O'Neill, 1992: Effects of 
aerosol from biomass burning on the global radiation budget. 
Science 256, 1432-1434. 
Penner, J.E., R.J. Charlson, J.M. Hales, N. Laulainen, R. Leifer. 
T. Novakov, J. Ogren, L.F. Radke, S.E. Schwartz and L. 
Travis, 1994 : Quantifying and Minimising Uncertainty of 
Climate Forcing by Anthropogenic Aerosols. Bull. Am. Met. 
Soc, 75, 375-400. 
Petrenchuk, OP., 1980: On the budget of sea salts and sulphur 
in the atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res., 85, 7439-7444. 
Prospero, J.M., 1990: Mineral aerosol transport to the North 
Atlantic and North Pacific: the impact of African and Asian 
sources. In: The Long-range 
Transport of Natural and 
Contaminated Substances, A.H. Knap (ed), NATO ASE series. 
297, 59-88. 
Pueschel, R.F., C.C. van Valin, R.C. Castillo, J.A. Kadlecek and 
E. Ganor, 1986: Aerosols in polluted versus nonpolluted air 
masses: long-range transport and effects on clouds. J.CIim. 
Appl. Met., 25, 1908-1917. 
Pye, K., 1987: Aeolian Dust And Dust Deposition. Academic 
Press, London. 
Radke, L.F., J.A. Coakley, and M.D. King, 1989: Direct and 
remote sensing observations of the effects of ships on clouds. 
Science, 246, 1146-1148. 
Raes, F, 1993: Entrapment of free tropospheric aerosols as ;i 
regulating mechanism for cloud condensation nuclei in the 
remote marine boundary \ayer.J.Geophys. Res. (In press.) 
Raga, G.B. and PR. Jonas, 1993: On the link between cloud-top 
radiative properties and sub-cloud aerosol concentrations 
Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 119, 1419-1425. 
Rehkopf, J., 
1984: Ein zweidimensionales 
globaU 
Ausbreitungmodell fiir Aerosole und Schwefclkomponenten 
PhD Thesis, Hamburg, Germany, 1984. 
Rodhe, H.,1978: Budgets and turn-over times of atmospheri 

Aerosols 
/6/ 
sulphur compounds. A tmos. Env., 12, 671-678. 
Rodhe, H. and I. Isaksen, 1980: Global distribution of sulphur 
compounds in the troposphere estimated in a height/latitude 
transport model. J. Geophys. Res., 85, 7408-7409. 
Rogers, C.F., J.G. Hudson, B. Zielinska, R.L. Tanner, J. Hallett 
and J.G. Watson, 1991: Cloud condensation nuclei from 
biomass burning. Proc. Chapman Conf. on Global Biomass 
Burning, MIT Press. 
Roosen, G.R., R.J. Angionne and C.H. Klemcke, 1973: 
Worldwide variations in atmospheric 
transmission 
observations. Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 54, 307-316. 
Samson, J.A., S.C. Barbard, J.S. Obremski, D.C. Riley, J.J. 
Black and A.W. Hogan, 1990: On the systematic variation in 
surface aerosol concentration at the South Pole. Atmos. Res., 
25, 385-396. 
Sassen, K., M.K. Griffin and G.C. Dodd, 1989: Optical scattering 
and microphysical properties of subvisual cirrus clouds, and 
climatic implications. J. Appl. Met., 28, 91-98. 
Savoie, D.L. and J.M. Prospero, 1989: Comparison of oceanic 
and continental sources of non-seasalt sulphate over the Pacific 
Ocean. Nature, 339, 685-687. 
Schang, J., U. Pederson, J.E. Skjelmoen, K. Arnesen and A. 
Bartoniova, 1994: Data Reports - Annual summaries, EMEP-
CCC Report 4/90/4 (and previous reports). Norwegian Institute 
for Air Research. 
Schmidt, M., 1974: Verlauf der Kondensationskcrn-
konzentration an zwei suddeutschen Stationen. Meteorol. 
Rundsch., 27, 151-153. 
Simkin, T. and L. Sibert, 1984: Explosive eruptions in space and 
time: durations, intervals and a comparison of the worlds 
active volcanic belts. In: Explosive Volcanism: Inception, 
Evolution and Hazards, Studies in Geophysics, Natl. Acad. 
Press, Washington DC, USA, 110-121. 
Simkin, T., L. Siebert, L. Mcclelland, D. Bridge, C. Newhall and 
J.H. Latter, 1981: Volcanoes Of The World: A Regional 
Directory, Gazetteer And Chronology Of Volcanism During 
The Last 1000 Years. Hutchinson Ross Publishing Company, 
Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, USA. 
Simoneit, B.R.T. and M.A. Mazurek, 1981: Air pollution; the 
organic constituents. Crit. Rev. Envir. Control, 11, CRC Press, 
219-276. 
Simoneit, B.R.T., W.F. Rogge, M.A. Mazurek, L.J. Standley and 
G.R. Cass, 1993: Lignan pyrolysis products, lignans and resin 
acids as specific tracers of plant classes in emissions from 
biomass combustion. Envir. Sci. Tech, 27, 2533-2541. 
Slingo, A., 1990: Sensitivity of the Earth's radiation budget to 
changes in low clouds. Nature, 343, 49-51. 
Slinn, W.G.N., 1983: Air-to-sea transfer of particles. In: Air-Sea 
Exchange of Gases and Particles, PS. Liss and W.G.N. Slinn 
(eds), 209-405, Reidel. 
SMIC, 1971. Study Of Man's Impact On Climate. MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA., USA. 
Spiro, P.A., D.J. Jacob and J.A. Logan, 1992: Global inventory 
of sulphur emissions with 1° x 1° resolution. J.Geophys.Res., 
97, 6023-6036. 
Stoiber, R.E., S.N. Williams and B. Huebert, 1987: Annual 
contribution of sulphur dioxide to the atmosphere by 
volcanoes. 7. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res., 33, 1-8. 
Stonehouse, B., 1986: Arctic Air Pollution, 
Cambridge 
University Press. 
Tarrason, L. and T. Iversen. 1992: The influence of North 
African anthropogenic sulphur emissions over western Europe. 
7W///.V, 44B. 114-132. 
Taylor, K..E. and J.E. Penner, 1994: Response of the climate 
system to atmospheric aerosols and greenhouse gases. Nature, 
369, 734-737. 
Toon, OB. and J.B. Pollack. 1976: A global average model of 
atmospheric aerosol for radiative transfer calculations. J. Appl. 
Met., 15, 225-245. 
Turco R.F., C.B. Toon, R.C. Whitten, J.B. Pollack and P. 
Hamill, 1983: The global cycle of particulate elemental 
carbon: a theoretical assessment, In: Proc. 4th International 
Conference on Precipitation Scavenging, Dry Deposition and 
Resuspension, H.R. Pruppachcr, R.G. Semonin and W.G.N. 
Slinn (eds), Elsevier, NY, ppl337-1351. 
Turton, J. D. and S. Nicholls, 1987: A study of the diurnal 
variation of stratocumulus using a multiple mixed layer model. 
Quart../. R. Met. Soc, 113, 969-1009. 
Twohy, C.H., AD. Clarke, SO. Warren, L.F. Radke and R.J. 
Charlson, 1989: Light absorbing material extracted from cloud 
droplets and its effect on cloud albedo. ./.Geophys. Res., 94, 
8623-8631. 
Twomey, S.A., 1977: The influence of pollution on the short-
wave albedo of clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 34, 1149-1152. 
Twomey, S.A. 1991: Aerosols, clouds and radiation. Atmos. 
Env., 25A, 2435-2442. 
Twomey, S.A., K.A. Davidson and K.J. Seton, 1978: Results of 5 
years' observations of cloud nucleus concentrations at 
Robertson, New South Wales../. Atmos. Sci., 35, 650-656. 
Twomey, S.A.. M. Piepgrass and T.L. Wolfe, 1984: An 
assessment of the impact of pollution on global cloud albedo. 
Tellus, 368, 356-366. 
Vali, G., 1985: Atmospheric ice nucleation - a review../. Rech. 
Atmos., 19, 105-115. 
Warneck, P. 1988: Chemistry of the Natural 
Atmosphere. 
Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, 757pp. 
Warner, J. and S. Twomey, 1967: The production of cloud 
nuclei by cane fires and the effect on cloud drop 
concentrations../. Atmos. Sci. , 24, 704-706. 
Warren, S.G. and AD. Clarke, 1990: Soot in the atmosphere and 
snow surface of Antarctica../. Geophys. Res., 95, 1811-1816. 
WEC, 1993: Energy Por Tomorrow's World - The Realities, The 
Real Options And The Agenda Por Achievement. 
World 
Energy Council, St. Martin's Press, New York, USA, 320pp. 
White, W„ 1990: The contribution of fine particle scattering to 
total extinction. Sections 4.1-4.4. In: Visibility: Existing and 
Historical Conditions - Causes and Effects. Acidic Deposition 
State of Science and Technology Report 24, National Acid 
Precipitation Assessment Program, US Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC. 
Wielicki, B.A., J.T. Suttles, A.J. Heymsfield, R.M. Welch, J.0. 
Spinhirne, M.L.C. Wu, DO. Starr, L. Parker and R.F. Arduini, 
1990: The 27-28 October 1986 FIRE IIO cirrus case study -
Comparison of radiative transfer theory with observations by 
satellite and aircraft. Mon. Wea. Rev., 118, 2356-2376. 
Yamamoto, G.M., M. Tanaka and K. Arao, 1971: Secular 
variation of atmospheric turbidity over Japan. Met. Soc, 49, 
859-865. 

762 
Aerosols 
Yue, G K, MP. McCormick, W.P. Chu, P. Wang and M.T. 
Osborn, 1989: Comparative studies of aerosol extinction 
measurements made by SAMII and SAGEII satellite 
experiments. J .Geophys. Res., 94, 8412-8424. 
Zimmermann, P.H., 1987: MOGUNTIA: A handy global tracer 
model. In Proceedings of the 16th NATO/CCMS International 
Technical Meeting on Air Pollution 
Modelling 
and Its 
Application, Lindau, Germany, Reidel, Dordrecht, pp.593-608. 


4 
Radiative Forcing 
K.P. SHINE, Y. FOUQUART, V. RAMASWAMY, S. SOLOMON, J. SRINIVASAN 
Contributors: 
M.O. Andreae, J. Angell, G. Brasseur, C. Brtihl, RJ. Charlson, M.D. Chou, 
J.R. Christy, T. Dunkerton, E. Button, BA. Fomin, C. Granier, H. Grassl, J. Hansen, 
Harshvardhan, D. Hauglustaine, P. Hobbs, D.J. Hoffman, L. Hood, N. Husson, 
I. Karol, YJ. Kaufman, J. Kiehl, S. Kinne, M.K. W. Ko, K. Labitzke, H Le Treut, 
A. McCulloch, AJ. Miller, M. Molina, E. Nesme-Ribes, A.H. Oort, J.E. Penner, 
S. Pinnock, V. Ramanathan, A. Robock, E. Roeckner, M.E. Schlesinger, K. Sassen, 
G.-Y Shi, A.N. Trotsenko, W.-C. Wang. 


CONTENTS 
Summary 
167 
4.1 Introduction 
169 
4.1.1 Definitions of Radiative Forcing 
169 
4.2 Greenhouse Gases 
171 
4.2.1 Spectroscopy 
171 
4.2.2 Calculating the Radiative Forcing 
171 
43 Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Ozone 
173 
4.3.1 Introduction 
173 
4.3.2 Radiative Forcing due to Changes in 
Stratospheric Ozone 
173 
4.3.3 Significance of the Forcing due to Stratospheric 
Ozone Loss 
177 
4.3.4 Temperature Changes in the Lower Stratosphere 
177 
4.3.5 Sensitivity of Surface-Troposphere Climate 
179 
4.3.6 Radiative Forcing due to Changes in 
Tropospheric Ozone 
179 
4.3.7 Radiative Forcing due to Total Atmospheric 
Ozone Change 
180 
4.3.8 Outstanding Issues 
180 
4.4 Effects of Tropospheric and Stratospheric Aerosols 
181 
4.4.1 Tropospheric Aerosols 
181 
4.4.1.1 The direct aerosol effect 
181 
4.4.1.2 Indirect effect of anthropogenic aerosols 
on cloud albedo 
183 
4.4.1.3 Summary of anthropogenic aerosol 
effects 
185 
4.4.2 Radiative Forcing due to Stratospheric Aerosol 
186 
4.4.2.1 Introduction 
186 
4.4.2.2 Stratospheric aerosol radiative effects 
186 
4.4.2.3 Observations and simulations of climatic 
effects 
187 
4.4.2.4 Summary 
189 
4.5 Solar Variability 
189 
4.5.1 Observations of Variability in Solar Irradiance 
since 1978 
189 
4.5.2 Inferences of Variability in Solar Irradiance on 
Longer Time-scales 
190 
4.5.3 Correlations between Climate and Solar Variability 191 
4.5.4 Summary 
192 
4.6 Other Forcings 
192 
4.7 Estimates of Total Forcing 
192 
4.7.1 Relative Confidence in Estimates of Radiative 
Forcing 
192 
4.7.2 Best Estimates of Forcings since Pre-industrial 
Times 
193 
4.7.3 Estimates of Forcing from Observed 
Temperature Records 
195 
4.7.4 Future Forcing 
196 
4.8 Forcing-Response Relationships 
197 
4.8.1 Background 
197 
4.8.2 Forcing-Response Relationships for 
Well-mixed Greenhouse Gases 
197 
4.8.3 Forcing-response Relationship for Other Forcings 198 
4.8.4 Summary 
199 
References 
199 


SUMMARY 
The concept of radiative forcing 
• 
Global-mean radiative forcing is a valuable concept 
for giving at least a first-order estimate of the 
potential climatic importance of various forcing 
mechanisms. However, there could be limits to its 
utility because the relationship between global-mean 
radiative forcing and global-mean 
surface 
temperature change may not be as simple as 
previously thought. For example, its general 
applicability has recently been questioned in the 
cases of forcing due to ozone and tropospheric 
aerosols, where changes in concentration are highly 
variable horizontally and/or vertically. 
Greenhouse gases 
• 
The direct global-mean radiative forcing due to 
changes in concentrations of the greenhouse gases 
(carbon dioxide (C02), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide 
(N20) and the halocarbons) since pre-industrial 
times is 2.4 Wm"2 and is believed to be accurate to 
within 15%. This value is essentially unchanged 
from previous IPCC assessments. 
• 
The global-mean radiative forcing due to increases in 
tropospheric ozone since pre-industrial times is 
positive and is estimated to be a few tenths of a Wm2. 
Since the late 1970s, decreases in stratospheric 
ozone have led to a global-mean radiative forcing 
estimated to be about -0.1 Wm"2. The accuracy of 
these estimates is presently limited by incomplete 
knowledge of the temporal, horizontal and vertical 
changes in ozone. 
Tropospheric aerosols 
• 
The direct global-mean radiative forcing due to 
increases in sulphate aerosol amounts since pre-
industrial times is negative and may lie in the range 
-0.25 to -0.9 Wm 2, but there are substantial 
uncertainties due to the lack of detailed knowledge 
of the amount of sulphate aerosols and their radiative 
properties. The effect of aerosols emitted as a result 
of biomass burning has received much less attention 
and is even more uncertain; the direct global-mean 
radiative forcing since pre-industrial times may lie in 
the range -0.05 to -0.6 Wm 2. Soot carbon in 
tropospheric aerosols has the potential to reduce the 
magnitude of the aerosol forcing; however global 
estimates are not yet available. 
• 
Estimates exist for the indirect effect of aerosols on 
cloud droplet sizes. The radiative forcing is believed 
to be negative and may be of a similar magnitude to 
the direct radiative forcing due to aerosol changes 
but the uncertainty is much larger. The possible 
effects of aerosols on cloud liquid water content and 
cloud cover are just beginning to be investigated. 
Volcanic aerosols 
• 
The volcanic eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in June 1991 
resulted in a large enhancement to the stratospheric 
aerosol layer; this caused a transient but large global-
mean negative forcing that peaked at about 4 Wm"2 
and exceeded 2 Wm"2 for about one year. Calculated 
radiative forcings are broadly consistent with values 
deduced from satellite observations. 
• 
General Circulation Model (GCM) simulations of 
the effect of the Mt. Pinatubo eruption on surface 
and lower stratospheric temperatures show 
encouraging agreement with observations. This 
suggests that the GCM's temperature response to a 
transient large-scale radiative forcing of a large 
magnitude is reasonable. 
Solar variability 
• 
Extension of the current understanding of the 
relationship between observed changes in solar 
output and other indicators of solar variability 
suggests that long-term increases in solar irradiance 
since the 17th century Maunder Minimum might 
have been climatically significant. A global-mean 
radiative forcing of a few tenths of a Wm'2 since 
1850 has been suggested, but uncertainties are large. 

/6A 
Radiative Forcing 
Problem in combining global-mean radiative forcing 
from different mechanisms 
• 
An estimate of the net global mean radiative forcing 
due to all human activity is not presented because the 
usefulness of combining estimates of global-mean 
radiative forcing of differing signs, and resulting 
from different spatial patterns, is not currently 
understood. For example, if, by coincidence, the 
global-mean radiative forcing were to be zero, due to 
the cancellation of positive and negative forcings 
from different mechanisms, this cannot be taken to 
imply the absence of regional-scale or possibly even 
global climate change. 

Radiative Forcing 
169 
4.1 Introduction 
This chapter considers recent advances in our knowledge 
of the factors which, by perturbing the planetary radiation 
budget, might result in climate change. Such a perturbation 
is referred to here as "radiative forcing" - some authors 
use the term "climate forcing" for the same concept. 
The concept of radiative forcing (e.g., IPCC 1990 and 
1992; and see Sections 4.1.1 and 4.8) is based on earlier 
climate model calculations which show that there is an 
approximately linear relationship between the global-mean 
radiative forcing at the tropopause and the equilibrium 
global mean surface temperature change. Importantly, 
model calculations have shown that, for a number of 
forcing mechanisms, the relationship is relatively 
unaffected by the nature of the forcing (e.g., whether it be 
due to a change in greenhouse gas concentration or solar 
output), provided it is appropriately defined (see Section 
4.1.1). If the global mean radiative forcing is given by AF 
(Wm~2) and the global mean surface temperature response 
is ATS (in K) then 
Ars = ^AF 
(4.1) 
where X is a climate sensitivity parameter. A. is determined 
by a number of processes such as water vapour feedback, 
cloud feedbacks and ice-albedo feedback and its computed 
value is found to vary greatly amongst different GCMs 
(over a range of at least 0.3 to 1.4 K/(Wm"2)), mostly 
because of uncertainties in the calculation of cloud 
feedbacks (see e.g., IPCC 1990 and 1992). While 
knowledge of the climate feedbacks is of crucial 
importance for climate prediction, consideration of recent 
work in these areas is beyond the scope of this chapter, but 
will be discussed in more detail in the next full IPCC 
assessment in 1995. 
Section 4.2 to 4.6 will concentrate on forcing due to 
changes in: 
(a) 
greenhouse gas concentrations, including ozone; 
(b) 
aerosols, both in the troposphere (mainly as a result 
of human activity) and in the stratosphere (mainly as 
a result of volcanic activity); 
(c) 
solar output. 
In the cases of forcing due to changes in lower 
stratospheric ozone and volcanic aerosols, changes in 
surface and lower stratospheric temperatures add useful 
supplementary information; since these responses are not 
considered elsewhere in this report, they will be briefly 
considered in this chapter. Section 4.7 provides an overall 
summary of our knowledge of radiative forcing. 
The radiative forcing concept encapsulated in 
Equation (4.1) has served the climate community well over 
the past two decades. Recently its general applicability has 
been questioned for forcing due to changes in both ozone 
and sulphate aerosols where changes in concentration are 
highly variable horizontally and/or vertically. Section 4.8 
reviews studies regarding this topic which are, as yet, too 
preliminary to allow firm conclusions to be drawn. 
However, they do suggest that the climate sensitivity (k in 
Equation (4.1)) may be significantly different for the 
forcing due to spatially inhomogenous changes in 
tropospheric aerosols and in ozone than it is for the well-
mixed greenhouse gases. In particular, the work suggests 
that the degree of cancellation, in the global mean, 
between the positive greenhouse forcing and the negative 
tropospheric aerosol forcing may be a poor guide to 
eventual climate response. For example, if, by coincidence, 
the global-mean radiative forcing were to be zero, due to 
an exact cancellation of positive and negative forcings 
with different spatial characteristics, this could not be 
taken to imply the absence of regional-scale or possibly 
even global climate change. We continue to compare 
global mean radiative forcings in this chapter, but we do so 
with caution. The resolution of this issue will be an 
important topic for future IPCC reports. 
It should also be noted that if a climate change 
mechanism leads to altered conditions in the stratosphere, 
the dynamics of the troposphere can also be affected (e.g., 
Rind el al., 1990, 1992); thus there is the potential for 
surface/tropospheric climate change to he induced by 
mechanisms other than by directly perturbing the radiation 
budget. 
Despite these possible problems, global-mean radiative 
forcing remains a useful concept for comparing the 
potential climatic effects of changes in different 
greenhouse gases, with the possible exception of ozone. It 
is also a useful single number for comparing different 
estimates of tropospheric aerosol forcing or ozone forcing. 
4.1.1 Definitions of Radiative Forcing 
In IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992) a specific definition of 
radiative forcing was adopted: 
The radiative forcing of the surface-troposphere 
system (due to a change, for example, in greenhouse 
gas concentration) is the change in net irradiance (in 
Wm"2) at the tropopause AFTER allowing for 
stratospheric temperatures to re-adjust to radiative 
equilibrium, but with surface and tropospheric 
temperatures held fixed at their unperturbed values. 
This follows earlier work (e.g., Ramanathan el al., 1985, 
Hansen el al., 1981 and references therein). The 
tropopause is chosen because, in simple models at least, it 
is considered that in a global and annual mean sense the 
surface and troposphere are so closely coupled that they 
behave as a single thermodynamic system. The adjustment 
of stratospheric temperatures could he considered as a 
feedback; however, it is counted as part of the forcing 

170 
Radiative Forcing 
because the timescale of the adjustment is a few months, 
compared with the decadal time-scale required for the 
surface-atmosphere system to adjust to the forcing, due to 
the large thermal inertia of the oceans. One additional 
feature of allowing for stratospheric adjustment is that the 
change in the net irradiance is then the same at the 
tropopause as at the top of the atmosphere; this is not the 
case when stratospheric temperatures are unadjusted (see 
Hansen et ai, 1981). 
The utility of radiative forcing will be the subject of 
Section 4.8, but it is useful here to illustrate the potential 
importance of the adjustment process using 1-dimensional 
radiative-convective model results reported by Rind and 
Lacis (1993) (see Table 4.1). 
The surface temperature response to an imposed 
radiative forcing, AT0, is the so-called no-feedback case, in 
which clouds, water vapour and surface albedo are held 
fixed. For this case, the equivalent form of Equation (4.1) 
where XQ is the climate sensitivity in the absence of 
feedbacks and AF is the adjusted forcing and is the same as 
that in Equation (4.1). This form will now be shown to be 
more useful than an alternative approach using the 
instantaneous forcing such that: 
Ar, = \Af\ 
where the subscript "i" refers to the instantaneous forcing. 
Table 4.1 shows values of AF;, AF, \ and A.Q for a 
number of different forcing mechanisms. The difference 
between Xs and A.Q shows the strength and sign of the 
adjustment process. The sign of the adjustment process 
depends on whether the change in forcing leads to a 
heating or a cooling of the stratosphere with a consequent 
increase or decrease in the thermal infrared emission from 
the lower stratosphere to the troposphere. For a doubling 
of C02, the stratosphere cools so that the adjusted forcing 
is about 6% less than the instantaneous. For an increase in 
CFC-11 from 0 to 1 ppbv the lower stratosphere warms 
and this makes the adjusted forcing 7% higher than the 
instantaneous. For changes in stratospheric ozone, the sign 
of X0 reverses between using instantaneous and adjusted 
forcing. For other forcing mechanisms, such as changes in 
methane, or solar output, the adjustment process is less 
important. 
The most important conclusion from Table 4.1 is that k 
calculated using adjusted forcing is much less dependent 
on the forcing mechanism than that computed using the 
instantaneous forcing. 
Cess et al. (1985) also reported similar experiments 
using a 1-dimensional radiative-convective model, which 
had no stratosphere; these showed that forcing due to 
changes in solar output, C0 2 and tropospheric aerosols 
result in a similar climate sensitivity, although heavily-
absorbing soot aerosols were found to have a markedly 
different sensitivity. 
In preparing this review some difficulty has been 
experienced in intercomparing work performed by 
different authors because some have applied the term 
"radiative forcing" to the instantaneous change in 
tropopause irradiance, not allowing for any change in 
stratospheric temperature. In other publications it is not 
clear which definition of radiative forcing has been 
adopted. The forcing should be calculated as a global mean 
using appropriate temperature, humidity and cloud 
Table 4.1: Surface temperature changes using a 1-D radiative-convective model (assuming no feedbacks) for a range of 
forcing mechanisms, together with the radiative forcing at the tropopause (AF) and the climate sensitivity parameter 
(KJ. The subscript "o" refers to the no-feedback case. The subscript "i" refers to the instantaneous forcing with no 
feedbacks. These results are from Rind and Lacis (1993) and Lacis (pers. comm.). (Note that surface temperature 
changes would be about 1 to 4 times larger if climate feedbacks were included - see IPCC (1992)). The changes in 
radiative properties used here are meant to be illustrative and do not necessarily represent actual or projected changes. 
Forcing Mechanism 
CO, 300-600ppmv 
CH4 0.28-0.56ppmv 
N:O0.16-0.32ppmv 
CFC-110-1 ppbv 
CFC-12 0-1 ppbv 
0 , 50% reduction at all altitudes 
Solar Const +2% at all wavelengths 
Stratospheric Aerosol T = 0.15 
(K) 
1.31 
0.16 
0.27 
0.07 
0.08 
-0.38 
1.35 
-0.99 
AF; 
4.63 
0.53 
0.96 
0.21 
0.26 
0.26 
4.48 
-3.42 
(Win'2) 
AF 
4.35 
0.52 
0.92 
0.22 
0.28 
-1.23 
4.58 
-3.3 
h 
0.28 
0.30 
0.29 
0.31 
0.32 
-1.47 
0.30 
0.29 
K/(Wnr2) 
K 
0.30 
0.30 
0.30 
0.30 
0.30 
0.31 
0.30 
0.30 

Radiative Forcing 
171 
conditions - again, it is not always clear, in published 
estimates, what conditions are being used for calculations. 
Since the adjustment process is generally most 
important for changes in greenhouse gases, we suggest 
that, in future, the greenhouse gas radiative forcing be 
referred to as either: 
(i) 
instantaneous radiative forcing if no change in 
stratospheric temperature is accounted for, or 
(ii) 
adjusted radiative forcing if the stratospheric 
temperature has been allowed to re-adjust to the 
instantaneous forcing. 
Assumptions concerning the vertical profiles of 
temperature and all radiatively active constituents 
(including cloudiness) should be stated. 
4.2 Greenhouse Gases 
Our understanding of the enhanced greenhouse effect is 
dependent on two broad areas. First we need to understand 
the fundamental radiative properties ("spectroscopy") of 
the gases involved. Next, these spectroscopic data need to 
be included in radiative transfer models to calculate the 
radiative forcing due to changes in gas concentration, for a 
given atmospheric profile of temperature, water vapour 
and other trace gases, and cloudiness. 
In this section the discussion will concentrate on the 
radiative forcing of greenhouse gases as a result of direct 
emissions of that gas. This is referred to as the direct 
greenhouse forcing. Greenhouse gas concentrations can 
change not only as a result of emissions of that gas, but 
when emissions of other gases lead to chemical reactions 
which alter the concentration of that gas; this is termed the 
indirect greenhouse forcing. Changes in ozone appear to 
be the most important indirect effect; these will be 
considered in Section 4.3. 
4.2.1 Spectroscopy 
In the thermal infrared (approximately 4-500 /<m) 
molecules absorb and emit radiation by changing the 
energy with which they vibrate and/or rotate; the 
wavelengths of the vibration/rotation transitions occur over 
narrow spectral intervals. Laboratory and theoretical 
studies are required to determine the wavelengths, 
strengths and widths of these transitions; in the case of 
heavy molecules, such as the halocarbons, the individual 
transitions are so closely-packed, that they are generally 
not resolved in laboratory observations. 
The main databases of spectral parameters of 
atmospheric gases are subject to periodic update; the two 
main catalogues, HITRAN (Rothman et a!., 1992) and 
GEISA (Husson et al., 1992) have both been substantially 
revised since IPCC (1992). These revisions are based on 
improvements to both laboratory measurements and 
theoretical techniques. Of the gases of most direct 
importance to radiative forcing, ozone and methane have 
undergone the most substantial revision, and many 
previously neglected weak spectral lines have been added. 
A detailed assessment of the effect of these revisions has 
not yet been reported; however, Fomin et al. (1993) report 
that the net irradiance at the tropopause, evaluated for a 
mid-latitude clear-sky atmosphere, changes by less than 
1% between using the 1986 and 1992 versions of 
HITRAN. It seems unlikely that the effect of these 
revisions on radiative forcing will be greater than 5% but 
there is a need to assess both the effect of the changes, and 
the potential impact of remaining uncertainties. 
Continuum absorption, especially by water vapour, is 
also of importance in calculating radiative forcing. In spite 
of recent progress in describing the effect, further 
theoretical and laboratory investigations are required to 
resolve remaining uncertainties. 
Further work on the infrared absorption cross-sections 
of halocarbons has been reported; this is particularly 
important for some of the HCFCs (hydrochlorofluoro-
carbons) and MFCs (hydrofluorocarbons) as some of the 
data used in IPCC (1990) were from a single source. 
Comparisons of strengths of many CFCs (chloro-
fluorocarbons) and HCFC-22 are presented in McDaniel et 
al. (1991), Cappellani and Restelli (1992) and Clerbaux et 
al. (1993). For newer HCFCs, MFCs and periluorocarbons, 
measurements are more limited; these are tabulated in 
WMO(1994). 
As examples, for HCFC-123, HCFC-141b, and HFC-
142b, the spread of results is more than 25% of the mean 
cross-section; for HFC-134a the spread is about 10%. 
Detailed descriptions, including temperatures and 
pressures of the measurements, are not available for all the 
datasets, so it is difficult to comment on the discrepancies; 
only Cappellani and Restelli (1992) and Clerbaux et al. 
(1993) have published cross-sections for a number of 
HFC/HCFCs over a range of temperatures. 
4.2.2 Calculating the Radiative Forcing 
In Section 4.7.2 updated calculations of radiative forcing 
due to changes in greenhouse gas concentration will be 
presented; in this section the basis on which these 
calculations are made will be assessed. 
A whole hierarchy of different radiative transfer 
schemes are available to compute the radiative forcing, 
ranging from line-by-line models through to so-called 
wide-band models (Ellingson et al., 1991). In addition, the 
results from such models can he represented by relatively 
simple empirical formulae, such as those presented in 
IPCC (1990) and Shi (1992), to allow rapid, and 
reasonably accurate, computation of forcing. 

172 
Radiative Forcing 
Many details of the radiation schemes (such as methods 
of handling clouds, spectral overlap of gases, treatment of 
water vapour continuum) affect the radiative forcing and 
are not handled in the same way by all schemes (see 
Ellingson et al., 1991). 
The ultimate test of such models is their ability to 
reproduce observed irradiances given the observed state of 
the atmosphere. Until recently, the quality of observations 
was generally inadequate to assess the models; now high 
quality experimental data (see e.g., Ellingson et al., 1992) 
are becoming available and should provide valuable 
checks on the realism of radiative models. 
The radiative forcing due to changes in concentrations 
of CO,, CH4, N20, CFC-11, CFC-12 presented in IPCC 
(1990) have been re-assessed by Kratz et al. (1993) and 
Shi and Fan (1992), although neither set of authors 
accounted for stratospheric adjustment. The historical 
forcing computed for the period 1765-1990 is found to 
agree with the expressions in IPCC (1990) to within 10% 
for all gases except for the direct greenhouse forcing due 
to methane (Table 4.1 indicates that adjustment is not an 
issue for methane). Kratz et al. (1993), Shi and Fan (1992) 
and Lelieveld et al. (1993) report forcing values of up to 
20% greater than that given in IPCC (1990). The 
recommended value for the radiative forcing due to 
methane may need to be revised in the near future, but 
additional work will be necessary before we can make a 
precise recommendation. There appears to be no pressing 
reason to alter the expressions for the other gases. Table 
4.2 lists the radiative forcing strength of these gases, 
relative to CO,, for small perturbations from present-day 
conditions; the empirical formulae in Table 2.2 of IPCC 
(1990) should be used for larger perturbations. It must be 
emphasised that the relative weakness of the radiative 
forcing due to changes in C02, on a per molecule or per 
unit mass basis, is more than compensated for by the large 
increase in its atmospheric concentration, since pre-
industrial times, relative to that of other gases. As 
discussed in Section 4.7.2, CO, makes by far the largest 
individual contribution to the greenhouse gas radiative 
forcing over that period. 
Despite the general agreement between the earlier IPCC 
reports and more recent calculations, a similar degree of 
agreement is not found for radiative transfer calculations 
performed in GCMs used for climate prediction. Cess et al. 
(1993) report an intercomparison of instantaneous clear-
sky radiative forcing due to a doubling of C0 2 from 15 
different GCMs. The results deviated by as much as 20% 
from reference line-by-line calculations; some of the 
difference was due to the neglect of some minor absorption 
bands, and in particular those near 10 jum. The size of the 
deviation should not be taken to indicate the uncertainty in 
calculating the C0 2 forcing; it is more indicative of 
weakness in the radiative transfer schemes used in some 
GCMs. 
New estimates of radiative forcing for a whole range of 
other minor species have been reported recently. These 
include the MFCs, HCFCs and perfluorinated molecules. 
Molecules which are created by the destruction of 
halocarbons have the potential to cause a radiative forcing, 
but their lifetimes are believed to be too short for them to 
be of importance (see Section 5.2.5 and WMO, 1994). 
HCFCs and HFCs 
The radiative forcing due to these gases was reported in 
IPCC (1990) and taken from Fisher et al. (1990); more 
recent calculations include those of Shi (1992), Briihl 
(pers. comm.) and Clerbaux et al. (1993). In general, the 
results from these sources differ because different radiation 
schemes and spectroscopic data were used, and different 
assumptions were made about vertical profiles of 
temperatures, clouds, overlapping species and the 
inclusion of stratospheric adjustment. When results are 
presented as ratios of forcing to other gases (e.g., to CFC-
11), the absolute forcing of the reference gas should be. 
but has not always been, stated. 
Table 4.2: Adjusted radiative forcing per unit mass and per unit molecule increase in atmospheric concentration, 
relative to C02 • The table shows direct forcing only, for small perturbations around present day conditions. For larger 
changes use expressions in Table 2.2 of IPCC (1990). 
Gas 
AF for per unit 
mass relative to 
CO, 
AF for per unit 
molecule relative to 
CO, 
CO, 
CH4 
N,0 
CFC-11 
CFC-12 
1 
58 
206 
3,970 
5,750 
1 
21 
206 
12,400 
15,800 

Radiative Forcing 
173 
The IPCC (1990) values for this class of gases were 
instantaneous forcing. The adjusted forcing can be up to 
10% greater than the instantaneous forcing (see WMO, 
1994). 
A more detailed comparison of the radiative forcing due 
to HFCs and HCFCs is presented in WMO (1994). The 
variation of the relative forcings from different sources 
show little consistency. The same spectral data in different 
radiation schemes do not always give the same relative 
forcings amongst the HFCs and HCFCs; and schemes 
using different spectral data do not always show the 
differences that would be anticipated from the values used 
for cross-sections. The results from Briihl (pers. comm.) 
and Clerbaux et al. (1993) generally show no systematic 
difference compared with IPCC (1990). There are only two 
gases, HFC-125 and HFC-152a, for which there is a 
consistent and large deviation from IPCC (1990) and new 
values are recommended here. For all other gases IPCC 
(1990) values are retained, and these are estimated to be 
accurate to within about 25% although more work is 
necessary to establish this. 
Table 4.3 presents values for a wide variety of gases and 
from a variety of sources. There is a considerable reliance 
on unpublished material which is regrettable but 
unavoidable at present. 
Since the list of such molecules is increasing, it is useful 
to divide it into groups on the basis of current use and 
anticipated production. The categories used here 
(A.McCulloch, pers. comm.) are: 
(i) 
in production now, and likely to be widely used; 
(ii) 
in production now, for specialised end use; 
(iii) under consideration for specialised end use. 
Perfluorocarbons 
The radiative effects of CF4 and C9Ffi have undergone 
renewed interest, although values have been reported by 
earlier studies (e.g., Wang et al., 1980; Ramanathan et al., 
1985; Hansen et al., 1989). These gases possess such a 
high degree of symmetry that most of their absorption 
occurs in a very narrow spectral region and detailed 
assessment probably requires use of the cross-sections in a 
line-by-line code (Isaksen et al., 1992). For C1Fft accurate 
measurements of the cross-section have only recently 
become available The best estimate for both gases (Isaksen 
etal. (1992)) is given in Table 4.3. The value for C6F,4 is 
an average from Roehl et al. (1994) and Ko (pers. comm.). 
The average value for SF6 from Ko et al. (1993) and 
Stordal et al. (1993) is also given in the table; Ko et al. 
(1993) indicate that there is a 10-20% spread in available 
cross-section data for this molecule. 
Stratospheric water vapour 
The radiative effects of changes in tropospheric water 
vapour concentrations are classed as a climate feedback 
and were discussed in IPCC (1992), and will be further 
discussed in the next full IPCC assessment in 1995. 
Increases in stratospheric water vapour might also result 
from a climate feedback, but the interest here is that they 
are expected to increase as a result of an increased rate of 
methane oxidation as methane concentrations rise. In IPCC 
(1990), the direct effect of methane was increased by 30% 
to account for the stratospheric water vapour increases 
whilst WMO (1991) reports a range of 22-38%,. However, 
these numbers have been disputed. Lelieveld et al. (1993) 
and Wuebbles (pers. comm.) compute the indirect forcing 
to be about 5% of the direct methane effect, whilst 
Hauglustaine et al. (1994) find it to be about 1%. Rind and 
Lacis (1993), on the other hand, calculate the effect to 
reach 25% by the year 2100 (there is a typographical error 
in the paper indicating the value is 50%) whilst the effect 
is much less for earlier years. There appears to be a 
growing consensus around a smaller value and we propose 
that the radiative forcing of stratospheric water vapour 
changes due to methane changes be taken to be of order of 
5% of the methane radiative forcing. There are no 
available observations with which to constrain model 
estimates of decadal time-scale changes in stratospheric 
water vapour; the accuracy of models depends on their 
ability to describe methane and water vapour in the lower 
stratosphere. 
4.3 Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Ozone 
4.3.1 Introduction 
Chapter 2 discussed the evidence for changes in both 
tropospheric and stratospheric ozone as a result of human 
activity. In this section the consequences of these changes 
on radiative forcing are discussed. The possible links 
between changes in solar output and changes in ozone will 
be discussed in Section 4.5. 
4.3.2 Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Stratospheric 
Ozone 
The principal features outlined in IPCC (1992) and WMO 
(1991) concerning the net radiative forcing of the surface-
troposphere system due to ozone depletion in the lower 
stratosphere were: 
(i) 
the distinction between the solar component which 
acts to heat the surface-troposphere system and the 
long-wave component which tends to cool it; 
(ii) 
the difference between the instantaneous forcing 
(referred to as "Mode A" in WMO, 1991) and the 
forcing calculated using adjusted stratospheric 
temperatures (referred to as "Mode B" in WMO, 
1991); the consequent cooling of" the lower 
stratosphere enhances the long-wave radiative effects 
to give a net negative forcing. 

774 
Radiative Forcing 
THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT OF INCREASED CONCENTRATIONS OF CARBON DIOXIDE 
It is sometimes stated that, because there is so much C02 already in the atmosphere, it is '"saturated" and extra C02 
can have no additional greenhouse effect. The purpose of this box is to present a simplified explanation as to why 
this is a misconception. 
When gases are present in small concentrations (the halocarbons are examples) the radiative effect of a gas is 
almost linear in concentration; doubling the concentration of, for example, CFC-11 will approximately double its 
greenhouse effect. This is not the case for greenhouse gases present in larger concentrations, for well-understood 
reasons (see e.g., Goody and Yung, 1989). Doubling the concentration of C0 2 from its present day concentrations 
leads to a 10-20% increase in the total greenhouse effect due to C0 2 - this factor is well-understood and has been 
included in climate models for several decades. 
Figure 4.1 illustrates aspects of the increased greenhouse effect of C0 2 using a detailed radiative transfer model 
(see footnote below for details). Figure 4.1a shows the spectral variation in the net infrared irradiance ("flux") at the 
tropopause in Wm^/cm"1. The shape of the curve is dictated by two factors. First, the Planck function determines 
the maximum amount of energy that can be emitted at a given wavelength and temperature. At typical atmospheric 
temperatures, the maximum lies between 10 and 15 /im; at wavelengths shorter than 5 /urn little can be emitted. The 
second factor is the absorbing properties of the atmosphere, which is dictated by the presence of greenhouse gases 
(of which water vapour is the most important, followed by C02) and clouds. 
If the troposphere were transparent to infrared radiation, then the irradiance reaching the tropopause would be the 
same as that leaving the surface. However greenhouse gases and clouds absorb the radiation emitted by the surface 
over a range of wavelengths; they emit energy in all directions, but since the temperature generally decreases with 
altitude in the troposphere, less on average is emitted upwards than is absorbed from below, so less reaches the 
tropopause. The downward radiation from the stratosphere into the troposphere is also an important factor. 
C02, like many other gases, absorbs and emits radiation by changing the energy at which it vibrates and rotates. 
The wavelengths of C0 2 absorption are grouped into bands (see e.g., Goody and Yung, 1989) with a strong 
absorption band centred near 15 fim (Figure 4.1b). The centre of the 15 /an absorption band is so strong that the 
radiation reaching the tropopause comes from very close to the tropopause and, more importantly, the C0 2 in the 
stratosphere emits as much downwards as the troposphere emits upwards - the net irradiance is thus very close to 
zero (see Figure 4.1a - note: the feature at about 10 /urn is mainly due to ozone). 
Figure 4.1c shows the modelled effect of an instantaneous change in C0 2 on the net irradiance at the tropopause. 
(The change in concentration between 1980 and 1990 is chosen for the purposes of illustration.) All other factors, 
such as cloudiness and temperature are held fixed. This plot indicates significant changes in irradiance. At the 
centre of the 15 /um band, the increase in C0 2 concentration has almost no effect - the C0 2 absorption is indeed 
saturated at these wavelengths. Away from the band centre C0 2 is less strongly absorbing so that an increase in 
CO-, concentration does have an effect. The net irradiance at the tropopause decreases - this corresponds to positive 
radiative forcing that would tend to warm the climate system. As more and more C0 2 is added to the atmosphere, 
more of its spectrum will become saturated - but there will always be regions of the spectrum which remain 
unsaturated and capable of enhancing the greenhouse effect if C02 concentrations are increased. An example is 
the 10 /.im band system. As shown in Figure 4.1b, it is about 1 million times weaker than the peak of the 15 jum 
band but its contribution to the irradiance change in the lower frame is much higher than might be anticipated; as 
COT concentrations increase, the 10 //m band would increase in its importance relative to the 
15 /iim band. 
The saturation effect is partly responsible for the fact that CFC molecules are about 10,000 times more effective 
at enhancing the greenhouse effect than molecules of C02. However, for every extra CFC molecule in the 
atmosphere since pre-industrial times, there are around 70,000 more C0 2 molecules - thus, the relative weakness of 
CO-, per molecule is more than compensated by the large absolute increase in the number of C02 molecules in the 
atmosphere. 
Note: 
The radiative transfer calculations were performed using the standard narrow band code of Shine (1991) which 
has a spectral resolution of 10 cm"1. The atmosphere used is a Northern Hemisphere mean for January, including 
the effects of clouds, water vapour, ozone, carbon dioxide and a number of other gases, although the above 
argument is not sensitive to the details. The spectrum in the middle frame is the sum of the linestrengths in each of 
the 10 cm"1 intervals at a temperature of 250 K, using the HITRAN database (Rothman et al., 1992); the units are 
cm"'/(kgm"-). In the lower frame, the irradiance change is the instantaneous radiative forcing. 

Radiative 
Forcing 
175 
Irradiance 
Wm"2/cm-1 
100 
40 
Wavelength (microns) 
1500 
2000 
10 
Sum of 
linestrengths 
10 
in each 10 cm"1 
interval 
1000 
1500 
2000 
Change in 
- ° ° ° 1 
irradiance 
Wm"2/cm"1 
-0.002 
-0.003 
(c) 
W—-v7 
Effect on tropopause irradiance 
of increasing carbon dioxide from 
1980 to 1990 values 
J_ 
500 
1000 
Wave number (cm"1) 
1500 
2000 
Figure 4.1: An illustration that additional amounts of CO, in the atmosphere do enhance the greenhouse effect - the details of the 
calculations are given in the footnote to the box. (a) Net infrared irradiance (Wm'-Vcm"1) at the tropopause from a standard radiative 
transfer code using typical atmospheric conditions; (b) Representation of the strength of the spectral lines of C02 in the thermal 
infrared; note the logarithmic scale, (c) Change in net irradiance at the tropopause (in Wm'-Vcm"1) on increasing the CO, concentration 
from its 1980 to 1990 levels, whilst holding all other parameters fixed. Note that the change in irradiance at the wavelength of 
maximum absorption, as shown in (b), is essentially zero, while the most marked effects on the irradiance are at wavelengths at which 
C02 is less strongly absorbing. 
These features have been supported by several model 
studies (Ramaswamy et al., 1992; Wang et al., 1993; 
Shine, 1993; Kami and Frolkis, 1992), as well as by an 
intercomparison exercise (Shine et al., 1995; WMO, 
1994). An expanded discussion of recent developments in 
this area can be found in WMO (1994). 
Accurate knowledge of the magnitude of the ozone loss 
in the lower stratosphere in different regions is important 
in evaluating the global radiative forcing. While IPCC 
(1992) reported the forcings due to ozone loss in the mid-
to-high latitudes, the SAGE observations (McCormick et 
al., 1992) suggest a depletion in the tropical regions as 
well. Thus, the low-latitude regions could also experience 
a negative radiative forcing due to the local stratospheric 
ozone loss (Schwarzkopf and Ramaswamy, 1993), but 
there is little supporting evidence for such changes from 
other measurements (WMO, 1994). 
The radiative forcing is strongly governed by the shape 
of the vertical profile of the ozone change, particularly in 
the vicinity of the tropopause (Wang et al., 1980; Lads et 
al., 1990). While it is unambiguously clear that a loss of 
ozone in the lower stratosphere will lead to a negative 
radiative forcing of the surface-troposphere system, the 
precise value is dependent on the assumed shape of the 
ozone change with altitude. In the absence of reliable data 
near the tropopause, the different assumptions made in 
model computations of the forcing can lead to a significant 
difference 
in the estimates (Wang el al., 
1993; 
Schwarzkopf and Ramaswamy, 1993). 
Wang et al. (1993) report instances where the loss of 
stratospheric ozone results in a warming rather than a 
cooling of the surface-troposphere system; this can be 
explained by the fact that the position of the tropopause in 
these calculations is such that some of the ozone-sonde 

776 
Radiative 
Forcing 
Table 4.3: Radiative forcing due to halocarbons per unit mass and per molecule increase in atmospheric 
concentration, 
relative to CFC-11. The table shows direct forcings only. The absolute radiative forcing due to CFC-11 is taken from 
IPCC (1990) and is 0.22 dX Wm'2 where dX is the perturbation 
to the volume mixing ratio of CFC-11 
inppbv. 
Gas 
Af per 
unit mass 
relative to 
CFC-11 
1.00 
1.45 
0.93 
1.18 
1.04 
0.41 
0.23 
1.37 
0.73 
1.12 
1.04 
1.06 
0.72 
0.88 
1.03 
1.03 
1.02 
0.72 
0.87 
1.59 
1.08 
0.85 
0.95 
1.06 
0.95 
0.86 
0.69 
1.36 
0.77 
1.00 
0.75 
AF per unit 
molecule 
relative to 
CFC-11 
1.00 
1.27 
1.27 
1.47 
1.17 
0.46 
0.22 
0.86 
0.62 
0.82 
0.77 
0.40 
0.80 
0.87 
0.90 
0.63 
0.49 
1.07 
1.29 
0.81 
0.80 
0.52 
1.17 
1.17 
0.93 
1.58 
0.44 
1.37 
1.05 
1.46 
1.84 
Source 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
Fisher (pers.comm.) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
Granier (pers. comm.) 
IPCC (1990) 
Granier (pers. comm.) 
Granier (pers. comm.) 
Granier (pers. comm.) 
Fisher (pers. comm.) 
Fisher (pers. comm.) 
Clerbaux and Colin (1994) 
Mean of Briihl and Fisher 
(pers. comm.) 
Fisher (pers. comm.) 
Fisher (pers..comm.) 
Fisher (pers. comm.) 
Isaksen etal. (1992) 
IsakseneW. (1992) 
Roehl et al. (1994) 
Fisher (pers.comm.) 
Mean of Roehl et al. 1994 
CFCs and other chlorinated species 
CFC-11 
CFCI3 
CFC-12 
CFC-113 
CFC-114 
CFC-115 
*Carbon tetrachloride 
CCL 
Methyl chloroform 
HFC/HCFCs in production now, and likely to be widely used 
HCFC-22 
HCFC-141b 
HCFC-142b 
HFC-134a 
*HFC-32 
HFC/HCFCs. in production now, for specialised end use 
HCFC-123 
HCFC-124 
*HFC-125 
HFC-143a 
*HFC-152a 
*HCFC-225ca 
*HCFC-225cb 
HFC/HCFCs under consideration, for specialised end use 
*HFC-23+ 
CHF, 
* HFC-134 
* HFC-143 
*HFC-227 
*HFC-236 
*HFC-245 
*HFC43-10mee 
CF2C12 
CF2C1CFC12 
CF2C1CF2C1 
CF3CF2C1 
CH3CC13 
CHF2C1 
CH3CFC12 
CH3CF2C1 
CF3CH2F 
CH2F2 
CF3CHC12 
CF3CHFC1 
CF3CHF2 
CH3CF3 
CHF2CH3 
CF3CF2CHCI2 
CC1F2CF2CHC1F 
CHF2CHF2 
CH2FCHF2 
CF3CHFCF3 
CF3CH2CF3 
CHF2CF2CFH2 
C5H2F10 
Fully fluorinated substances 
*CF4 
'CzF* 
* % 
*cC,F„ 
*SF6 
Other species 
CFC-13 
CHCl, 
CH,C12 
CF3Br (Halon 1301) 
CF3I 
perfluorocyclobutane 
CCIFs 
2.75 
1.37 
2.92 
1.04 
0.090 
0.23 
1.19 
1.20 
0.078 
0.14 
1.29 
1.71 
and Ko (pers comm.) 
Mean of Ko etal. (1993) 
and Stordal e; a/. (1993) 
Mean of Briihl and Fisher 
(pers comm.) 
Fisher (pers. comm.) 
Fisher (pers. comm.) 
IPCC (1990) 
Pinnock (pers. comm.) 
Also emitted as a by-product of other halocarbon production. 
Indicates value amended from IPCC (1990), or gas not previously listed: the mass factor for CC14 has altered due to a 
typographical error in IPCC (1990). 

Radiative Forcing 
177 
observed increases in ozone are attributed to the lower 
stratosphere. Hauglustaine et al. (J994) also find that the 
decrease in stratospheric ozone causes a warming of the 
surface-troposphere system. They used a 2-D chemical-
dynamical-radiative model to simulate changes in the 
concentration of a number of gases including ozone since 
pre-industrial times. The sign of their stratospheric ozone 
effect appears to be because, in the Northern Hemisphere 
at least, their model simulates less ozone depletion in the 
lower stratosphere than is indicated by recent observations; 
if ozone loss occurs in the upper stratosphere it can cause a 
positive radiative forcing (see Lacis et al., 1990). 
The overall effect of observed stratospheric ozone 
depletion on radiative forcing has not been significantly 
updated since WMO (1991) which reported an adjusted 
radiative forcing of about -0.1 Wm"2 between 1980 and 
1990. Hansen et al. (1993a) compute a global mean 
adjusted forcing of -0.2±0.1 Wm"2 between 1970 and 
1990. Such values represent a small but not neglibible 
offset to the total greenhouse forcing from changes in C09, 
CH4, N 20 and the CFCs which resulted in a forcing of 
about 0.45 Wm"2 between 1980 and 1990. 
Model-dependent factors may also be significant for the 
accuracy of the computed forcing. An intercomparison 
exercise (Shine et al., 1995; WMO, 1994), with tightly 
specified conditions, found that, although all the 
participating models produced a negative forcing, there 
was a substantial spread (more than a factor of two). Most 
of this spread results from differences in calculations at 
solar wavelengths; the spread seems due more to the 
approximations used by the different groups rather than an 
inherent uncertainty in modelling solar radiation in the 
atmosphere. 
4.3.3 Significance of the Forcing due to Stratospheric 
Ozone Loss 
The weight of evidence suggests that heterogeneous 
chemical reactions involving the decay products of 
halocarbons are the main cause of the observed global 
ozone depletion (WMO, 1994). Since several of these 
compounds, particularly the CFCs, exert a (direct) positive 
effect, the (indirect) negative radiative forcing due to the 
chemically-induced ozone losses has the potential to 
substantially reduce the overall contribution of the 
halocarbons, particularly over the past decade. 
Daniel et al. (1994) have partitioned the total direct and 
the total indirect forcing among the various halocarbons. 
The indirect effect is strongly dependent upon the 
effectiveness of each halocarbon for ozone destruction. 
Each bromine atom released in the stratosphere is 
estimated to contribute more to the indirect effect than 
each chlorine atom. About 50% of the 1980-1990 indirect 
forcing of about -0.1 Wm"2 is attributed to the CFCs; since 
the CFCs dominate the direct positive forcing due to all 
halocarbons (estimated to be about 0.1 Wm"2), their net 
effect is about 50% of the direct effect because of ozone 
loss. Carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform each 
contribute 20% to the indirect 
forcing, 
while 
bromocarbons contribute 10%; since these species 
contribute little to the direct effect, their net effect is likely 
to be negative. This analysis suggests that the net 
halocarbon forcing was probably quite strong and positive 
in the 1960s and 1970s (i.e., before the period of marked 
ozone losses), but that the rate of increase in forcing since 
then has probably decreased owing to the indirect 
component attributable to ozone depletion. 
As with all radiative forcings, there is a significant 
question concerning the degree to which positive and 
negative forcings of a different nature (such as the CFC 
and ozone forcings) can be directly intercompared. 
4.3.4 Temperature Changes in the Lower Stratosphere 
Models 
Fixed dynamical heating (FDH) and radiative-convective 
models compute significant temperature decreases in the 
lower stratosphere as a result of the stratospheric ozone 
changes of the past decade (WMO, 1991; Miller et al., 
1992; Shine, 1993; Kami and Frolkis, 1992; Ramaswamy 
and Bowen, 1994). It is this temperature change that 
determines, to a substantial extent, the negative forcing 
due to the ozone losses (IPCC, 1992; WMO, 1991). 
McCormack and Hood (1994) calculate the temperature 
decreases using an FDH model employing the ozone 
changes deduced from the the Solar Backscattered Ultra 
Violet instrument on the Nimbus-7 satellite for the period 
1979-1991; the temperature changes are comparable to or 
slightly less than the decadal change inferred from satellite 
and radiosonde data in regions where the observed trends 
are statistically significant. 
GCM studies with imposed ozone losses in the lower 
stratosphere also obtain a temperature decrease in this 
region. Hansen et al. (1993a) obtain a cooling in the lower 
stratosphere that is consistent with the global mean decadal 
trend (-().4°C) inferred from radiosonde observations. 
Another GCM study (Ramaswamy, pers. comm.) finds a 
similar cooling of the lower stratosphere and shows that 
the FDH temperature changes exhibit a qualitatively 
similar zonal pattern as the GCM results. A three-
dimensional chcmical-radiative-dynamical investigation of 
the climatic effects due to the Antarctic ozone losses 
(Mahlman et al., 1994), in which the transport of ozone 
and the ozone losses are handled explicitly, reveals a 
decrease of temperature in the Southern Hemisphere lower 
stratosphere that is consistent with the observed trends. An 
important aspect of such GCM experiments is that the 
dynamical response results in temperature changes at 

778 
latitudes at which no significant ozone change is imposed, 
e.g., in the tropics. 
Observations 
There is a considerable literature reporting observational 
evidence of a cooling of the lower stratosphere which is 
discussed in more detail in WMO, 1994. The detection of 
long-term trends in lower stratospheric temperatures is 
made difficult because of the episodic and frequent 
volcanic eruptions which cause a major perturbation to 
those temperatures (see Section 4.4.2.4) as well as other 
sources of natural variability. An additional problem 
concerns the quality of available radiosonde data (Gaffen, 
1994; Parker and Cox, 1994). Changes in instrumentation, 
ascent times and reporting practices introduce a number of 
time varying biases which have not yet been properly 
characterised; they indicate the need for some caution 
when using data primarily intended for weather forecasting 
in climate trend analysis. 
Based on all available radiosonde reports for the period 
December, 1963 to November, 1988, Oort and Liu (1993) 
infer a trend in the global lower stratospheric (100-50 
mbar) temperature of -0.4±0.12°C/decade; the cooling trend 
is apparent during all seasons. Latitudinal profiles of the 
estimated trends show that the cooling of the lower 
stratosphere has occurred everywhere, but that the strongest 
temperature decreases (-l°C/decade) have occurred in the 
Southern Hemisphere high latitudes, strongly suggesting an 
association with the Antarctic "ozone hole". These results 
are in generally good agreement with earlier estimates by 
Angell (1988) using a subset of 63 sonde stations and 
corroborate the findings in Miller et al. (1992). Labitzke's 
(pers. comm.) analysis of Northern Hemisphere sonde data 
indicates an annual mean trend of -0.2 to -0.4°C/decade 
between 1965 and 1992 at most latitudes between 30 and 
80 mbar, although the trend varies greatly from month to 
month. In addition there is an indication that the trend 
during springtime is more negative over the period 1979 to 
1993 than over the period 1965 to 1992. 
Channel 4 of the Microwave Sounder Unit (MSU) on 
the NOAA polar-orbiting satellites has been used to 
monitor trends in lower stratospheric temperature (between 
about 120 and 40 mbar) since 1979. Christy and Drouilhet 
(1994) report a trend of -0.26°C/decade for the period 
January, 1979 to November, 1992, but comment that, 
because of the effects of the volcanoes, its significance is 
hard to assess. For the period 1979 to 1991, Randel and 
Cobb (1994), using MSU data, infer a significant cooling 
of the lower stratosphere over the Northern Hemisphere 
mid-latitudes in winter and spring (with a peak exceeding 
-1.5°C/decadc) and over Antarctica in the Southern 
Hemisphere spring (peak exceeding -2.5°C/decade) 
(Figure 4.2); the overall space-time patterns are similar to 
Radiative Forcing 
those determined for ozone trends except in southern mid-
to high latitudes in winter. The Northern Hemisphere 
trends derived from MSU data are in good agreement with 
the sonde analysis from the Free University of Berlin 
(McCormack and Hood, 1994; Labitzke, pers. comm.) 
In summary, the available analyses indicate that the lower 
stratosphere has, on a global-mean basis, cooled by about 
0.25-0.4°C/decade in recent decades although more work on 
the quality of the archived data sets is clearly warranted. 
Ozone trend (DU/year) 
M
A
M
J 
J
A
S
O
N 
Month 
Temperature trend (°C/year) 
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D 
Month 
Figure 4.2: Latitude-time sections of zonal mean total ozone (in 
Dobson Units (DU)/year) and lower stratospheric zonal mean 
temperature trends (in °C/yr) for the period from 1979 to 1991 
from Randel and Cobb (1994). The ozone data are from the Total 
Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS). The temperature data arc 
from Channel 4 of the Microwave Sounding Unit (see text for 
details). Stippling denotes regions where the statistical fits are not 
different from zero at the 2 sigma level. The hatched areas on th. 
upper plot indicate polar night, where TOMS does not measure. 
The bold lines on the lower plot also indicate the edge of the 
polar night. 

Radiative Forcing 
/7V 
Inferences 
The cooling of the lower stratosphere, either from the 
long-term records or those over the past decade, is too 
strong to be attributable to increases in the well-mixed 
greenhouse gases (mainly C02) alone (Miller et al., 1992; 
Hansen et al., 1993a; Shine, 1993; Ramaswamy and 
Bowen, 1994). In contrast, models employing the observed 
ozone losses yield a global temperature decrease that 
is broadly 
consistent 
with 
observations. 
This 
strongly suggests that, among the trace gases, stratospheric 
ozone change is the dominant contributor to the observed 
cooling trends. However, the potential competing effects 
due to as yet unknown changes in other radiative 
constituents (e.g., ice clouds, water vapour, tropospheric 
aerosols and tropospheric ozone: Hansen et al., 1993a; 
Ramaswamy and Bowen, 1994) makes it difficult to 
rigorously quantify the precise contribution by ozone to 
the temperature trends. 
It is encouraging that both the FDH models and 
the GCMs yield a lower stratospheric cooling that is 
consistent with the magnitude inferred from observations. 
Precise agreement should not be expected as, in all the 
model studies, the lower stratospheric temperature 
changes are subject to uncertainties related to the assumed 
vertical and horizontal distribution of the ozone change, 
and there is uncertainty in the observed temperature 
trends. 
43.5 Sensitivity of Surface-Troposphere Climate 
Hansen et al. (1993c) have used a GCM to evaluate the 
relative effects due to the well-mixed greenhouse gases 
and ozone upon the surface temperature. A sequence of 
model runs with the 1970-1990 increases in the well-
mixed greenhouse gases only is compared with a sequence 
including observed ozone changes; the members of each 
sequence differ only in their initial conditions. It is 
estimated that the 1970-1990 modelled surface warming 
(0.35°C) is reduced by 15% due to the ozone changes. 
Although there is a considerable spread among the 
different GCM realisations in the sequence of experiments 
performed, the results indicate that the cooling induced by 
ozone loss has the potential to reduce the warming effect 
obtained due to the halocarbon increases over the time 
period considered. Despite the fact that only one GCM 
study has been performed to study the surface temperature 
response, the results are consistent with expectations from 
the radiative forcing and the simple relation usually 
assumed for the forcing-response relationship. However, 
as discussed in Section 4.8, the forcing-response 
relationship (i.e., the climate sensitivity) may be sensitive 
to the altitude at which the ozone perturbation is 
introduced in the model. 
4.3.6 Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Tropospheric 
Ozone 
As discussed in Chapter 2 there is observational and model 
evidence for an increase in tropospheric ozone since pre-
industrial times at least in some areas; this is believed to be 
due to anthropogenic emissions of hydrocarbons, oxides of 
nitrogen and carbon monoxide. An increase in 
tropospheric ozone leads to a positive forcing that would 
tend to warm the surface-troposphere system and has been 
the subject of several recent studies (e.g., Lacis et at., 
1990; WMO, 1991; Wang et al.. 1993; Schwarzkopf and 
Ramaswamy, 1993; Hauglustaine et al., 1994). Wang et 
al.\ (1993) study using ozonesonde observations indicates 
that tropospheric ozone changes have the potential to yield 
a substantial local forcing comparable to the effect of all 
other greenhouse gases. Hauglustaine et al. (1994) use a 
2-D radiative-dynamical-chemical model to estimate that 
changes in tropospheric ozone since pre-industrial times 
have contributed a global mean forcing of 0.55 Win"2 
over that period, with the dominant contribution in 
the mid-latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. Their 
computed tropospheric ozone change is in reasonable 
agreement with other similar studies (WMO, 1994) and is 
not inconsistent with the few available long-term surface 
observations; global upper tropospheric ozone changes, 
which are an important component of the forcing, 
are however not well quantified by observations. 
Fishman (1991), using observed trends, estimates that 
between 1965 and 1985 a 1% per year trend in tropos-
pheric ozone applied over the entire Northern Hemisphere 
implies an approximate global mean forcing of 0.15 
Wm"2, or about 20% of the effect of well-mixed green-
house gases; however since this study uses evidence from a 
few northern mid-latitude sites, the extrapolation of ozone 
changes to the whole hemisphere may not he valid. 
Marenco el al. (1994) have used observations from 
France in the late 19th century together with recent 
observations of the meridional distribution of tropospheric 
ozone to estimate a global-mean forcing since pre-
industrial times of 0.6 Wm"2. They used the simple 
expression for tropospheric ozone forcing (0.02 Wm"2 
/ppbv change in tropospheric ozone) used in IPCC (1990); 
this expression is reasonable for first-order estimates when 
the ozone change is distributed throughout the troposphere 
(WMO, 1991; IPCC, 1992). 
Given that there have been so few detailed studies of 
the global or hemispheric radiative forcing due 
to tropospheric ozone, and there is considerable reliance 
on chemical models in inferring the change in ozone on 
large scales, it is difficult to characterise a range for 
the forcing. Nevertheless, the available modelling results 
and observational information indicate a positive forcing, 
since pre-industrial times, of the order of a few tenths 

/ao 
Radiative Forcing 
of a Win'2; this would make tropospheric ozone changes 
of comparable significance to changes of methane over 
the same period. The increases in tropospheric ozone will 
be highly regional in nature and so will the positive 
radiative forcing associated with them. Indeed, since the 
sources of the precursors of ozone are similar to those of 
sulphate aerosols in the troposphere, the regional pattern of 
forcing may be similar in size, but of opposite sign, to the 
radiative forcing associated with the aerosols (see Section 
4.4.1). 
In an intercomparison exercise (Shine et al., 1995), 
similar to that for the stratospheric ozone loss, a specific 
tropospheric ozone increase profile was also prescribed. 
All the participating models obtain a positive forcing due 
to increasing tropospheric ozone; again, however, there is 
a spread in the forcing - in this case, by about 50%, 
indicating a non-negligible difference in the radiative 
treatments in the various models. 
4.3.7 Radiative Forcing due to Total Atmospheric Ozone 
Change 
While it is clear that a tropospheric ozone increase alone 
would lead to a positive radiative forcing and that this 
would be opposite to the effect due to the lower 
stratospheric losses, the sign of the net effect is uncertain 
(WMO, 1985; Lacis et al, 1990; Kami and Frolkis, 1992; 
Schwarzkopf and Ramaswamy, 1993; Wang et al, 1993). 
Based on the global-mean estimates above, it seems likely 
that radiative forcing due to changes in tropospheric ozone 
has dominated since pre-industrial times. Over the past 
decade or so, stratospheric ozone loss is likely to have 
dominated the forcing as the stratospheric losses are more 
marked than the tropospheric changes over the same 
period. 
4.3.8 Outstanding Issues 
Radiative forcing due to a specified ozone change, as a 
function of the ozone altitude, is qualitatively well 
understood. 
Nevertheless, 
as 
revealed 
by 
the 
intercomparison exercise, approximate radiative methods 
appear to differ in their estimates; it is important that 
such differences be understood. However, the prin-
cipal limitation inhibiting an accurate estimate of 
the global ozone forcing is the lack of knowledge of 
the precise vertical profile of change with latitude and 
season. 
In contrast to the well-mixed greenhouse gases, ozone 
change causes a more complicated radiative forcing -
neither the ozone profile nor its change are uniform in the 
horizontal and vertical. The spatial patterns of the radiative 
forcing differ for changes in ozone and the well-mixed 
gases. In addition, even the apportionment between the 
surface and the troposphere is different for ozone relative 
to the well-mixed greenhouse gases (WMO, 1985; 1991). 
Ozone forcings have not been used for systematic climate 
studies analogous to those carried out for the well-mixed 
greenhouse gases. It remains to be determined the degree 
to which the irradiance change at the tropopause is a 
reasonable indicator of the surface temperature response in 
the case of ozone changes. 
As discussed in WMO (1991) and WMO (1994), there 
is evidence that heterogeneous chemistry on sulphate 
aerosol leads to enhanced ozone loss. The observations of 
unusually low ozone in the northern mid-latitudes during 
the winter of 1992-93 and spring of 1993 (see Chapter 2) 
suggest a possible link with aerosols produced as a result 
of the Mt. Pinatubo eruption. Such a volcanic eruption-
ozone link would imply an enhancement of the transient 
negative radiative forcing owing to the presence of 
unusually large volcanic sulphate aerosol concentrations 
(see Section 4.4.2). 
Additional complications in the determination of the 
ozone forcing are uncertainties in the feedbacks related to 
chemical processes. One example of this is the 
stratospheric ozone loss-OH-methane lifetime connection. 
A decrease of stratospheric ozone could lead to an increase 
of UV radiation in the troposphere, thereby affecting 
tropospheric photochemical processes and providing a 
potential feedback via changes in tropospheric ozone and 
OH (e.g., Madronich and Granier, 1992, 1994). For 
example, methane lifetimes could decrease leading to 
lower concentrations than would be expected in the 
absence of stratospheric ozone depletion. A lower 
stratospheric cooling due to the ozone loss can affect, for 
example, the water vapour mixing ratios there, with the 
potential to alter heterogeneous chemical reactions. Also. 
consequent changes in methane in the troposphere could 
be accompanied by changes in stratospheric water vapour 
which, in turn, would affect the radiation balance. The 
radiative forcing calculations so far have mostly employed 
observed ozone changes. It is extremely desirable to have 
interactive 
climate-chemistry-transport 
model 
investigations that simulate correctly the observed ozone 
changes and account for the chemical feedbacks in 
computing the forcing. 
Aircraft emissions have the potential to alter upper 
tropospheric/lower stratospheric ozone (see Chapter 2). 
The tentative conclusion of WMO (1994) is that the 
radiative forcing associated with the ozone change is 
similar in size to that resulting from the emissions of 
COT from aircraft: aircraft are responsible for about }'"/ 
of the fossil fuel emissions of C02. The increase in hisih 
altitude cloudiness, via contrails, and changes in water 
vapour at the same levels, might have a climate conse-
quence but we know of no evidence to support a substantia e 
effect. 

Radiative Forcing 
181 
4.4 Effects of Tropospheric and Stratospheric Aerosols 
4.4.1 Tropospheric Aerosols 
Aerosols in the troposphere produced by anthropogenic 
activities have the potential to change the globally 
averaged temperature of the Earth. Aerosols may increase 
the albedo both directly, by back-scattering incoming solar 
radiation, and indirectly, by increasing the concentrations 
of cloud condensation nuclei and therefore cloud droplets, 
which would also result in more back-scattered solar 
radiation. The latter is also suspected to induce further 
effects through the decrease of precipitation, thus affecting 
cloud lifetime and, in turn, cloud cover. On the other hand, 
carbonaceous particles are strong absorbers at solar 
wavelengths; over regions of high surface albedos and in 
cloudy areas they can substantially decrease the amount of 
radiation reflected to space. Globally, this latter effect is 
expected to be small and aerosols should increase the 
planetary albedo; however the influence of aerosol 
absorption is only beginning to receive attention and 
further research is needed. 
Desert dust is also an important component of the 
atmospheric aerosol load; the degree to which its 
distribution has been affected by human activity is not 
known. 
Three important distinctions must be made between 
tropospheric aerosol forcing and greenhouse forcing. 
Firstly, estimates of the forcing due to tropospheric 
aerosols are based on modelled, rather than observed, 
distributions of the aerosols and their optical properties; 
for most of the greenhouse gases, the concentration 
changes are from observations. Secondly, the lifetime of 
tropospheric aerosols is a few weeks, while for most 
greenhouse gases the lifetimes range from decades 
to centuries. Hence most of the aerosols in the troposphere 
at the present time are the result of emissions during the 
past few weeks; the enhanced greenhouse gas 
concentrations are the accumulated effect of releases 
over the past 10 to 100 years. As pointed out in IPCC 
(1992), this means that the concentration of tropospheric 
aerosols will respond far more rapidly to changes in 
emissions than will the concentrations of greenhouse 
gases. Thirdly, the aerosol forcing is more heterogeneous 
in space and time. Thus, global-mean forcing might not 
reflect its climatic importance as will be discussed in 
Section 4.8. For tropospheric aerosols there is little 
difference between the instantaneous and adjusted 
radiative forcing; most values in the literature are 
instantaneous forcings. 
Although the bulk of sulphate emissions occur in the 
Northern Hemisphere this does not mean that the Southern 
Hemisphere might not be significantly affected. Firstly, as 
discussed in Section 4.4.1.2, the generally cleaner 
conditions in the Southern Hemisphere make cloud 
properties more susceptible to increased sulphate 
concentrations; secondly, as discussed in Section 4.8.3, 
climate model studies indicate that a radiative forcing 
applied mainly in the Northern Hemisphere can have a 
significant effect in the Southern Hemisphere. 
4.4.1.1 The direct aerosol effect 
Since IPCC (1992) there has been increasing interest in the 
role of tropospheric aerosols resulting from industrial 
activity and biomass burning. Chapter 3 considers the 
various aspects of characterising aerosols for estimating 
their impact on radiative forcing; in this section we 
concentrate on the most recent estimates of the aerosol 
radiative forcing. In the discussion of radiative forcing, the 
approach in Chapter 3 was a zero-dimensional box model 
which highlighted some of the causes of uncertainty. Here 
we consider a more comprehensive approach. 
An accurate assessment of the effect of tropospheric 
aerosols on the radiation balance requires knowledge of: 
(i) 
their spatial and temporal distribution and 
(ii) 
their radiative properties. 
Sulphate aerosols 
The first estimate of the spatial distribution of the radiative 
forcing due to sulphate aerosols was discussed in IPCC 
(1992). It was calculated with a simple aerosol radiative 
transfer model (Charlson et ah, 1991, 1992) applied to the 
spatial and temporal distribution of sulphate aerosols 
calculated over the globe obtained from an idealised 3-D 
chemical-dynamical model (Langner and Rodhe, 1991). 
Large negative forcings of -2 to -4 Wm"2 were found over 
the eastern USA, central Europe and China, with a 
Northern Hemispheric averaged sulphate forcing of-1.1 
Wm"2 (-0.6 Wm"2 for the global-mean forcing) since pre-
industrial times. The major sources of uncertainly in these 
calculations are related to the two factors listed above, i.e., 
sulphate distribution and optical properties. 
A more sophisticated radiative transfer calculation has 
been performed by Kiehl and Briegleb (1993) on the same 
sulphate distribution (Figure 4.3). They also calculated the 
spatial and temporal distribution of the instantaneous 
greenhouse forcing (Figure 4.4) using the pre-industrial to 
1990 trace gas changes from IPCC (1990). They then 
compared the aerosol direct forcing to the greenhouse 
forcing to assess the relative role of the aerosol's negative 
forcing to that of the positive greenhouse forcing. 
Kiehl and Briegleb (1993) employed temperature and 
moisture distributions from ECMWF analyses, cloud data 
from a GCM which were adjusted using observational 
data, climatological o/one data and a realistic distribution 
of surface albedo. The sulphate optical properties were 
based on assuming a log-normal size distribution and 
employing H,S04 refractive index data (calculations were 
also carried out for ammonium sulphate indices of 
refraction). Although the spatial distribution (Figure 4.3) 

/K2 
Radiative Forcing 
of the anthropogenic aerosol forcing was found to be 
similar to that obtained by Charlson et al. (1991), the 
magnitude of the forcing is roughly a factor of two 
smaller: the Northern Hemisphere averaged forcing is 
-0.43 Wm"2 and the global-mean forcing is -0.3 Wm'2 
since pre-industrial times. The source of the difference 
between these two studies was mostly attributed to 
differences in the optical properties of the aerosols that 
were used in the simulations (asymmetry parameters and 
spectral dependence of the aerosol extinction: the 
asymmetry parameter is a measure of the amount of 
radiation scattered in the forward direction relative to the 
backward direction). 
The radiative forcing due to sulphate aerosols 
plus greenhouse gases, derived by Kiehl 
and 
Briegleb (1993) indicated that over the eastern USA, 
central Europe and eastern China (see Figure 4.5) the 
negative forcing by the aerosols offsets a significant 
amount of the positive greenhouse forcing. Note that for 
the global average, the instantaneous greenhouse forcing 
calculated by Kiehl and Briegleb is +2.1 Wm"2 compared 
to a -0.3 Wm"2 for aerosol forcing. It must be emphasised 
that the geographical pattern of forcing shown in Figure 
4.5 must not be taken to indicate the geographical pattern 
of climate response because the atmospheric circulation 
leads to a non-local response to a localised forcing (see 
Section 4.8). 
Hansen et al. (1993a), using the same sulphate 
distribution, but allowing for some aerosol absorption, 
obtained a global mean forcing of -0.25 Wm"2. 
A global-mean forcing by anthropogenic sulphate 
aerosols of -0.9 Wm"2 has been obtained by Taylor and 
Penner (1994) with a coupled sulphur chemistry and 
climate model. The chemical model used was similar to, 
but independent of, the model used by Langner and Rodhe. 
It is important to note that the global-mean forcing could 
range as low as -0.6 Wm"2 if the dependence of aerosol 
extinction on relative humidity was accounted for in the 
manner of Kiehl and Briegleb. The remainder of the 
difference was partly attributed to larger sulphate 
concentrations in the Taylor and Penner study, leading to 
larger aerosol optical thickness, and to a larger seasonal 
variation of sulphate amounts. 
The very large sensitivity of the results of these 
simulations to the prescription of the aerosol's optical 
properties clearly indicates that improvements in 
calculating the direct sulphate aerosol forcing require more 
observational data on the chemical and physical properties 
of the aerosol as well as more refined sulphate distribution 
calculations. 
Biomass burning 
As noted in Chapter 3 the aerosols produced by the 
combustion of biomass account for a significant part of the 
most radiatively active aerosols of the accumulation mode 
(0.1 to 1 jum). The global-mean direct aerosol forcing due 
to biomass burning has been estimated to be -0.8 Wm"2 
(Penner et al., 1992). This estimate is based upon simple 
box model calculations and, according to Penner (pers. 
Anthropogenic sulphate aerosol forcing 
90°N 
45°N 
180° 
90°W 
90°E 
180° 
Figure 4.3: Geographic distribution of annual mean direct radiative forcing (Wm"2) from anthropogenic sulphate aerosols (after Kich 
and Briegleb, 1993). The calculations use the sulphate distribution calculated by Langner and Rodhe (1991). The contour interval is 0 
Wm"2 and values below -lWm2 are shaded. 

Radiative Forcing 
183 
Greenhouse gas forcing 
90°N 
45°N 
45°S -
90°S 
180° 
90°W 
180° 
Figure 4.4: Geographic distribution of annual-mean instantaneous greenhouse forcing, pre-industrial to present, (Wm"2) from CO.,, 
CH4, N20, CFC-11 and CFC-12 (after Kiehl and Brieglcb, 1993). The gases are uniformly mixed throughout the atmosphere; the 
spatial variability in the forcing results from a combination of variations in temperature, humidity and cloudiness. The effects of 
stratospheric and tropospheric ozone changes, and a number of CFCs, are not included. The contour interval is 0.5 Wm"2. 
comm.), it would be reduced by roughly a factor of 2 if it 
were made with a 3-D model. A further reduction of a 
factor of 2 applies if the period of reference is fixed to 
1850 since significant changes in biomass burning are 
thought to have occurred prior to 1850 (Andreae, 1994). 
This gives a global and annual mean forcing of -0.2 Wm"2 
since pre-industrial times. The calculations of Hansen et 
al. (1993a) give about half this value (-0.12 Wm"2) for the 
same period of reference. According to Chapter 3, these 
values could be in error by nearly a factor of 3, giving a 
possible range of -0.05 to -0.6 Wm2 since pre-industrial 
times, and is in addition to the negative forcing due to 
sulphate aerosol. 
The spatial distribution of aerosols from biomass origin 
is also heterogeneous and mostly localised in the 
continental tropical areas; in addition, it is strongly 
seasonal. As for the sulphate aerosols, their climatic 
influence might not be assessed correctly by using a single 
global-mean radiative forcing. 
The contribution of elemental carbon in aerosols 
produced from biomass burning can significantly modify 
their optical characteristics by increasing the absorption 
efficiency; however, at present, there are no global 
estimates of the forcing due to elemental carbon or organic 
based aerosols produced by biomass burning. 
The question of the global climatic response to large 
localised soot injections has been considered with the 
burning oil wells in Kuwait during the Gulf War in early 
1991. The response seems to have been small outside the 
neighbouring region. A series of model simulations by 
Bakan et al. (1991) concluded that the reason for that was 
the relatively low initial height of the soot injection; 
however, a simulation performed with a fourfold increase 
of the soot emission led to a large global response. 
4.4.1.2 Indirect effect of anthropogenic aerosols on cloud 
albedo 
The global energy balance is very sensitive to cloud 
albedo, particularly for marine stratus clouds which cover 
about 25% of the Earth. Cloud albedo is itself calculated to 
be sensitive to changes in cloud droplet number 
concentration. This droplet number depends, in a 
complicated manner, on the concentration of cloud 
condensation nuclei (CCN) which, in turn, depends on 
aerosol concentration. Through this indirect effect, the 
radiative forcing caused by anthropogenic aerosol might be 
further increased. This concerns both sulphate aerosols and 
aerosols from biomass burning. The problem, however, is 
extremely complex and many related key issues such as 
the influence of cloud entrainment and mixing processes 
remain mostly unknown. This matter is made more 
challenging because the ability of an aerosol particle to act 
as a CCN under the low supersaturations found in clouds 
depends both on its size and its chemical composition. 
Two features of the latter are important: the water-soluble 
fraction and the presence of substances (e.g., organic 
species) that influence surface tension. Thus substantial 
chemical understanding is also needed before the 
CCN/cloud albedo/climate problem can he considered as 
well posed. 

784 
Radiative Forcing 
Net (sulphate aerosol + greenhouse gas) forcing 
90°N 
45°N -
90°W 
180° 
Figure 4.5: Geographic distribution of the annual-mean instantaneous radiative forcing (Wm"2) since pre-industrial times due to 
changes in both greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols (direct effects only) - the field is the sum of those shown in Figures 4.3 and 4.4 
(after Kiehl and Briegleb, 1993). Note that the global-mean forcing is positive (1.8 Wm2) but there are small regions where the 
negative forcing due to sulphate aerosols is greater than the positive greenhouse forcing, so that the local sum is negative. The contour 
interval is 0.5 Wm"2 and values below zero are shaded. 
Although the link between CCN concentration and 
cloud droplet size distributions is not firmly established, 
direct observations of the impact of CCN on cloud albedos 
have already been reported in Coakley et al. (1987) which 
showed the impact of aerosols concentrations on cloud 
reflectances in ship stack exhausts. Kim and Cess (1993) 
used monthly averaged Earth Radiation Budget 
Experiment (ERBE) observations to compare the 
variations with longitude of the cloud albedos of two 
strongly polluted ocean areas of the Northern Hemisphere 
(North Atlantic and North Pacific) to those of remote clean 
areas of the Southern Hemisphere (Indian Ocean and 
South Pacific). They found some evidence of a decrease of 
the cloud albedos with distance from the continent in the 
Northern Hemisphere whereas observations in the 
Southern Hemisphere showed no similar variation. 
However, a direct link with aerosols was not established 
by that paper, so the results are, at most, only suggestive of 
an aerosol-cloud albedo link. 
Satellite observations have also been used to estimate 
the effect of smoke aerosols on the properties of clouds 
over the Brazilian Amazon Basin (Kaufman and Nakajima, 
1993). This analysis was based on several tens of 
thousands of bright clouds. It concluded that a large 
reduction in drop size (from 15 to 9 /.im) occurred when 
smoke was present but it also showed that the reflectances 
of those clouds indeed decreased, probably due to the 
increased absorption by graphitic carbon. For those 
particular clouds, the indirect effect of aerosols would be a 
positive forcing. These observations exemplify the 
important influence of the chemical composition of 
aerosols, in particular that of carbonaceous components. 
Indeed, the multiple scattering that occurs in dense clouds 
considerably amplifies the effect of even a small portion of 
absorbing particles. The influence of aerosols on cloud 
absorption is a complicating factor that needs to be 
considered (Stephens and Tsay, 1990; Chylek and Hallett. 
1992) before a realistic estimate of aerosol forcing can be 
made. 
Model Simulations 
Jones et al. (1994), using fields from the United Kingdom 
Meteorological Office Unified Forecast/Climate Model. 
calculated the indirect radiative forcing of sulphate 
aerosols due to a modification of cloud droplet size. The 
cloud radiative properties were calculated from the cloud 
liquid water content and effective radius. In thai 
calculation, the effective radius was related to aerosol 
concentrations using an empirical relationship based on 
observational data collected for a variety of meteorological 
conditions (Martin et al., 1994) and the distribution of 
column sulphate aerosol loading was derived by Languor 
and Rodhe (1991). The indirect effect at the top of the 
atmosphere was found to be about -1.3 Wm"2 in the global 
annual mean since pre-industrial times. The Norther, 

Radiative Forcing 
185 
Hemisphere forcing is found to be 1.6 times greater than 
that in the Southern Hemisphere; this is small compared to 
the factor of 3 difference in the direct aerosol forcing 
calculated by Kiehl and Briegleb (1993) using the same 
sulphate distribution. The reason is that the lower the pre-
industrial concentration of CCN, the more susceptible the 
cloud albedo, and hence forcing, is to an increase in 
sulphate concentration; this acts to amplify the effect of 
aerosol increases on the forcing in regions such as the 
southern oceans. For a similar reason, Jones et al. (1994) 
point out that the forcing per unit mass of sulphate will 
have been greater earlier in the century when cloud albedo 
was more susceptible to changes in CCN. 
The estimates of Jones et al. (1994) can be compared 
with previous estimates based on simpler models. 
Kaufman and Chou (1993) found a forcing of -0.45 Wnr2 
and Charlson et al. (1992) estimated -1 Wnv2. 
These preliminary estimates of the radiative forcing due 
to the indirect effect of aerosols were based on calculations 
of the variations of cloud reflectances associated with 
variations in droplet size, the cloud liquid water content 
remaining constant. Observations (Radke et al., 1989) 
suggest, however, that cloud liquid water may vary in 
relation to droplet number. Clouds with smaller droplets 
tend to retain their liquid water through inhibition of the 
formation of drizzle. As a consequence, for constant 
external conditions (turbulent surface fluxes, entrainment, 
sea surface temperature, incident solar energy, etc.), clouds 
with smaller droplets would tend to have liquid water 
concentrations that are larger than those of similar clouds 
with larger droplets. The resulting effect of these 
mechanisms should be to enhance the space and time 
averaged albedo of the areas of strong sulphate aerosol 
concentration. 
In recent model simulations, attempts have been made to 
account for these complex interactions between radiation, 
cloud microphysics (e.g., cloud droplet size) and 
precipitation. GCM simulations appear to exhibit a large 
sensitivity to these microphysical processes: a simulation 
performed with the LMD GCM using fixed sea surface 
temperatures (Boucher et al., 1994a, 1994b) investigated 
the effect that an increase in cloud droplet concentration 
would have on cloud properties by imposing a fourfold 
increase, for illustrative purposes. The consequent changes 
in cloud liquid water content and cloud cover led to a 
decrease in absorbed solar radiation which was 
approximately the same size as the decrease due to 
changes in cloud albedos resulting from variations in 
droplet size. Hence changes in cloud amount and liquid 
water content could lead to a significant enhancement of 
the indirect effect of aerosols. 
These model calculations confirm that through various 
mechanisms the aerosol indirect effect might make a very 
important contribution to radiative forcing. However, 
many questions remain open, such as that of the role of 
absorbing particles; in addition, the observations on which 
these simulations are based are still scarce, the evidence is 
tenuous and further observational confirmations are clearly 
needed. In addition, the representation of clouds in GCMs 
is still one of the major sources of uncertainty in climate 
modelling, the indirect aerosol effect adding to that 
uncertainty. As a consequence we can have little 
confidence in the reliability of available estimates. 
4.4.1.3 Summary of anthropogenic aerosol effects 
Although it might appear very likely that anthropogenic 
aerosols (including those resulting from biomass burning) 
do influence the radiative balance of the planet by back-
scattering incoming solar radiation, the exact value of this 
effect cannot be calculated with confidence at this time 
due to inadequate knowledge of their sources, properties 
and geographical distribution. This uncertainty will 
persist until new observational data can he collected on 
a global scale with the required accuracy (Hansen et al., 
1993b). 
The advisability and utility of comparing global-mean 
forcing of anthropogenic aerosols with that due to 
greenhouse forcing is questionable because the two types 
of forcing are fundamentally different in nature. The 
inhomogeneity of the geographical and temporal 
distribution of aerosol forcing might lead to a climatic 
response different from that resulting from a more 
geographically uniform forcing, even with the same 
global-mean forcing (see Section 4.8). 
Current estimates place the value of the global-mean 
forcing since pre-industrial times due to direct effects of 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosols in the range -0.25 to -0.9 
Wm"2. Inclusion of other aerosols from biomass burning 
could cause an additional forcing of-0.05 to -0.6 Wm"2. 
Although some observations have confirmed that, at 
least in some cases, changes in CCN concentration 
resulting from aerosol concentration enhancements do 
have a significant impact on cloud albedos, many 
questions arise that remain essentially unanswered. Under 
these conditions any estimate is very uncertain. The 
presently available estimates have shown that the indirect 
effect of aerosols might be of similar size to the direct 
effect, but observations have also shown that the influence 
of absorbing particles could lead to a decrease in cloud 
albedos in some circumstances. To permit even initial 
assessment of the magnitude of the various mechanisms 
involved in this effect, innovative and exploratory work is 
required. 

/#) 
Radiative Forcing 
4.4.2 Radiative Forcing due to Stratospheric Aerosol 
4.4.2.1 Introduction 
The stratospheric aerosol layer is of importance for the 
radiation budget of the stratosphere and for the surface-
troposphere system. An enhancement of sulphate particle 
concentrations is observed following volcanic eruptions 
which inject sulphur-containing gases into the stratosphere 
that are then converted to aerosols (see Chapter 3). Large 
concentrations of these aerosols following volcanic 
eruptions perturb the climate by: 
(a) 
warming the lower stratosphere through the 
enhanced absorption of solar and long-wave 
radiation; 
(b) 
reducing the net radiation available to the surface-
troposphere system (i.e., a negative surface-
troposphere radiative forcing). 
However, owing to the short residence times of these 
aerosols in the stratosphere (with an e-folding time of 1-2 
years), the radiative forcing produced by a single volcanic 
eruption lasts for only a few years. The spatial and the 
temporal distribution of the forcing is governed by aerosol 
microphysics and large-scale dynamical processes. The 
1991 eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines stands out 
as probably the major volcanic perturbation of this century 
(Sato etal., 1993). 
There is a possibility that the background stratospheric 
aerosol amount has increased as a result of human activity 
(Hofmann, 1990). However, even if all the aerosol in the 
stratosphere just prior to the Mt. Pinatubo eruption was 
due to human activity, which is very unlikely, the radiative 
forcing would be less than -0.2 Wm"2, if the 1990 value of 
the optical depth given by Sato et al. (1993) is used. 
4.4.2.2 Stratospheric aerosol radiative effects 
Model Computations 
The radiative forcing due to stratospheric aerosols is 
mainly determined by the optical depth and the area-
weighted mean (or effective) radius (Lacis et al., 1992). 
The surface-troposphere forcing is less sensitive to other 
characteristics such as the aerosol composition and the 
altitude. For particle effective radii below 2 /urn, which is 
the regime that is normally observed, there is a globally 
averaged cooling; above this size, the infrared radiative 
effects would dominate and there would be a globally 
averaged warming of the surface-troposphere system. The 
sensitivity of the radiative forcing is estimated to be about 
-2.5 to -3 Wm"2 for a midvisible optical depth of 0.1 (Lacis 
et al.. 1992; Russell et al., 1993). The forcing is spatially 
inhomogeneous and evolves temporally as well, consistent 
with the microphysical mechanisms governing the aerosol 
formation and sinks, and the global scale transport of 
volcanic gases and aerosols. 
In a model investigation of the aerosol produced by the 
eruption of Mt. Pinatubo, Hansen et al. (1992) considered a 
global mean midvisible optical depth that has a value of 
about 0.15 ten months after the eruption, decaying 
exponentially after that with a one-year time constant. The 
corresponding global-mean forcing is estimated to have had 
a maximum value of about -4 Wm"2, and a value of about -
1 Wm"2 until about two years following the eruption. The 
volcanic aerosol forcing over the first two years after the 
eruption is comparable with the greenhouse gas forcing 
over the past century and is substantially greater than 
greenhouse forcing over the past decade (-0.4 Wm"2). 
However, the effect of the aerosols from a single eruption is 
felt for only a short duration unlike the greenhouse gases 
which have longer lifetimes. For such a transient forcing 
only a small fraction of the possible equilibrium 
temperature change (Equation (4.1)) can be realised 
because of the thermal inertia of the climate system. 
Kinne et al. (1992) estimate a heating of the tropical 
lower stratosphere of about 0.3 K/day due to the Mt. 
Pinatubo aerosols. This heating anomaly resulted in: 
a) 
an increase in the local temperature; 
b) 
an additional mean upward motion for the aerosol 
cloud leading to adiabatic cooling; 
c) 
reductions in ozone concentrations as a consequence 
of the enhanced upward motions. 
Each of these processes operated on a different time-
scale; maximum lower stratospheric temperatures were 
observed after -90 days; maximum ozone losses of about 
1.5 ppmv occurred after 140 days. 
Observations 
Numerous observations and/or inferred information 
concerning the Mt. Pinatubo aerosols have been 
documented (e.g., GRL (1992) and see Chapter 3). The 
optical depth estimates during the first year ranged from 
-0.1-0.3 and varied with location. The most optically thick 
portions of the cloud resided between 20-25 km, and were 
confined to the 10°S-30°N zone during the early period 
(McCormick et al., 1992). Within 2-3 months, high 
stratospheric optical depths were observed to at least 70°N: 
the aerosol loading in the Southern Hemisphere was also 
enhanced. The aerosol loading has now decayed to near 
pre-emption levels. 
Directly observed narrow and broad band total solar 
irradiance effects attributable to the eruption of Ml. 
Pinatubo have been reported by both surface-based and 
satellite observations (Valero and Pilewskie, 1992; Button 
and Christy, 1992; Button et al., 1994; Minnis et al., 199?: 
Saunders, 1993). The observations during the first t\\>> 
years generally agree closely with the theoretically 
expected reductions in the solar radiation at the surface, a-. 

Radiative Forcing 
IH7 
estimated from optical depth measurements. The 
reductions range from <5 to 20 Wm~2 in the diurnal 
mean depending on the associated aerosol optical depth. 
Figure 4.6 shows the anomaly in low latitude net 
irradiance at the top of the atmosphere, as measured by the 
ERBE (Minnis et a/., 1993; updated by Minnis, 1994). The 
observations indicate a decrease of about 5 Wm2 in the 
absorbed solar radiation in the period following the 
eruption. 
The satellite observations of Minnis et at. suggest the 
possibility of significant cloud modification and hence the 
presence of an indirect aerosol radiative forcing due to the 
volcanic aerosols. Polarisation lidar observations by 
Sassen (1992) in the Northern mid-latitudes following the 
Mt. Pinatubo eruption indicate that the aerosols could have 
affected the microphysical and optical characteristics of 
cirrus clouds in the upper troposphere. A model study 
(Jensen and Toon, 1992) also suggests that the aerosols 
have a potential for the formation of cirrus clouds, with the 
extent of the effect depending on the aerosol composition 
and size distribution. While cirrus clouds so affected could 
make an important contribution to radiative forcing, global 
estimates of such indirect forcing are not possible at 
present. 
4.4.2 J Observations ami simulations of climatic effects 
Surface-troposphere 
The time-series of anomalies from satellite observations 
reveals that there was a nearly global, but non-uniform, 
tropospheric cooling following the eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo (Button and Christy, 1992). This has been shown 
to be coincident with the observed reduction in solar 
radiation reaching the troposphere. The summer 1992 
cooling was greatest in the continental interiors (Hansen et 
w/., 1993a). 
Hansen et al. (1992) have conducted a GCM 
investigation of the climatic impact due to the Mt. 
Pinatubo aerosols, using their calculations of forcing 
discussed in Section 4.4.2.2. The model predicts a global 
cooling that represents a dramatic but temporary break in 
the warm conditions of recent years. The cooling 
maximised about fifteen months after the eruption time. 
There is good agreement between the model predictions 
and the observations (see Figure 4.7b and c). The model-
computed surface cooling ranges from 0.4 to 0.6°C while 
the observed cooling estimates in 1992 (~a year after the 
eruption) range from 0.3 to 0.5°C (Hansen et al., 1993a). 
Graf et al. (1993) have used a global aerosol 
microphysics-transport model to obtain the aerosol 
4 -
3 
t 
I 1 
N ,LW V 
-3 
-5 
J 
i_ 
J 
i_ 
1985 
1986 
1987 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
Figure 4.6: Time series of smoothed wide field of view Earth Radiation Budget Experiment long-wave (LW), short-wave (SW) and 
net(LW-SW) irradiance anomalies (in Wm"2) between 40°N and 4()°S relative to the 5 year (1985-1989) monthly mean (alter Minnis et 
al., 1993, updated by Minnis, 1994). The deviation starting in mid-1991 is mainly due to the Mt. Pinatubo eruption - the net anomaly 
in August (about -4 Wm"2) is almost three times higher than the standard deviation computed between 1985 and 1989. 

788 
Radiative Forcing 
p 
0) 
5 
_c 
u 
2 
3 
2 
E <u 
2 
1 
0 
-1 
- 2 
- 3 
(a) 
-
W 
i 
Stratosphere 
V\ 
Model 
j \ l f\ 
Observations 
'/ 
w *\ 
A 
i 
i 
V 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
t 
L Mt. Pinatubo eruption 
Figure 4.7: Observed and modelled (from the G1SS GCM) 
monthly mean temperature changes over the period of the Mt. 
Pinatubo eruption (updated from Hansen et al., 1993a). The 
eruption is indicated by the vertical dashed line, (a) Stratospheric 
temperatures are from satellite observations and show the 30 mb 
zonal mean temperature at 10°S and are supplied by M.Gelman, 
NOAA; the model results are the 10-70 mb layer at 8 to 16°S. 
The zero is the mean for 1978 to 1992. (b) Tropospheric 
temperatures are from satellite observations and are supplied by 
J. Christy. Univ of Alabama; the observations and model results 
are essentially global. The zero is given by the mean for the 12 
months preceding the eruption, (c) Surface temperatures are 
derived from meteorological stations; the observations and model 
results are essentially global. The zero is given by the mean for 
the 12 months preceding the eruption. Note that the model results 
use a simple prediction of the way the optical thickness of the 
volcanic cloud varied with time, made soon after the eruption, 
rather than detailed observations of the evolution of the cloud. 
distribution under volcanically perturbed conditions; this is 
used to compute the radiative forcing. In turn, the forcing 
is employed in a GCM to study the response of the climate 
system. There is a significant warming of the aerosol-
containing layers in the tropics and the mid-latitudes, 
consistent with observations. The warming increases the 
equator-to-pole temperature gradient in the upper 
troposphere and lower stratosphere. There is also an 
increase in the polar night jet in the Northern Hemisphere, 
with strong zonal winds that extend down into the 
troposphere. 
By removing the influence of El Nino - Southern 
Oscillation events, Robock and Mao (1994) have identified 
the patterns of climate response to large volcanoes on a 
regional and seasonal basis. The cooling lasts 
approximately 2 years, with the Northern Hemisphere 
response being larger, and with an amplitude of 
approximately 0.1 to 0.2°C averaged over the 6 largest 
eruptions of the past century. A particularly interesting 
pattern is the warming over the Northern Hemisphere 
continents in the winter following tropical eruptions and in 
the second winter following high latitude eruptions. This 
pattern is found both in observations (Robock and Mao, 
1992) and in GCM simulations (Graf et al., 1993). The 
radiative forcing from major eruptions (including Mt. 
Pinatubo) is believed to alter atmospheric circulation 
patterns, so as to increase the transfer of heat from the 
oceans to Northern Hemisphere continents during the 
winter following the eruption. 
Stratosphere 
A number of studies have reported warming of the lower 
stratosphere following the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo 
(Labitzke and McCormick, 1992; Angell, 1993; Hansen et 
al., 1993a; Spencer and Christy, 1993; Christy and 
Drouilhet, 1994). Recent observations are discussed in 
more detail in WMO (1994). 
Angell (1993) finds that the warming of the lower 
stratosphere following the eruption of both Agung 
(in 1963) and El Chichon (in 1982) was greatest in 
the equatorial zone and least in the polar zones. The 
warming following the El Chichon eruption was slightly 
greater than that following the Agung eruption everywhere 
except the south polar zone. Preliminary analysis indicated 
that, in the northern extratropics and the tropics, the 
warming following the Mt. Pinatubo eruption was 
comparable to the warming that followed Agung and 11 
Chichon which is consistent with an analysis of radiosonde 
data by Labitzke (see WMO, 1994). However, in southern 
temperate and polar zones, the warming following Mt. 
Pinatubo is considerably greater, perhaps due to a 
contribution from the eruption of Cerro Hudson in Chile. 
Globally, the warming following the Mt. Pinatubo eruption 
was greater than that after the El Chichon and Aguiu: 
eruptions. 

Radiative Forcing 
189 
Lower stratospheric temperature data deduced from 
Channel 4 of MSU (see Section 4.3.4) show that the 
eruption of Mt. Pinatubo gave a slightly greater global 
mean warming (about 1.1°C) than El Chichon (about 
0.7°C) compared to the immediate pre-eruption 
temperatures (Christy and Drouilhet, 1994). 
Both MSU and radiosondes are in general agreement 
that the post-eruption warming is similar in the Northern 
Hemisphere for both El Chichon and Mt. Pinatubo. The 
greater warming in the Southern Hemisphere following 
Mt. Pinatubo is consistent in both the MSU and radiosonde 
analyses. 
Hansen et al. (1993a) show that the tropical warming in 
the lower stratosphere associated with Mt. Pinatubo is well 
simulated by the GISS GCM with an imposed idealised 
volcanic aerosol cloud (see Figure 4.7a). 
4.4.2.4 Summary 
By far the most encouraging development in the study 
of volcanic aerosol impacts has been the opportunity 
to compare model computations of radiative forcings 
with observations taken following the eruptions of El 
Chichon and Mt. Pinatubo, particularly the latter. The 
computed forcings appear to be in reasonable agreement with 
inferences from observations. Further, GCM simulations, 
especially based on the Mt. Pinatubo eruption, appear to 
yield transient global mean temperature responses that are 
reasonably consistent with observations, both for the lower 
stratosphere and the surface. In this regard, the Mt. Pinatubo 
eruption, being of a large magnitude, has afforded a test of 
the ability of current GCMs to simulate the climate system's 
response to a large transient external radiative perturbation. 
The preliminary work so far provides fair optimism for the 
credibility of the models on short time-scales. However, 
considerably more work in comparing model simulations 
with observations remains to be done, especially evaluating 
the degree of agreement in the spatial and the seasonal 
responses, and in extending these findings to forcing with 
longer time-scales. 
Since the stratospheric aerosol forcing is a transient one, 
its climatic effect on the decadal scale requires a 
knowledge of the duration of the forcing. A key issue in 
this regard is the necessity of knowing the spatial and 
temporal evolution in the aerosol optical depth and size 
characteristics; this requires a continuous monitoring of the 
stratosphere. The aerosol microphysical processes and the 
potential for indirect effects through cirrus cloud 
modifications also need to be studied. 
The radiative forcing from Mt. Pinatubo-type volcanic 
eruptions is large but transitory. The magnitude of the 
negative forcing during the first two years (> 1 Wm"2) 
following the eruption easily overwhelms the decadal 
increments in the greenhouse gas forcing (-0.4 Wm"2). 
The transient cooling tendency at the surface induced by 
such a negative forcing has the potential to dominate the 
global surface temperature record for a few years. 
4.5 Solar Variability 
Since the Sun provides the energy which drives the climate 
system, variations in solar output are obviously a potential 
mechanism for driving climate change. Quantification of 
that role is made difficult because reliable observations of 
the solar irradiance have only been made from satellites 
since the late 1970s. These observations can be used to 
estimate changes in solar output on longer time-scales by 
making use of relationships with other indicators of solar 
variability which are more easily observed from the 
surface. Records for some of these indicators extend back 
to the 17th century. However, these relationships are based 
on an incomplete understanding of solar physics, so there 
are substantial uncertainties in the estimated change in 
solar output. 
In addition, there are a number of studies which have 
shown significant correlations between indicators of solar 
variability and changes in climate. The reality of any 
connection is often controversial, especially when there is 
no obvious physical mechanism that can provide a 
quantitative explanation. 
4.5.1 Observations of Variability in Solar Irradiance 
since 1978 
Since the late 1970s, the variations of both the integrated 
and spectrally resolved solar irradiance have been 
precisely measured from a number of different space-borne 
instruments. These have demonstrated that the total solar 
irradiance (sometimes less accurately known as the solar 
constant) is certainly not strictly constant, having varied by 
about 0.1% during solar cycle 21 (1979 to 1990) (Hickey 
el «/., 1988; Willson and Hudson, 1988; Lee el al., 1987). 
The radiative forcing due to changing solar output is 
obtained by multiplying the change in total solar irradiance 
by a factor of (I - planetary albedo)/4 or 0.175; the factor 
of 4 is associated with the fact that the Earth's surface area 
is four times the cross-sectional area of the Earth as seen 
from the Sun whilst the factor (1 - planetary albedo) 
ensures that only solar radiation actually absorbed by the 
Earth-atmosphere system is accounted for. With this 
scaling a 0.1% change in total solar irradiance would be 
equivalent to a radiative forcing of 0.24 Wm"2 if all the 
change at the top of the atmosphere was experienced at the 
tropopause. In this section all changes quoted in Wm"2 are 
instantaneous radiative forcings rather than changes in 
total solar irradiance itself. 
While the radiative forcing associated with a change of 
0.1% in total solar irradiance is a significant fraction of 

790 
Radiative Forcing 
that believed to be induced by changes in greenhouse gas 
concentration over about the period of a decade, there are 
several factors that are believed to make this comparison 
an overestimate of the true role of the Sun upon recent 
climate. First, the thermal inertia of the ocean-atmosphere 
system leads to lag times between radiative forcing and 
climate response that are much longer than a decade. 
Therefore the steady accumulation of greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere over many decades can ultimately cause a 
climatic impact far greater than the cyclic solar changes 
(which average to a net of near zero over 11 years or so). 
The realised surface temperature change associated with 
the most recent 11-year solar cycle forcing is estimated to 
be in the order of 0.02-0.06°C (Hoffert et al., 1988; Foukal 
and Lean, 1990; Lee et al., 1993), much smaller than the 
corresponding equilibrium response of about 0.2°C to a 
sustained forcing due to a 0.1% change in solar output. 
A second factor that affects the interpretation of 
observed changes in solar irradiance is the fact that the 
spectral variation of the change plays a key role in 
determining where the incoming energy is absorbed. 
Ultraviolet radiation at wavelengths shorter than about 0.3 
,am is absorbed nearly entirely above the tropopause, and is 
estimated to represent about 20% of the change in the 
Sun's total output over an 11-year cycle; the region 
between 0.3 and 0.4 fim makes up an additional 13% 
whose penetration to the troposphere is more limited than 
that at longer wavelengths (Lean, 1991; Lean et al., 
1992a). Thus the direct forcing of the troposphere by solar 
irradiance changes at the wavelengths that effectively 
penetrate there is less than 80% of the total spectrally 
integrated change in the solar irradiance (Lean, 1991). 
However, the possibility of feedbacks that could modify 
the propagation of UV radiation changes to the tropopause 
should also be considered. Haigh (1994) made the 
important point that enhancements in the irradiance at 
wavelengths less than 0.25 ^m could lead to ozone 
increases in the lower stratosphere that would act to shield 
the troposphere from extraterrestrial irradiance changes. At 
winter high latitudes less solar radiation could reach the 
troposphere during periods of high solar activity. 
4.5.2 Inferences of Variability in Solar Irradiance on 
Longer Time-scales 
It is possible that solar changes over longer time-scales 
may have been larger than those since 1978, and therefore 
more important for understanding climate forcing on time-
scales of centuries or more. 
One approach to inferring historical changes in solar 
output assumes that the Sun's brightening can be attributed 
to the irradiance effect of photospheric structures called 
faculae, which, like dark sunspots, are regions of enhanced 
magnetic activity (Lean, 1991). Foukal and Lean (1990) 
estimated solar cycle irradiance variations since 1874, 
based on an empirical analysis of the relationship between 
sunspot number (as a surrogate for faculae) and directly 
observed total irradiance (corrected for sunspot blocking) 
since 1979, coupled with historical measurements of 
sunspot number. Their results suggest that the mean total 
irradiance has been rising steadily since about 1945, with 
the largest peaks so far in about 1980 and 1990. The long-
term change since 1874 was of the order 0.05% (about 0.1 
Wm"2). The method of Lean and co-workers suggests a 
solar output decrease of about 0.24% (about 0.6 Wm2) 
during the Maunder Minimum (mainly in the 17th century) 
as compared to contemporary values (Lean et al., 1992b). 
The larger variability was speculated to arise from changes 
in background solar emission in addition to changes 
associated with the 11-year cycle alone as determined by 
Foukal and Lean (1990). 
A different approach to inferring variability in solar 
output was presented by Nesme-Ribes and Mangeney 
(1992) and Nesme-Ribes et al. (1993), who consider 
evidence for changes in the solar convection pattern and in 
the solar diameter within the framework of the solar 
dynamo model. They include detailed historical 
observations of the motion of sunspots, which allow 
inference of the solar surface rotation rate. This in turn can 
be related to the solar meridional circulation pattern and to 
a corresponding change in kinetic energy and total solar 
irradiance. They inferred a variation of the solar irradiance 
during the Maunder Minimum of about 0.5% (about 1 
Wm"2). If this interpretation is correct, it very likely 
implies a smaller role for changes in solar irradiance 
during the past century, when the Sun has apparently been 
much more active (e.g., Foukal and Lean, 1990). 
Hoyt and Schatten (1993) estimated the changes in solar 
irradiance over the past several centuries using five 
different surrogates for solar activity. They derive a 
possible forcing of around 0.4 Wm"2 between 1850 and the 
present day. This is considerably smaller than the 
estimated greenhouse forcing of more than 2 Wm"2, but 
such solar changes may have made a non-negligible 
contribution to climate change earlier this century. 
Lockwood et al. (1992) compared the brightness 
fluctuations of the Sun with eight years of observations of 
33 Sun-like stars. They concluded that the Sun is in an 
unusually steady phase compared to similar stars, and 
suggest that the extrapolation of current measurements of 
solar brightness to previous epochs based on contemporary 
solar indicators could be risky. Lockwood et al. (1992) 
emphasise the fact that future solar-induced climate 
fluctuations could exceed those of the historical past. 
However, Foukal (1994) points out that our understanding 
of the Sun's magnetic activity is inconsistent with any 
change in solar output greater than those that have been 
inferred for the past few centuries. 

Radiative Forcing 
191 
4.5.3. Correlations between Climate and Solar 
Variability 
Suggestive correlative evidence for an enhanced role of the 
Sun in forcing climate has been presented by many 
authors, including Labitzke and Van Loon (1993, and 
references therein), Reid (1991), Friis-Christensen and 
Lassen (1991) and Tinsley and Heelis (1993). In these 
studies, the correlations between solar indices such as 
sunspots and solar cycle length, and observed 
characteristics of the atmosphere (e.g., temperature at 
particular locations, global average sea surface 
temperature, etc.) are examined. Some authors have 
questioned the usefulness of solar-cycle correlation 
studies, noting that undersampling and/or aliasing of other 
periodic atmospheric phenomena could lead to spurious 
results (e.g., Teitlebaum and Bauer, 1990; Salby and Shea, 
1991; Dunkerton and Baldwin, 1992). A combination of, 
for example, biannual and quasi-biennial oscillations could 
induce 10- to 12-year periodicities and hence lead to 
correlations similar to those observed, but unrelated to 
solar forcing (Dunkerton and Baldwin, 1992). In addition, 
internal variability of the climate system, or other 
mechanisms such as changes in ocean circulation, could 
lead to 10- to 12-year oscillations over short records which 
could be misinterpreted as solar signals. 
Labitzke and Van Loon (1993) noted remarkably high 
correlations between stratospheric temperatures and solar 
indices (such as solar emissions at a wavelength of 10.7 
cm), as well as an apparent propagation of such 
correlations in the form of planetary-scale temperature 
patterns throughout the troposphere (with amplitudes 
exceeding 1°C in some cases). Kodera (1993) showed, by 
examining running correlations, that undersampling is not 
the origin of the Labitzke/Van Loon oscillation. However, 
it is clear that the large changes in temperature noted by 
Labitzke and Van Loon (1993) and others are inconsistent 
with observed changes in the radiative forcing associated 
with the well-documented total solar irradiance 
fluctuations of at least the past decade (and very probably 
the past century). Observations also show that the 
ultraviolet region of the spectrum is subject to much larger 
fluctuations over the 11-year solar cycle, i.e., 5-10% at 0.2 
fim, and 2-6% at 0.21-0.25 jum, decreasing to less than 1% 
by 0.29 /urn (Rottman, 1988; Cebula et al., 1992; Lean et 
al, 1992a). These wavelengths are all absorbed well above 
the tropopause. If this forcing resulted only in local 
stratospheric temperature changes, then there would be 
little direct impact upon surface climate. Nevertheless, the 
likely stratospheric dynamical responses to this forcing and 
the physical mechanisms that could transmit and possibly 
amplify their effects in the troposphere need also to be 
considered. 
Recent model assessments of the effects of observed 
ultraviolet flux variations over the 11-year solar cycle 
predict relatively minor perturbations of the order of 1% 
for total ozone, 1°C for stratospheric temperatures, and less 
than 1 ms"1 for stratospheric zonal wind (Huang and 
Brasseur, 1993; Wuebbles et al., 1991). Observational 
evidence for the solar forcing of the middle atmosphere is 
not straightforward because of the short record (from 1 to 
3 cycles), so that no relationship can be considered well-
established statistically. Recent analysis of stratospheric 
ozone, wind and temperature data by Hood et al. (1993) 
and Randel and Cobb (1994) suggest solar-related changes 
in all of these parameters that are qualitatively consistent 
with model predictions but quantitatively much larger than 
expected (e.g., the 23±9 ms"1 zonal wind oscillation noted 
by Hood et al., 1993). Particularly noteworthy is the work 
of Kodera and co-workers (e.g., Kodera et al., 1990; 
Kodera, 1991) suggesting a strong solar-cycle dependence 
of the strength of the upper stratospheric polar night jet. 
Kodera et al. (1990) noted that changes in the position and 
strength of the zonal winds near the stratopause in 
December appeared to influence the tropospheric 
westerlies observed in the following February, perhaps via 
wave-mean flow interactions. Such changes are 
qualitatively consistent with the findings of Labitzke and 
Van Loon (1993), which require a mechanism capable of 
changing the climatology of the stratosphere and 
troposphere throughout the winter season dependent upon 
solar activity. 
Kodera et al. (1991) presented a GCM study of the 
modulation of the stratospheric circulation during the 
Northern Hemisphere winter by the quasi-biennial 
oscillation (QBO) and by solar activity. By imposing a 
40% modulation of the ultraviolet heating, they obtained 
an oscillation quite similar to that observed by Labitzke 
and Van Loon (1993), but noted that this forcing far 
exceeds that justifiable by solar observations. Further, 
Hamilton (1990) examined historical records of surface 
temperature and pressure dating back to the late 1800s. 
Combining these data with a wide range of plausible time-
series for QBO phase, he showed that no reproduction of 
Van Loon and Labitzke's (1988) solar correlation results 
of these quantities was possible during the period from 
1875 to 1936, provided that the QBO phases then followed 
the same pattern as in modern observations. Thus it 
appears that these oscillations, if real, remain inconsistent 
with contemporary observations of solar output and 
theoretical models of atmospheric dynamics. 
Friis-Christensen and Lassen (1991) found a high 
correlation between solar cycle length and Northern 
Hemisphere land temperatures. Hoyt and Schatten (1993) 
used solar cycle length as one of their parameters in 
deducing a quantitative variation in solar output over 
recent centuries. They also find a good correlation between 
solar output and Northern Hemisphere 
surface 
temperatures over the past century. However their results 

792 
Radiative Forcing 
imply that a 0.14% increase in solar output (equivalent to a 
forcing of 0.34 Wnr2) causes a surface warming of 0.5°C; 
this is a high climate sensitivity which, if applied to the 4 
Wm"2 forcing associated with doubling the concentration 
of C02, would result in a warming of about 6°C. Thus the 
hypothesis that variability in solar irradiance explains the 
observed surface temperature variations over the past 
century is inconsistent with our current understanding of 
climate sensitivity and would require a dramatically 
different forcing-response relationship for solar forcing 
than for other forcing mechanisms; there is no known 
physical mechanism and no modelling evidence to support 
such a difference. 
4.5.4 Summary 
The characterisation of variability in solar irradiance is one 
element in efforts to understand climate change. In roughly 
descending order of scientific confidence: 
(i) 
Observations since the late 1970s indicate that the 
change in radiative forcing between the maximum 
and minimum of the 11-year solar cycle is about 
0.24 Wm"2. Although this is a substantial fraction of, 
for example, the decadal increment of radiative 
forcing due to greenhouse gases, the fact that it is 
cyclic means that such changes in solar irradiance 
are likely to play only a negligible role in surface-
troposphere climate variations. 
(ii) 
Extension of current understanding of the 
relationship between observed solar irradiance 
change and other indicators of solar variability 
indicates that long-term increase in solar irradiance 
since the 17th century might have been climatically 
significant. A radiative forcing of about 0.3 Wm"2 
since 1850 has been suggested, but uncertainties are 
large. 
(iii) Observations of Sun-like stars suggest that solar 
variability could be larger in the future, but current 
understanding of the Sun indicates that this 
variability might not exceed the changes inferred for 
the Sun during the past few centuries. 
(iv) Studies using limited records indicate correlations of 
winds and temperatures with the solar cycle. 
However, their interpretation remains controversial 
on statistical grounds. No physical mechanism has 
been proposed that is quantitatively consistent with 
the relationships implied by the correlations. 
4.6 Other Forcings 
IPCC (1990) briefly discussed two other possible radiative 
forcing mechanisms - due to changes in surface albedo 
and "Milankovitch" variations in the Earth's orbital 
parameters. It was concluded that, for the global-mean, the 
likely forcings were negligible compared to the effects of 
other mechanisms on the century time-scale; there appears 
to be no need to change this conclusion. 
If, in future, the emphasis shifts from global and annual 
mean forcings to the need to know the forcing at more 
regional levels (see Section 4.8) then there may be a need 
for re-assessment. 
The annual and hemispheric mean radiative forcing due 
to orbital changes are negligible on the century time-scale. 
However, Smits et al. (1993) show that between 1765 and 
1990 the Northern Hemispheric mean incident solar 
radiation has increased by 1 Wm"2 in April and decreased 
by 1 Wm"2 in September; to convert to a forcing change 
these values should be multiplied by about 0.7 to account 
for the planetary albedo. 
An exploratory calculation of the effect of changes in 
surface albedo might assume that 20% of the tropical rain 
forest has been lost over a 30 year period (Henderson-
Sellers and Gornitz, 1984) with the surface albedo 
changing from 0.13 to 0.16. Assuming the changes in 
planetary albedo to be about one-third of the surface 
albedo change (due to effects of clouds and atmospheric 
gases) then for a diurnal-mean incident solar radiation of 
400 Wm"2, the 30 year radiative forcing actually over the 
tropical forests would be about -0.8 Wm"2. Locally this 
could be a significant fraction of, but the opposite sign to, 
the greenhouse forcing over the same period (+1.2 to 1.5 
Wm"2) but it must be emphasised that this surface albedo 
effect would occur only over 7% of the globe. However, 
the assumed change in surface albedo has not yet been 
confirmed by recent global satellite surveys (e.g., Whitlock 
et al., 1994); the surface albedo fields from such surveys 
do not yet agree in either absolute value or spatial gradient. 
A complete reassessment would need to consider other 
possible changes in surface albedo. 
4.7 Estimates of Total Forcing 
Two general approaches can be used to estimate past 
forcing. One is simply to compare the best estimates of 
each forcing mechanism, an approach used in IPCC (1990) 
and updated below. A second method attempts to combine 
forcing estimates with observed temperature changes and 
simple climate models; the degree of agreement between 
modelled and observed temperatures is then taken as some 
constraint on the sizes of forcings. Recent work in this area 
is reviewed in Section 4.7.3. 
4.7.1 Relative Confidence in Estimates of Radiative 
Forcing 
The method by which the radiative forcing is currently 
estimated varies from mechanism to mechanism; there is 
an associated variation in our level of confidence in the 
estimates. The basis of the forcing estimates has been 

Radiative Forcing 
193 
discussed in the appropriate sub-sections but it is useful to 
summarise the overall picture. 
Direct greenhouse forcing: Radiative forcing due to 
changes in concentrations of gases such as CCs, CH4, N20 
and the CFCs is calculated using radiative transfer models 
and accurate direct observations of changes in 
concentrations over the past few decades; changes in 
concentration since the pre-industrial period are also 
believed to be reasonably well characterised. Some work 
remains to be done on the spectroscopic properties of these 
molecules and on the observational verification of the 
radiative transfer methods used to calculate the forcing. 
Although it is difficult to quantify rigorously, the 
uncertainty in the total anthropogenic greenhouse forcing 
is probably about ±15%. Confidence in the estimates is 
relatively high. 
Stratospheric ozone and water vapour: Many of the 
estimates of the forcing due to changes in stratospheric 
ozone are based on observed trends over the past decade. 
Outside of the Antarctic springtime, the natural variability 
of ozone is so large that confidence in the cause of the 
trends is less than that associated with the "direct" 
greenhouse gases. The vertical distribution of the trend is 
not well established. For stratospheric water vapour, 
observations to date are inadequate for trend detection, and 
forcing estimates rely entirely on models. Confidence in 
the estimates is low. 
Tropospheric aerosols and ozone: For both these 
potential forcing mechanisms, calculations rely mainly on 
model estimated changes in concentrations with some 
constraints provided by limited observations; the models 
require knowledge of emissions of precursors and their 
distribution and the chemical transformations that generate 
and destroy the aerosols and ozone, as well as the 
advective processes; confidence in our current ability to 
model these processes is not high (see Chapters 2 and 3). 
There are additional significant uncertainties in the optical 
properties of the aerosols. Confidence in forcing 
calculations is low. The forcings due to aerosols and 
tropospheric ozone changes are of opposite sign, but might 
be of a similar magnitude and may have similar spatial 
patterns. Two points of importance are that firstly, our 
confidence in the estimates of both tropospheric ozone 
forcing and aerosol forcing is low, and secondly, the two 
processes are related, as the combustion processes leading to 
the production of aerosols or their precursors also 
generally lead to the production of ozone precursors. It 
may therefore be desirable to consider their combined effect. 
Confidence in the radiative forcing due to the impact of 
aerosols on clouds is very low. This is mainly due: 
(i) 
to the difficulties in relating changes in cloud 
properties to changes in aerosol concentrations and 
the lack of observational evidence of trends in cloud 
properties; 
(ii) 
the added impact of carbonaceous material on the 
radiative properties of clouds; 
(iii) the difficulties in representing clouds in atmospheric 
models. 
Volcanic aerosols in the stratosphere: The eruptions 
of Mt. Pinatubo, and to a lesser extent El Chichon, caused 
large but transient impacts on surface and top-of-the-
atmosphere radiation; the changes in irradiance have been 
amenable to direct observation. The radiative forcing 
resulting from Mt. Pinatubo is arguably the best 
characterised radiative forcing. Confidence in the forcing 
due to earlier eruptions decreases as there is progressively 
less knowledge of the strength and nature of individual 
eruptions. Confidence for eruptions 100 years ago is quite 
low. Confidence in the effect of volcanic aerosols on, for 
example, forcing due to changes in cirrus cloud properties 
or stratospheric ozone is very low. 
Solar variations: Direct satellite-based observations of 
the variation in solar output only extend back until 1978. 
Although the measurements are of high precision and 
stability, the radiative forcing at the tropopause is much 
less clear because of factors such as wavelength variations 
in the change in incoming solar energy and solar-driven 
changes in stratospheric ozone. Variations in forcing prior 
to 1978 have a very low confidence as they rely on indirect 
techniques which depend on an incomplete understanding 
of solar physics and/or the assertion that variations since 
1978 are representative of variations on much longer time-
scales. 
4.7.2 Best Estimates of Forcings since Pre-industrial 
Times 
Global-mean forcings are discussed here, but an important 
caveat is necessary. Even if the 
global-mean 
forcing/response relationship discussed in Sections 4.1.1 
and 4.8 is correct, the degree of cancellation of global-
mean temperature change due to opposing forcing 
mechanisms may not he a good guide to the cancellation 
on more regional scales. This applies to both the 
tropospheric aerosol forcing and the forcing due to 
changes in ozone. While forcings over smaller 
geographical areas could be quoted, this is not felt to be 
helpful: local forcing may bear little resemblance to local 
response because heat is transported by the atmosphere 
and ocean. 
Greenhouse Forcing: Recent estimates of the direct 
forcing due to greenhouse gas changes since about 1850 
are reasonably consistent. Although slightly different 
periods arc chosen and different trace gas concentration 
changes may be used, estimates are 2.3 Wm~2 (IPCC, 
1990), 2.1 Wnr2 (Hansen el at., 1993a), 2.A Wnr2 
(Hauglustaine el al., 1994), 2.1 Wirf2 (Kiehl and Briegleb, 
1993) and 2.3 Wnr2 (Shi and Fan, 1992). The first three of 

794 
Radiative Forcing 
these are adjusted forcings, the latter two are instantaneous 
forcings. 
Using the revised pre-industrial to 1992 changes in trace 
gas concentrations listed in Table 2.1 and the forcing-
concentration relationships from IPCC (1990) (Table 2.2) 
and from Table 4.3, an adjusted radiative forcing of 2.45 
Wm"2 is calculated and is estimated to be accurate to 
within ±15%. By gas this is: 1.56 Wm"2 for C02; 0.47 
Wm"2 for CH4; 0.14 Wm"2 for N-,0; 0.06 Wm"2 for CFC-
11 and 0.14 Wm"2 for CFC-12; other gases give about 0.08 
Wm"2, with CC14, HCFC-22 and CFC-113 contributing 
most of this. 
For the indirect adjusted forcing, uncertainties are 
larger. Hansen et al. (1993a) estimate -0.2 Wm"2 for 
stratospheric ozone change from 1970 to 1990; this is 
somewhat higher than would be inferred 
from 
Ramaswamy et al. (1992) who found a forcing of about 
-0.1 Wm2 for 1980 to 1990, which was a period of more 
marked ozone depletion. Hauglustaine et al. (1994) 
calculate an increase in tropospheric ozone since pre-
industrial times which resulted in a forcing of 0.55 Wm"2; 
there are insufficient similar calculations to characterise an 
uncertainty in this estimate, but, as discussed earlier, a 
value of order of a few tenths of a Wm"2 is supported by 
other work. A range of 0.2 to 0.6 Wm"2 is tentatively 
suggested; the upper limit corresponds to the simple 
estimate of Marenco et al. (1994) in which a pre-industrial 
ozone mixing ratio of 10 ppbv is assumed. For the effect of 
methane-induced changes in stratospheric water vapour, 
assuming a forcing of 5% of the direct methane forcing 
yields a value of about 0.02 Wm"2. 
Tropospheric Aerosol Forcing: The discussion in 
Section 4.4 led to estimates of the direct effect of sulphate 
aerosols of between -0.25 and -0.9 Wm"2 since about 1850. 
The corresponding value for aerosols from biomass 
burning is -0.05 to -0.6 Wm"2. However, we cannot rule 
out the possibility that the effects may lie outside these 
ranges. 
The indirect effect of aerosols, due to cloud albedo 
changes, is much more uncertain. Kaufman and Chou 
(1993) report a value of -0.45 Wm"2 since 1850 due to 
sulphate aerosols, although they believe that it may be 
more negative, while Jones et al. (1994) report a value of 
-1.3 Wm"2. Penner et al. (1992) conclude that the indirect 
effect of biomass burning must be comparable with the 
sulphate effect. Hansen et al. (1993a) estimate a combined 
biomass/sulphate indirect effect of -0.5 Wm"2, with at least 
a factor of two uncertainty. However, Kaufman and 
Nakajima's (1993) observational study indicates that the 
effect of biomass burning may be to decrease the albedo of 
some clouds. This may act to reduce the effect of aerosol 
changes on cloud radiative properties. A tentative range of 
0 to -1.5 Wm"2 is used here for the total indirect forcing 
due to tropospheric aerosols; the upper value is simply the 
same value as the combined sulphate/biomass direct 
forcing. However, we emphasise that there can be little 
confidence in such a range on the basis of present 
understanding. 
An overall estimate of the effect of tropospheric aerosol 
is impossible to make with any confidence. On the basis of 
a simple addition of the above estimates, a range of -0.3 
Wm"2 to -3 Wm"2 is plausible but it is possible that the 
actual forcing lies outside this range. These estimates may 
be subject to substantial revision in the future; this is in 
contrast to the greenhouse forcing which we believe to be 
far better characterised. Hence, on a global mean basis at 
least, the effect of tropospheric aerosols could range from 
a partial to a substantial offset of the greenhouse forcing; 
however, we emphasise again that cancellation of forcings 
on a global mean may not be a good guide to the regional 
climatic influence of individual forcings. 
Volcanic Aerosols: Peak global-mean forcings of up to 
-4 Wm"2 have been estimated as a result of the Mt. 
Pinatubo eruption (Hansen et al., 1992; Minnis et al., 
1993) although this was an unusually large eruption. 
Averaged over several years the forcing due to individual 
eruptions is -0.5 Wm"2 or less but such values are still of 
significance compared to other forcing mechanisms. Over 
the past century it is unlikely that there have been large 
trends in forcing due to stratospheric aerosols, although 
observational support for such a statement is lacking. 
Nevertheless, within the century, volcanic eruptions have 
been distributed unevenly in time, such that the period 
from about 1925 to 1960 was notably lacking in eruptions 
of potential climatic importance compared with the periods 
before and after (see e.g., Robock, 1991). Sato et a/.'s 
(1993) chronology of stratospheric aerosol optical depth 
since 1850 also suggests important inter-decadal changes, 
although they acknowledge the significant uncertainties 
associated with their estimates. Hence, over shorter 
periods, the variation in stratospheric aerosol loading may 
have caused a significant variation in forcing. 
Solar Variability: A number of recent studies suggest 
changes since the Maunder Minimum larger than those 
given in IPCC (1990). In terms of top of the atmosphere 
forcing since the Maunder Minimum, estimates include 
+0.6 Wm"2 (Lean et al., 1992b), +0.9 Wm"2 (Hoyt and 
Schatten, 1993) and +1 Wm"2 (Nesme-Ribes et al., 1993). 
Since about 1850, the forcing may have been about half 
these values; a mid-range value of 0.3 Wm"2 is taken, with 
a lower limit of 0.1 Wm"2 on the basis of Foukal and 
Lean's (1990) study and an upper limit of 0.5 Wm"2 based 
on Nesme-Ribes et al. (1993). Superimposed on this 
increase, a shorter time-scale variation has been proposed. 
Such changes could be of significance for the earlier pan 
of the century when greenhouse/aerosol forcings weiv 
much smaller; their significance since then depends to 
large extent on the degree of compensation between th 

Radiative Forcing 
195 
greenhouse and aerosol forcing, although confidence in the 
estimates of solar forcing is very low. 
Summary: Figure 4.8 shows our estimate of the 
radiative forcing due to different climate change 
mechanisms from about 1850 to 1990 based on the above 
discussion and subject to the caveats about the utility of 
global-mean forcing discussed in this chapter. An estimate 
of the net radiative forcing due to all human activity is not 
presented as the usefulness of combining estimates of 
global-mean radiative forcings of different signs, and 
resulting from different spatial patterns, is not currently 
understood. The different levels of confidence in such 
estimates also complicates any attempt to combine them. 
4.7.3 Estimates of Forcing from Obsen'ed Temperature 
Records 
An alternative method for assessing past forcings is to use 
statistically based comparisons with observed changes in 
surface temperature, either directly, or else by using a 
climate model with some representation of oceanic thermal 
inertia to calculate the evolution of the temperature. This 
modelled temperature series can then be compared with 
the observed series and some measure of explained 
variance can be computed. 
Three recent examples of this technique using simple 
global or hemispheric energy balance models are Kelly 
and Wigley (1992), Schlesinger and Ramankutty (1992) 
and Shi et al. (1993). 
CM 
E 
05 
C 
0 
-1 
Direct greenhouse 
Halocarbons 
N20 
OH/ 
COc 
Indirect greenhouse 
Tropospheric 
aerosols 
Direct Indirect 
Solar 
^^r1 
Tropospheric 
Stratospheric 
ozone 
ozone 
High 
Low 
Confidence level 
Low 
Low 
Very 
low 
Very 
low 
Figure 4.8: Estimates of the global and annual-mean radiative forcing (Wm-2) from 1850 to 1990 for a number of potential climate 
change mechanisms. The height of the column indicates a mid-range estimate of the forcing whilst the error bars show an estimate of 
the uncertainty range. Our confidence that the actual forcing lies within this range varies greatly from mechanism to mechanism; a 
subjective confidence level is indicated for each mechanism as either high, low or very low. The contributions of individual greenhouse 
gases are indicated in the first column. The episodic and transient nature of the effects of volcanic eruptions means that their relative 
importance depends greatly on the precise period for which forcings are quoted; their effects are not shown in the figure, but they can 
be of importance on decadal time-scales. 

796 
Radiative Forcing 
Kelly and Wigley (1992) use their best estimate of 
greenhouse gas and sulphate aerosol and impose a 
speculative representation of the effect of solar cycle 
length variations on solar constant with an undetermined 
amplitude B. They find the climate sensitivity and B which 
yield the largest value of explained variance. The results 
show that the explained variance is highest (61.6%) when 
the solar cycle effects are included on their own; however, 
it is only slightly lower (60.7%) when greenhouse gases 
and tropospheric aerosols are included. The results 
demonstrate that the explained variance is a very poor 
guide to the contribution of different forcing mechanisms. 
Schlesinger and Ramankutty (1992) adopt a similar 
approach and, further, explore the sensitivity to the size of 
the sulphate aerosol forcing. They obtain the highest 
explained variance when including greenhouse gases, solar 
cycle effects and tropospheric aerosols, for a pre-industrial 
to 1978 contribution of aerosols of -1.5 Wm"2. The proposed 
solar cycle effect does improve their explained variance and 
reduces the climate sensitivity (by a factor of two) but again 
a wide range of different forcings are possible which result 
in only a small change in explained variance. 
Neither of these two studies included the effects of 
volcanic aerosols. Shi et al. (1993) include an estimate of 
the effect of volcanoes in addition to greenhouse gases 
and, neglecting changes in tropospheric aerosols, achieve 
an explained variance exceeding 75%. They do not vary 
solar constant with solar cycle; instead, using the estimates 
of solar constant variation from Foukal and Lean (1990), 
which includes only a small long-term forcing trend, they 
find that the impact of solar variations is negligible. Thus a 
quite different mix of forcing mechanisms is found to 
produce a good agreement with observations. 
Further problems in this energy balance model approach 
are: 
(a) 
they ignore the effect of unforced natural variability; 
this variability might require that an appreciable 
fraction of the inter-decadal variance does not need 
to be explained in terms of forcing mechanisms 
(Stouffer et al., 1994); 
(b) 
they assume that the surface temperature record is of 
uniform reliability since the mid-19th century so that 
the modelled temperatures are required to fit the 
observations equally well for all periods; 
(c) 
they either assume values for climate sensitivity and 
effective thermal inertia, or use them as floating 
variables in the maximisation of explained variance; 
(d) 
they assume the same climate sensitivity for all 
forcings. 
Whilst these studies produce interesting and suggestive 
results, the ambiguity in the results and the neglect of 
unforced variability makes it unclear whether they provide 
useful information in addition to that provided by the more 
direct estimates discussed in Section 4.7.2. 
Hansen et al. (1993a) use a simplified version of the 
GISS GCM with a simple ocean to explore the dependence 
of the modelled temperature evolution when a variety of 
forcings are imposed. Although they do not quantify the 
degree of agreement between observed and modelled 
temperature changes, they do conclude that the inclusion 
of solar forcing and tropospheric aerosol forcing does 
achieve a greater consistency with observations than 
greenhouse gases alone. They also argue that the net 
tropospheric aerosol forcing cannot be much greater than 
their 1850-1990 estimate of-0.9 Wm"2. 
4.7.4 Future Forcing 
New scenarios of possible future concentrations of 
greenhouse gases and aerosols are not presented in this 
report, so earlier estimates from IPCC (1992) are not 
updated (see also Wigley and Raper (1992) and Wigley 
(1994)). Between 1990 and 2100 the positive forcing due 
to the well-mixed greenhouse gases (i.e. excluding ozone) 
ranges from 3.4 to 8.5 Wm"2 depending on assumptions 
about population growth, economic growth, resource 
availability and policy. For all assessments C0 7 is the 
dominant greenhouse gas, contributing between 76 and 
84% of the total. 
Wigley and Raper (1992) also include estimates of the 
impact of sulphate aerosol forcing (which includes direct 
and indirect effects) which are in the range +0.2 to -1.4 
Wm 2 for the period 1990-2100. The positive forcing 
occurs for certain scenarios where sulphur emissions 
decline over the century; because the aerosols are so short-
lived, they respond quickly to emission changes and the 
aerosol concentration decreases. Given the large 
uncertainties in estimating the contemporary aerosol 
radiative forcing and in estimating future aerosol 
concentrations (see Table 3.8), we can have little 
confidence in such estimates. 
Kaufman and Chou (1993) extend their estimates of 
sulphate aerosol indirect forcing to the year 2060. They 
use the IPCC (1990) Scenarios with future SO, emissions 
taken to be a fixed fraction of fossil fuel consumption. In 
their model the effectiveness of sulphur emissions at 
changing cloud albedo decreases as the aerosol 
concentration increases. Thus while they estimate that the 
indirect sulphate effect might offset 50% of the CO, 
forcing in 1980, the offset might reduce to 20% in 2060. In 
common with other authors, Kaufman and Chou draw 
attention to the way sulphate aerosol concentrations will 
respond much more rapidly to emission changes than CO, 
concentrations. It must again be pointed out that such 
estimates are subject to very large uncertainties given our 
present understanding, although the study does highligi: 
some important issues. 

Radiative Forcing 
197 
Daniel et al. (1994) have produced projections of future 
forcing due to halocarbons including their effect on 
stratospheric ozone concentrations. They consider the 
relative effectiveness of each molecule in releasing 
chlorine and bromine in the lower stratosphere and 
highlight the role of bromocarbons in generating the 
negative radiative forcing due to ozone depletion. Their 
future projections are based on assumptions concerning the 
phase out of CFCs and the growth rate in emissions of 
HFCs. Daniel et al.'s projections have the negative forcing 
due to ozone decreasing to zero by about 2050 after which 
the forcing due to the HFCs dominates; the forcing 
between 1990 and 2100 is about 0.15 Win-. Wigley 
(1994), using a simpler method for the ozone effect, and 
using IS92 Scenarios (IPCC, 1992), obtains a higher 
forcing change for this period, with a range 0.2 to 0.4 Wm2. 
Such estimates will be sensitive to assumptions about the 
precise mix of halocarbons used and, more particularly, to 
the assumed growth rates in emissions. 
Other factors influencing radiative forcing, such as 
possible changes in tropospheric ozone, are also difficult to 
characterise. Future variations in natural forcings due to 
volcanic aerosols and solar variability cannot be 
characterised. 
4.8 Forcing-Response Relationships 
In Section 4.1.1, the rationale for using adjusted radiative 
forcing to intercompare different forcing mechanisms was 
presented. In a 1-D radiative convective model, the climate 
sensitivity parameter was found to be remarkably 
independent of the forcing mechanism. In this section the 
relationship between radiative forcing and climate 
response in higher dimensional models is briefly 
discussed. There are two distinct issues: firstly, the extent 
to which the climate sensitivity parameter (k in Equation 
(4.1)) is independent of forcing mechanism and secondly, 
the extent to which global-mean radiative forcing can 
indicate changes on smaller scales; this has become 
important with the recognition of more regional scale 
forcings resulting from changes in tropospheric ozone and 
aerosols. In particular, even if A. was independent of 
forcing mechanism, the global-mean surface temperature 
change implied by summing forcings with opposing signs 
and differing spatial patterns may give a misleading 
impression of the size of regional-scale climate changes. 
4.8.1 Background 
Manabe and Wetherald (1980), Hansen et al. (1984) and 
Nesme-Ribes et al. (1993) have found the climate 
sensitivity of a GCM to perturbations of CO^ amount and 
solar output to be very similar as were the geographical 
variations of the surface temperature change. This is 
despite the fact that the surface-atmosphere partitioning of 
these forcings is quite different with much more of the 
modelled solar forcing directly affecting the surface; the 
latitudinal distribution of the forcings is also different. 
Potter and Cess (1984), using a zonally averaged model, 
reached a similar conclusion when comparing forcing due 
to the imposition of background tropospheric aerosols and 
due to changes in solar output. Global-mean surface 
temperature responses were within 5% and at any one 
latitude the response was within 10% for the same 
magnitude of forcing from the two mechanisms. 
These studies led to the conclusion that global-mean 
temperature change, at the surface and within the 
troposphere (but not the stratosphere), is primarily 
governed by the global-mean radiative forcing, and that 
latitudinal variations in temperature are reasonably 
independent of forcing mechanism. 
These studies have supported the use of radiative 
forcing as an appropriate index with which to assess both 
the relative and absolute climatic impacts of changes in 
forcing. However, there are clearly limits to the 
applicability of the concept. Palaeoclimatic simulations 
(e.g., Kutzbach, 1992) which adopt different orbital 
parameters to those of the present day are able to generate 
marked regional climate responses, despite the fact that the 
global mean incident solar radiation is unaltered (even the 
changes on time-scales of l()-s years, involving variation in 
orbital eccentricity, are small). 
A related aspect is the dependence of the climate 
sensitivity to the sign of the forcing. GCM experiments 
with mixed-layer oceans can show greater sensitivity to 
negative forcings than positive forcings due mainly to the 
fact that the snow/sea-ice albedo effect becomes more 
important in a colder climate (e.g., Wetherald and Manabe, 
1975; Manabe et al., 1991 and Roeckner et al., 1994). 
However, this asymmetry in response was very much 
smaller in the coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM study of 
Manabe et al. (1991) when they compared the transient 
response to a halving and doubling of CO, concentration. 
This indicates that caution is necessary in interpreting 
forcing-response relationships in models with simplified 
oceans. 
4.8.2 Forcing-Response Relationships for Well-mixed 
Greenhouse Gases 
Wang et al. (1991, 1992) used a GCM with a mixed-layer 
ocean to investigate whether "effective C02" ' amount can 
be used as a proxy for the effect of an increase in a mixture 
of greenhouse gases. Wang et al. (1992) found that the 
1 Effective CO, is the amount of CO, that would give the same 
radiative forcing since pre-industrial times as that resulting from 
changes in all greenhouse gases. 

798 
Radiative Forcing 
global-mean surface temperature response due to the 
mixture of greenhouse gases was within 4% of that due to 
an effective CO, amount giving the same instantaneous 
forcing. Deviations in regional temperature response could 
exceed 20%, for example, over parts of North America. 
However, in agreement with earlier studies, the zonal 
mean surface temperature changes due to the two different 
forcing mechanisms were within 10%. 
Wang et al. (1992) compared equal instantaneous 
forcing (of 3.1 Wm"2) due to effective CO-, and for the 
mixture of gases. Allowing for stratospheric adjustment 
would lead to a decrease in the forcing which would be 
more marked for effective C0 2 than it would be for the 
mixture of gases. Application of the ratios of 
adjusted/unadjusted forcings from Table 4.1 gives an 
adjusted C0 2 forcing of 2.9 Wm"2 and for the mixture 
of gases it would be 3.0 Wm"2; the ratio of these two 
forcings is about the same as the ratio of the global-mean 
warmings calculated by Wang et al. Taking account of 
adjustment would also lead to a slight decrease in the 
regional differences in temperature change for the two 
forcings. Hence the tropospheric climate sensitivity to 
different mixtures of greenhouse gases appears very 
similar, particularly when stratospheric adjustment is 
included. 
Despite the fact that the changes in concentration of the 
greenhouse gases such as C02, CH4, N20 and the CFCs 
are globally relatively uniform, Figure 4.4 illustrates that 
the resulting radiative forcing is anything but uniform, 
owing to the influence of regional variations in 
temperature, cloudiness and humidity. Thus the well-
behaved nature of the forcing-response relationship for 
greenhouse gas changes is not a simple result of spatial 
uniformity in its forcing. 
4.8.3 Forcing-response Relationship for Other Forcings 
Several recent sets of experiments, summarised below, 
have examined the response to more localised forcing both 
in the vertical and horizontal. 
Hansen et al. (1993b) used an idealised version of the 
GISS GCM to examine the effect of a hypothetical forcing 
of 4 Wm"2 applied either entirely at the surface, or entirely 
in individual model layers. The forcing applied at the 
surface is included in three different ways - in one 
experiment it is applied equally over the globe, in another, 
it is applied only polewards of 30°, and in a third it is only 
applied equatorwards of 30°; in all three cases, the global 
mean is the same. A forcing applied at latitudes greater 
than 30° is found to cause a factor of 1.9 more warming 
than the same forcing at latitudes less than 30°. After 
accounting for stratospheric adjustment, the sensitivity 
applied in individual layers is reasonably independent of 
altitude above the lower troposphere; however, when 
applied at the surface, or in the near-surface layer, there is 
a different surface temperature response, most markedly 
when cloud feedbacks are allowed. 
Hansen et al. (1993b) also investigated the dependence 
of the forcing-response relationships to very idealised 
changes in ozone, again applied sequentially in each model 
layer. The climate sensitivity is markedly dependent on the 
height of the ozone perturbation in cases where cloud 
feedbacks are allowed. 
Taylor and Penner (1994) used a version of the NCAR 
Community Climate Model with a mixed-layer ocean and 
computed the pre-industrial to present day forcing due 
to the direct effect of sulphate aerosols and observed 
changes in C 0 2 concentration. They performed 
integrations with C0 2 changes alone, sulphate changes 
alone and with both forcings combined. The climate 
sensitivity (calculated from the instantaneous forcing) 
varied markedly between experiments ranging from 
1K/Wm2 for sulphate alone to 2.6 K/Wm"2 for sulphate 
and C0 2. Thus in this model the global mean forcings 
from different mechanisms are a poor guide to climate 
response. The pattern of climatic response is found to be 
markedly different to the pattern of forcing; as an example, 
in the sulphate-only case the Southern Hemisphere forcing 
is only 20% of the Northern Hemisphere forcing, and yet 
the Southern Hemisphere surface temperature response is 
about 70% of the Northern Hemisphere value. An 
outstanding issue is the high climate sensitivity of the 
model (which implies a warming of 6.4°C for a doubling 
of C02) compared to other GCMs. 
Roeckner et al. (1994) report experiments with the 
ECHAM GCM using a mixed-layer ocean. Sulphate 
forcing is mimicked by changing the surface albedo using 
the pattern of anthropogenic sulphur loading from Langner 
and Rodhe (1991). Using this pattern, but reversing the 
sign to give a positive forcing, it is found that the climate 
sensitivity is identical to that derived from an increased 
C02 experiment despite the large differences in the vertical 
and horizontal patterns of the forcings. However, it is 
markedly different when applied as a negative forcing, due 
to the asymmetry of the snow/sea-ice albedo feedback. As 
with Taylor and Penner's (1994) study, there was a 
considerable response remote from the areas of forcing, in 
the sulphate-only case. 
Chen (1994) used the GFDL GCM with a mixed-layer 
ocean and fixed cloud amounts to examine the dependence 
of the climate sensitivity; the forcing was imposed in the 
model by either doubling C0 2 or by perturbing the cloud 
radiative properties (via the liquid water path and effective 
radius) either globally or in specific regions in six different 
ways. The model's global-mean climate sensitivity wa-
found to be virtually independent of the sign, magnitude or 
location of the forcing, although the latitudinal variation o; 
the climate response differed amongst the experiments. 

Radiative Forcing 
199 
4.8.4 Summary 
The relationship between radiative forcing and climate 
response is crucially important to the development of 
radiative forcing (and hence any global warming potential) 
as an appropriate index. For a wide range of forcing 
mechanisms the forcing/response relationship appears 
similar. However, some studies indicate that climate 
sensitivity may be markedly different for forcings which 
have a strong vertical or horizontal structure, although a 
clear consensus has yet to emerge. However, in model 
calculations where two opposing radiative forcings with 
differing spatial patterns are applied, the global-mean 
surface temperature change does not give an adequate 
indication of the changes on smaller spatial scales. The need 
for continued careful experimentation with both idealised 
and realistic forcings in a range of different models is clearly 
apparent before firm conclusions can be drawn. 
References 
Andreae, M.O., 1994: Climatic effects of changing atmospheric 
aerosol levels. In: World Survey of Climatology, Vol XVI: 
Future Climates of the World, A. Henderson-Sellers (cd). 
Angell, J.K., 1988: Variations and trends in tropospheric and 
stratospheric global temperatures, 1958-1987.7. Climate, 1, 
1296-1313. 
Angell, J.K., 1993: Comparison of stratospheric warming 
following Agung, El Chichon and Pinatubo volcanic eruptions. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 715-718. 
Bakan, S., A. Chlond, U. Cubasch, J. Feichter, H. Graf, H. 
Grassl, K. Hasselmann, I. Kirchner, M. Latif, E. Roeckner, R. 
Sausen, U. Schlese, D. Schriever, I. Schult, U. Schumann, F. 
Sielmann, and W. Welke, 1991: Climate response to smoke 
from the burning oil wells in Kuwait. Nature 351, 367-371. 
Boucher, O., H.Le Treut and M.B. Baker, 1994a: Sensitivity of a 
GCM to changes in cloud droplet concentration. In: Preprints 
of 8th Conference on Atmospheric 
Radiation, American 
Meteorological Society, Boston, pp.558-560. 
Boucher, O., H.Le Treut and M. Baker, 1994b: Precipitation and 
Radiation Modelling in a GCM: Introduction of Cloud 
Microphysical Processes, submitted to./. Geophys. Res. 
Cappellani, F. and G. Restelli, 1992: Infrared band strengths and 
their temperature dependence of the hydrohalocarbons HFC-
134a, HFC-152a, HCFC-22, HCFC-123 and HCFC-142b. 
Spectrochimica Acta, 48A, 1127-1131. 
Cebula, R.P., M.T. Deland and B.M. Schlesinger, 1992: 
Estimates of solar variability using the Mg II index from the 
NOAA 9 satellite. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 11613-11620. 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, S.J. Ghan and W.L. Gates, 1985: The 
climatic effects of large injections of atmospheric smoke and 
dust: a study of climate feedback mechanisms with one and 
three dimensional climate models. J.Geophys. Res., 90, 12937-
12950. 
Cess, R.D., M-H. Zhang, G.L. Potter, H.W. Barker, R.A. 
Colman, D.A. Dazlich, A.D. Del Genio, M. Esch, J.R. Fraser, 
V. Galin, W.L. Gates, J.J. Hack. W.J. Ingram, J.T. Kiehl, A.A. 
Lacis, H. Le Treut. Z.-X. Li, X.-Z. Liang, J.-F. Mahl'oul, B.J. 
McAveney, V.P. Meleshko, J-J. Morerette, D.A. Randall. E. 
Roeekner, J.-F. Royer, A.P. Sokolov, P.V. Sporyshev, K.E. 
Taylor. W.-C. Wang and R.T. Welherald, 1993: Uncertainties 
in CO, radiative forcing in atmospheric general circulation 
models. Science 262, 1252-1255. 
Charlson, R.J., J. Langner, H. Rodhe, C.B. Leovy and SO. 
Warren, 1991: Perturbation of the Northern Hemisphere 
radiative balance by backscattering from anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosols. Tellus, 43A-B, 152-163. 
Charlson, R.J., S.E. Schwartz, J.M. Hales, R.D. Cess. J.A. 
Coakley, Jr., J.E. Hansen and D.J. Ho I man n, 1992: Climate 
forcing by anthropogenic aerosols. Science 255, 422-430. 
Chen, C-T., 1994: Sensitivity of the simulated global climate to 
perturbations in low cloud microphysical properties. Ph.D. 
thesis. Princeton. 
Christy, JR. and S.J. Drouilhet, 1994: Variability in daily, zonal 
mean lower stratospheric temperatures../. Climate, 7, 106-120. 
Chylek, P. and J. Hallett, 1992: Enhanced absorption of solar 
radiation by cloud droplets containing soot particles in their 
surface. Quarterly.I. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 118, 167-172. 
Clerbaux, C, and R. Colin, 1994: Determination of the infrared 
cross-section and global warming potential of I, 1,2-
trifluoroethane (HFC-143). Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 2377-
2380. 
Clerbaux, C, R. Colin, PC. Simon and C. Granier, 1993: 
Infrared cross-sections and global warming potentials of 10 
alternative hydrohalocarbons. ./. Geophys. Res., 98, 10491-
10497. 
Coakley, J.A.Jr., R.L. Bernstein and P.A. Durkee, 1987: Effects 
of ship-stack effluents on cloud reflectivities. Science, 237, 
1020-1022. 
Daniel, J.S., S. Solomon and D.L. Albritton, 1994: On the 
evaluation of halocarbon radiative forcing and global warming 
potentials../. Geophys. Res. (in press) 
Dunkerton, T.J., and M.P. Baldwin, 1992: Modes of inlerannual 
variability in the stratosphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 49-52. 
Button, E.G. and J.R. Christy, 1992: Solar radiative forcing at 
selected locations and evidence for global lower tropospheric 
cooling following the eruptions of El Chichon and Pinaluho. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 2313-2316. 
Button, E.G., P. Reddy, S. Ryan, J. De Luisi, 1994: Features and 
effects of aerosol optical depth observed at Mauna Loa, 
Hawaii, 1982-1992../. Geophys. Res., 99, 8295-8306. 
Ellingson, R.O.. J. Ellis and S B . Fels , 1991: The 
intercomparison of radiation codes used in climate models: 
Long wave results../. Geophys. Res, 96, 8929-8953 
Ellingson, R.G., W.J. Wiscombe, J. DcLuisi, V. Kunde, H. 
Melfi, D. Murcray and W. Smith, 1992: The Spectral 
Radiation Experiment (SPECTRE): Clear Sky Observations 
and their use in ICRCCM and ITRA. In: IRS '92. Current 
Problems in Atmospheric Radiation, S. Kcevalik and O. 
Karner (eds), Deepak Publishing, pp 451-453. 
Fisher, D.A., C.H. Hales, W.-C. Wang, M.K. W.Ko and N.-D. 
Sze, 1990: Model calculations of the relative effects of CFCs 
and their replacements on global warming. Nature, 344, 513-
516. 
Fishman, J., 1991: The global consequences of increasing 
tropospheric ozone concentrations. Chemosphere, 22, 685-695. 

200 
Radiative 
Forcing 
Fomin, B.A., A.N. Rublev and A.N. Trotsenko, 1993: Using line 
parameter databases in accurate modelling of radiative heat 
exchange in a scattering and absorbing atmosphere. In: 
Atmospheric 
Spectroscopy 
Applications-ASA 
Reims 
93: Workshop Proceedings, A. Barbe and L. Rothman (eds), 
pp290-293. 
Foukal, P., 1994: Stellar luminosity variations and global 
warming. Science, 264, 238-239. 
Foukal, P. and J. Lean, 1990: An empirical model of total solar 
irradiance variation between 1874 and 1988. Science, 247, 
556-558. 
Friis-Christensen, E. and K. Lassen, 1991: Length of the solar 
cycle: an indicator of solar activity closely associated with 
climate. Science, 254, 698-700. 
Gaffen, D.J. 1994: Temporal inhomogeneities in radiosonde 
temperature records. J Geophys. Res., 99, 3667-3676. 
Goody, R.M. and Y.L. Yung, 1989: Atmospheric Radiation. 
Oxford University Press. 
Graf, H.-F., I. Kirchner, A. Robock and I. Schult, 1993: Pinatubo 
eruption winter climate effects: models versus observations. 
Climate Dynamics, 9, 81-93. 
GRL, 1992. Mount Pinatubo Special Section, Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 19, 149-218. 
Haigh, J.D., 1994: The role of stratospheric ozone in modulating 
the solar.radiative forcing of climate. Nature, 370, 544-546. 
Hamilton, K., 1990: A look at the recently proposed solar QBO-
weather relationship. J. Climate, 3, 497-503. 
Hansen, J.E., D. Johnson, A. Lacis, S. Lebedeff, P. Lee, D. Rind 
and G. Russell, 1981: Climate impacts of increasing carbon 
dioxide. Science, 213, 957-966. 
Hansen, J.E., A. Lacis, D. Rind, G. Russell, P. Stone, I. Fung, R. 
Ruedy and J. Lerner 1984: Climate sensitivity: analysis of 
feedback mechanisms. Geophysical Monographs, 29, 130-163. 
Hansen, J.E., A. Lacis and M. Prather, 1989: Greenhouse effect 
of chlorofluorocarbons and other trace gases. J.Geophys. Res., 
94, 16417-16421 
Hansen, J.E., A. Lacis, R. Ruedy and M. Sato, 1992: Potential 
climate impact of Mount Pinatubo eruption. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 19. 215-218. 
Hansen, J.E., A. Lacis, R. Ruedy, M. Sato and H. Wilson, 1993a: 
How sensitive is the world's climate? National Geographic-
Research and Exploration, 9, 142-158. 
Hansen, J.E., M. Sato, A. Lacis and R. Ruedy, 1993b: Climatic 
impact of ozone change. In: The Impact on Climate of Ozone 
Change and Aerosols, Background Material from the Joint 
Workshop of IPCC Working Group I and the International 
Ozone Assessment Panel, Hamburg, May, 1993. 
Hansen, J. E., W. Rossow and 1. Fung, 1993c: Long-term 
monitoring of global climate forcings and feedbacks. NASA 
CP3234, Proceedings of workshop held at Goddard Institute 
for Space Studies, New York, February 3-4, 1992, 91pp. 
Hauglustaine, DA.. C. Granier, G.P. Brasseur and G. Megic, 
1994: The importance of atmospheric chemistry in the 
calculation of radiative forcing on the climate system. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 1173-1186. 
Henderson-Sellers, A. and V. Gornitz, 1984: Possible climatic 
impacts of land cover transformations, with particular 
emphasis on tropical deforestation. Climatic Change, 6, 231-
257. 
Hickey, J. R., B.M. Alton, H.L. Kyle and D. Hoyt, 1988: Total 
solar irradiance measurements by ERB/Nimbus-7: A review of 
nine years. Space Sci. Rev., 48, 321-342 . 
Hoffert, M.I., A. Frei and V.K. Narayanan, 1988: Application of 
Solar Max ACRIM data to analysis of solar-driven climatic 
variability on Earth, dim. Change, 13, 267-285. 
Hofmann, D.J., 1990: Increase in stratospheric background 
sulphuric acid aerosol mass in the past 10 years. Science, 248. 
996-1000. 
Hood, L.L., J.L. Jirikowic and J.P. McCormack, 1993: Quasi-
decadal variability of the stratosphere: Influence of long-term 
solar ultraviolet variations, J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 3941-3958. 
Hoyt, D.V. and K.H. Schatten, 1993: A discussion of plausible 
solar irradiance variations, 1700-1992. J. Geophys. Res.. 
98(A11), 18895-18906. 
Huang, T.Y.W. and G.P. Brasseur, 1993: Effect of long-term 
solar variability in a two-dimensional interactive model of the 
middle atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 20413-20427. 
Husson, N., B. Bonnet, N.A. Scott and A. Chedin,1992: 
Management and study of spectroscopic information: The GE1SA 
program. J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radial Transf., 48, 509-518 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: 
Climate Change: the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, 
J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds) Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, B.A. 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds), WMO/UNEP, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 200pp. 
Isaksen I.S.A., C. Briihl, M. Molina, H. Schiff, K.P. Shine and F. 
Stordal, 1992:An assessment of the role of CF4 and C2F() as 
greenhouse gases. Centre for International 
Climate and 
Energy Research, University of Oslo, Policy Note 1992:6. 
Jensen, E. and O B . Toon, 1992: The potential effects of 
volcanic aerosols on cirrus-cloud microphysics. Geophys. Re.\. 
Lett., 19, 1759-1762. 
Jones, A., D.L. Roberts and A. Slingo, 1994 : A climate model 
study of the indirect radiative forcing by anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosols. Nature, 370, 450-453. 
Karol, Land V.A. Frolkis, 1992: Model evaluation of the 
radiative and temperature effects of the ozone content changes 
in the global atmosphere of 1980s. In: Ozone in the 
Troposphere and Stratosphere, Proceedings of the Quadrennial 
Ozone Symposium, 1992, Charlottesville, VA. NASA 
Conference Publication 3266, pp409-412 
Kaufman, Y.J. and M.D. Chou, 1993: Model simulations of the 
competing climatic effects of SO, and CO,. ./. Climate.. 6. 
1241-1252. 
Kaufman, Y.J. and T. Nakajima, 1993: Effect of Amazon smoke 
on cloud microphysics and albedo - Analysis from satellite 
imagery. J. Appl. Meteor., 32, 729-744. 
Kelly, P.M., and T.M.L. Wigley, 1992: Solar cycle length. 
greenhouse forcing, and global climate. Nature, 360. 328-330. 
Kiehl, J.T. and B.P. Briegleb, 1993: The relative role of sulphate 
aerosols and greenhouse gases in climate forcing. Science. Kt'.l 
311-314. 
Kim, Y. and R.D. Cess, 1993: Effect of anthropogenic sulpha 
aerosols on low level cloud albedo over oceans. J. Geoph\ 
Res., 98, 14883-14885. 

Radiative 
Forcing 
201 
Kinne, S., O B . Toon and M. Prather, 1992: Buffering of 
stratospheric circulations by changing amounts of tropical 
ozone: A Pinatubo case study. Geophys. Res. Let!., 19. 1927-
1930. 
Ko, M.K.W., N.D. Sze, W.-C. Wang, G. Shia, A. Goldman, F.J. 
Murcray, D.G. Murcray and C.P. Rinsland, 1993: Atmospheric 
sulphur hexafluoride: sources, sinks and greenhouse warming. 
J. Geophys. Res., 98, 10499-10507. 
Kodera, K., 1991: The solar and equatorial QBO influences on 
the stratospheric circulation during the early northern-
hemisphere winter. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 1023-1026. 
Kodera, K., 1993: The quasi-decadal modulation of the influence 
of the equatorial QBO on the north-polar stratospheric 
temperatures. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 7245-7250. 
Kodera, K., K. Yamazaki, M. Chiba and K. Shibata, 1990: 
Downward propagation of upper stratospheric mean zonal 
wind perturbation to the troposphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 
1263-1266. 
Kodera, K., M. Chiba and K. Shibata, 1991: A General 
Circulation Model study of the solar and QBO modulation of 
the stratospheric circulation during the Northern Hemisphere 
winter. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 1209-1212. 
Kratz, DP., M.-D. Chou and M.M.-H. Yan, 1993: Infrared 
radiation parameterizations for the minor CO^ bands and for 
several CFC bands in the window region. J. Climate, 6, 1269-
1281. 
Kutzbach, J.E., 1992: Modelling large climatic changes of the 
past . \n:Climate System Modelling, K.E.Trenberth (ed), 
Cambridge University Press, pp 669-688. 
Labitzke, K. and M.P. McCormick, 1992: Stratospheric 
temperature increases due to Pinatubo aerosols. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 19,207-210. 
Labitzke, K., and H. van Loon, 1993: Some recent studies of 
probable connections between solar and atmospheric 
variability. Annates Geophysicae. (In press) 
Lacis, A.A., D.J. Wuebbles and J.A. Logan, 1990: Radiative 
forcing of climate by changes in the vertical distribution of 
ozone. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 9971-9981. 
Lacis, A.A., J.E. Hansen and M. Sato, 1992: Climate forcing by 
stratospheric aerosols. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 1607-1610. 
Langner, J. and H. Rodhe, 1991: A global three-dimensional 
model of the tropospheric sulphur cycle. J. Atmos. Chem., 13, 
225 - 263. 
Lean, J., 1991: Variations in the sun's radiative output. Rev. 
Geophys., 29, 505-535. 
Lean, J., M. Van Hoosicr, G. Brueckner and D. Prinz, 1992a: 
SUSIM/UARS observations of the 120 to 300 nm flux 
variations during the maximum of the solar cycle: inferences 
for the 11-year cycle. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 2203-2206. 
Lean, J., A. Skumanich and O. White, 1992b: Estimating the 
Sun's radiative output during the Maunder minimum. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 1591-1594. 
Lee, R.B., BR. Barkstrom and R.D. Cess, 1987: Characteristics 
of the ERBE solar monitors. Appl. Opt., 26. 3090-3096. 
Lee, R.B., W.C. Bolden, M.A. Gibson, J. Paden. O.K. Pandey. S. 
Thomas and R.S. Wilson, 1993: Correlation of solar irradiance 
and atmospheric temperature variations derived from 
spacecraft radiometry. Adv. Space. Res. (In press) 
Lelieveld, J., P.J. Crutzen and C. Bruhl. 1993: Climate effects of 
atmospheric methane. Chemosphere, 26, 739-768. 
Loekwood, G.W.. B.A. Skiff. S.L. Baliunas and R.R. Radick. 
1992: Long-term solar brightness changes estimated from a 
survey of Sun-like stars. Nature, 360, 653-655. 
Madronich. S. and C. Granicr 1992: Impact of recent total ozone 
changes on tropospheric ozone photodissociation, hydroxy! 
radicals and methane trends. Geophys.Res.Lett., 19. 465-467. 
Madronich, S. and C. Granicr 1994: Tropospheric chemistry 
changes due to increased UV-B radiation. In: Stratospheric 
Ozone Depletion - UV-B Radiation in the Biosphere, R.H. 
Biggs and M.E.B. Joyner (eds). Springer, pp.3-10. 
Malilman. J.D., J.P. Pinto and L.J. Umscheid, 1994: Transport. 
radiative and dynamical effects of the Antarctic ozone hole: A 
GFDL "SKYHI" model experiment. ./. Atmos. Sci.. 51, 489-
508. 
Manabe S. and R.T.Wetherald, 1980: On the distribution of 
climate change resulting from an increase of CO, content of 
the atmosphere../. Atmos. Sci., 37, 99-1 18. 
Manabe S., R.J. Stouffer, M.J. Spelman and K. Bryan, 1991: 
Transient response of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to 
gradual changes of atmospheric CO,. Part I: Annual mean 
response../. Climate, 4, 785-818. 
Marenco, A., II. Gouget. P. Ncdelec, J-P. Pages and F. Karcher, 
1994: Evidence of a long-term increase in tropospheric ozone 
from Pic du Midi data series - consequences: positive radiative 
forcing. J.Geophys.Res. 99, 16617-16632. 
Martin, G.M., D.W. Johnson and A. Spice, 1994: The 
measurement and parameterization of effective radius of 
droplets in warm stratocumulus clouds. .I.Atmos.Sci., 51, 1823-
1842. 
McCormack, J. P. and L.L. Hood, 1994: Relationship between 
ozone and temperature trends in the lower stratosphere: 
Latitudinal and seasonal dependences. Geophys. Res. Lett. 21, 
1615-1618. 
McCormick, MP., RE. Veiga, and W.P. Chu, 1992: 
Stratospheric ozone profile and total ozone trends derived from 
the SAGE I and II data. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 269-272. 
McDaniel, AH., C.A. Cantrell, J.A. Davidson, RE. Shelter and 
J.G. Calvert, 1991: The temperature dependent infrared 
absorption cross-sections for chlorofluorcarbons: CFC-I I, 
CFC-12, CFC-I3, CFC-I4, CFC-22, CFC-113, CFC-I 14 and 
CFC-115../. Atmos. Chem, 12, 211-227. 
Miller, A.J., R.M. Nagatani, G.C. Tiao, X.F. Niu, G.C. Reinsel, 
D. Wuebbles and K. Grant, 1992: Comparisons of observed 
ozone and temperature trends in the lower stratosphere. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 929-932. 
Minnis, P., 1994: Radiative forcing by the 1991 Ml. Pinatubo 
Eruption. Preprints of 8th Conference on 
Atmospheric 
Radiation American Meteorological Society, Boston, pp J 9-
Jll. 
Minnis, P., E.F. Harrison, G.G. Gibson, F.M. Dcnn, DR. 
Doclling and W.L. Smith, Jr., 1993: Radiative forcing by the 
eruption of Mt. Pinatubo deduced from NASA's Earth 
Radiation Budget Experiment data. Science. 259, 1411-1415. 
Nesme-Ribes. E. and A. Mangeney, 1992: On a plausible 
physical mechanism linking the Maunder minimum to Ihe little 
ice age. Radiocarbon, 34. 263-270. 
Nesme-Ribes, E.. E.N. Ferreira, R. Sadourny, II. Le Treut and 
Z.X. Li. 1993: Solar dynamics and its impact on solar 

202 
Radiative 
Forcing 
irradiance and the terrestrial climate. J. Geophys. 
Res., 
98(A11), 18923-18935. 
Oort, A.M. and H. Liu, 1993: Upper air temperature trends over 
the globe, 1958-1989.7. Climate, 6, 292-307. 
Parker, D.E. and D.I. Cox, 1994: Towards a consistent global 
climatological rawinsonde database. Int. J. Climatology . (In 
press) 
Penner, I.E., R.E. Dickinson and C.A. O'Neill, 1992: Effects of 
aerosol from biomass burning on the global radiation budget. 
Science, 256, 1432-1434. 
Potter, G.L. and R.D. Cess, 1984: Background tropospheric 
aerosols: implications within a statistical-dynamical climate 
model../. Geophys. Res., 89, 9521-9526. 
Radke, L.F., J.A. Coakley, Jr. and M.D. King, 1989: Direct and 
remote sensing observations of the effects of ships on clouds. 
Science, 246, 1146-1149. 
Ramanathan, V., R.J. Cicerone, H.B. Singh and J.T. Kiehl, 
1985: Trace gas trends and their potential role in climate 
change../. Geophys. Res., 90, 5547-5566. 
Ramaswamy, V. and M.M. Bowen, 1994: Effect of changes in 
radiatively active species upon the lower stratospheric 
temperatures. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 18909-18921. 
Ramaswamy, V., M.D. Schwarzkopf and K.P. Shine, 1992: 
Radiative forcing of climate from halocarbon-induced global 
stratospheric ozone loss. Nature, 355, 810-812. 
Randel, W.J. and J.B. Cobb, 1994 : Coherent variations of 
monthly mean total ozone and lower stratospheric temperature. 
./. Geophys. Res.. 99, 5433-5447. 
Reid, G.C., 1991: Solar total irradiance variations and the global 
sea surface temperature record. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 2835-
2844. 
Rind D. and A. Lacis 1993: The role of the stratosphere in 
climate change. Surveys in Geophysics, 14, 133-165. 
Rind D.. R. Suozzo, N.K. Balachandran and M.J. Prather, 1990: 
Climate change and the middle atmosphere, Part I: The 
doubled CO, climate../. Atmos. Sci., 47, 475-494. 
Rind D., N.K. Balachandran and R. Suozzo, 1992: Climate 
change and the middle atmosphere, Part II: The Impact of 
volcanic aerosols. J. Climate, 5, 189-208. 
Robock, A. 1991: The volcanic contribution to climate change of 
the past century. In: Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic 
Change: A critical appraisal of simulations and observations, 
M.E. Schlesinger (ed.), Elsevier, pp 429-443. 
Robock, A. and J. Mao, 1992: Winter warming from large 
volcanic eruptions. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 2405-2408. 
Robock, A. and J. Mao, 1994: The volcanic signal in surface 
temperature observations. Submitted to 7. Climate. 
Roeckner, E., T. Siebert and J. Feichter, 1994: Climatic response 
to anthropogenic sulphate forcing simulated with a general 
circulation model. To appear in Proceedings 
of Dahlem 
Workshop "Aerosol Forcing of Climate". Wiley. 
Roehl. C, D. Boglu, C. Briihl and G . Moortgat, 1994: Infrared 
band intensities and global warming potentials of CF4, C2Ffi, 
C,FS. C4F|(). C5F12 and C6F,4. (In preparation.) 
Rothman. L.S., R.R. Gamache, R.H. Tipping, C.P. Rinsland, 
M.A.H. Smith, DC. Benner, V.Malathy Devi, J-M. Flaud, C. 
Camy-Peyret, A. Perrin, A. Goldman, S.T. Massie, L.R. Brown 
and R.A. Toth, 1992: The HITRAN molecular database: 
editions of 1991 and 1992. ./. Quant. Spectrosc. 
Radial. 
Transfer, 48, 469-507. 
Rottman, G.J., 1988: Observations of solar UV and EUV 
variability. Adv. Space Res., 8(7), 53-66. 
Russell, P.B., J.M. Livingston, E.G. Dutton, R.F. Pueschel, J.A. 
Reagan, T.E. De Poor, M.A. Box, D. Allen, P. Pilewskie, B.M. 
Herman, S.A. Kinne and D.J. Hoffman 1993: Pinatubo and 
pre-Pinatubo 
Optical 
Depth 
Spectra: 
Mauna 
Loa 
measurements, comparisons, inferred 
particle 
size 
distributions, radiative effects and relationships to Lidar data. 
J.Geophys.Res., 99, 22699-22985. 
Salby, M.L.and D.J. Shea, 1991: Correlations between solar 
activity and the atmosphere: An unphysical explanation. J. 
Geophys. Res., 96, 22579-22595. 
Sassen, K., 1992: Evidence for liquid-phase cirrus cloud 
formation from volcanic aerosols: Climatic implications. 
Science, 257, 516-519. 
Sato, M., J.E. Hansen, M.P. McCormick and J.B. Pollack, 1993: 
Stratospheric aerosol optical depths, 1850-1990. J. Geophys. 
/ks., 98, 22987-22994. 
Saunders, R., 1993: Radiative properties of Mt.. Pinatubo 
volcanic aerosols over the tropical Atlantic. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 20, 137-140. 
Schlesinger, M.E. and N. Ramankutty, 1992: Implications for 
global warming of intercycle solar-irradiance variations. 
Nature, 360, 330-333. 
Schwarzkopf, M.D. and V. Ramaswamy, 1993: Radiative 
forcing due to ozone in the 1980s: Dependence on altitude of 
ozone change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 205-208. 
Shi, G., 1992: Radiative forcing and greenhouse effect due to the 
atmospheric trace gases. Science in China (Series B), 35, 217-
229. 
Shi, G. and X. Fan, 1992: Past, present and future climatic 
forcing due to greenhouse gases. Adv. in Atmos. Sci., 9, 279-
286. 
Shi, G.Y., J.D. Guo, X.B. Fan, B. Wang and L.X. Wang, 1993: 
Climate change and its causes. Proceedings 
of the 
International 
Conference on Regional Environment and 
Climate Changes in East Asia. Taipei, Taiwan. 
Shine, K.P., 1991: On the relative greenhouse strength of gases 
such as the halocarbons. J. Atmos. Sci., 48, 1513-1518. 
Shine, K.P., 1993: The greenhouse effect and stratospheric 
change. In: The role of the stratosphere in global change, ML. 
Chanin (ed.), NATO AS I series, Springer. 
Shine, K.P., B.P. Briegleb, A.S. Grossman, D. Hauglustaine, H. 
Mao, V. Ramaswamy, M.D. Schwarzkopf, R. van Dorland and 
W.-C. Wang, 1995: Radiative forcing due to changes in ozone: 
a comparison of different codes. In: Atmospheric ozone as a 
climate gas W-C. Wang and I.S.A. Isaksen(eds), NATO ASI 
series, Springer. (In press) 
Smits, I., T. Fichefet, C. Tricot and J.-P. van Ypersele, 1993: A 
model study of the time evolution of climate at the secular 
time-scale. Atmosfera, 6, 255-272. 
Spencer, R.W. and J.R. Christy, 1993: Precision lower 
stratospheric temperature monitoring with the MSU: 
Validation and results 1979-1991.7. Climate, 6, 1194-1204. 
Stephens, G.L. and S-C. Tsay, 1990: On the cloud absorption 
anomaly. Quarterly J. Roy. Meteor. Soc, 116, 671-704. 
Stordal, F., B. Innset, A.S. Grossman and G. Myhre. 1993: SF„ 
as a greenhouse gas; an assessment of Norwegian and global 

Radiative 
Forcing 
203 
sources and the global warming potential. Norwegian Institute' 
for Air Research, Report, OR 15/93. 
Stouffer, R.J., S. Manabe and K.Y. Vinnikov, 1994: Model 
assessment of the role of natural variability in recent global 
warming. Nature., 367, 634-636. 
Taylor, K. and J.E. Penner, 1994: Response of the climate 
system to atmospheric aerosols and greenhouse gases. Nature, 
369, 734-737. 
Teitlebaum, H. and P. Bauer, 1990: Stratospheric temperature 
eleven year variations: Solar cycle influences or stroboscopic 
effect? Ann. Geophys., 8, 239-242. 
Tinsley, B.A. and R.A. Heelis, 1993: Correlations of atmospheric 
dynamics with solar activity: evidence for a connection via the 
solar wind, atmospheric electricity, and cloud microphysics../. 
Geophys. Res., 98, 10375-10384. 
Valero, F.P.J, and P. Pilewskie, 1992: Latitudinal survey of 
spectral optical depths of the Pinatubo volcanic cloud: Derived 
particle sizes, columnar mass loadings, and effects on 
planetary albedo. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 163-166. 
Van Loon, H. and K. Labitzke, 1988: Association between the 
11-year solar cycle, QBO, and the atmosphere, part II: surface 
and 700 mb in the Northern Hemisphere winter. J.Climate, 1, 
905-920. 
Wang, W.-C, J.P. Pinto and Y.L. Yung, 1980: Climatic effects 
due to halogenated compounds in the Earth's atmosphere../. 
Atmos.Sci., 37, 333-338. 
Wang, W.-C, M.P. Dudek, X.-Z. Liang and J.T. Kiehl, 1991: 
Inadequacy of effective C0 2 as a proxy in simulating the 
greenhouse effect of other radiatively active gases. Nature, 
350, 573-577 
Wang, W.-C, M.P. Dudek and X-Z. Liang, 1992: Inadequacy of 
effective C0 2 as a proxy in assessing the regional climate 
change due to other radiatively active gases. Geophys. 
Res.Lett., 19,1375-1378 
Wang, W.-C, Y-C. Zhuang and R.D. Bojkov. 1993: Climate 
implications of observed changes in ozone vertical 
distributions at middle and high latitudes ol the Northern 
Hemisphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20. 1567-1570. 
Wetherald, R.T. and S. Manabe. 1975: The effect of changing 
the solar constant on the climate of a general circulation 
model. J. Atmos.Sci., 32. 2044-2059. 
Whitlock, C, T. Charlock, W. Slaylor. R. Pinker, I. Laszlo, A. 
Ohmura, H. Gilgen, R. DiPasquale, S. LeCroy and N. Ritchey, 
1994: The first global WCRP surface radiation budget data set. 
Submitted to Bull. Amer. Meteorol. Soc. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1994 : The contribution from emissions of 
different gases to the enhanced greenhouse effect. In: The Rio 
Convention on Climate Change: The New Regime and the 
Agenda for Research, T. Hanisch (ed), Westview Press. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1992: Implications for climate 
and sea level of revised IPCC emissions scenarios. Nature, 
347, 293-300. 
Willson, R.C and U.S. Hudson, 1988: Solar luminosity 
variations in solar cycle 21. Nature, 332, 810-812. 
WMO, 1985: Atmospheric Ozone 1985. Global Ozone Research 
and Monitoring Project Report No. It). World Meteorological 
Organisation, Geneva. 
WMO, 1991: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion; 1991. 
Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report No 25. 
World Meteorological Organisation, Geneva. 
WMO, 1994: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, 1994: 
Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report No. 
37. World Meteorological Organisation, Geneva. 
Wuebbles, D.J., D.E. Kinnison, K.E. Grant and J. Lean, 1991: 
The effect of solar flux variations and trace gas emissions on 
recent trends in stratospheric ozone and temperature. ./. 
Geomagn. Geoelecl., 43, Suppl., Part 2, 709-718. 


5 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
D.L. ALBRITTON, R.G. DERWENT, I.S.A. ISAKSEN, M. LAL, D.J. WUEBBLES 
Contributors: 
C. Bruhl, J.S. Daniel, D. Fisher, C. Granier, S.C. Liu, K. Patten, V. Ramaswamy, 
T.M.L. Wigley 


CONTENTS 
Summary 
209 
5.1 Introduction 
211 
5.1.1 Utility of Trace-Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
211 
5.1.1.1 Changes in radiative forcing as the basis for 
measures of induced climate change 
211 
5.1.1.2 Uses of radiative forcing indices 
211 
5.1.2 Definition of Relative Radiative Forcing Indices 
212 
5.1.2.1 General characteristics 
212 
5.1.2.2 Primary factors 
212 
5.1.2.3 Additional factors 
214 
5.1.2.4 Formulations of radiative forcing indices 215 
5.1.3 General Scientific Limitations of a Simple Index 216 
5.2 Calculation of Global Warming Potentials 
217 
5.2.1 Reference Molecule 
217 
5.2.2 Spectral Properties of the Present and Future 
Atmosphere 
218 
5.2.2.1 Trace gas composition 
218 
5.2.2.2 Water vapour and clouds 
219 
5.2.3 Lifetimes 
220 
5.2.4 Direct GWPs 
221 
5.2.5 Indirect Effects 
223 
5.2.5.1 General characteristics 
223 
5.2.5.2 Indirect effects upon the GWP of CH4 
225 
5.2.6 The Product of GWP and Estimated Current 
Emissions 
226 
5.3 A Perspective on GWPs 
227 
5.3.1 The Insights Gained From Ozone Depleting 
Potentials (ODPs) 
227 
5.3.2 Characteristics Relevant to Uses of GWPs in 
Policy Formulation 
229 
References 
230 


SUMMARY 
Radiative forcing indices have been developed as a relative 
measure of the potential globally averaged warming effect 
on the surface-troposphere system arising from emission 
of a set amount (e.g., 1 kilogram) of a variety of trace 
gases. These gases can exert a radiative forcing of the 
climate system both directly and indirectly. Direct forcing 
occurs when the emitted gas is itself a greenhouse gas. 
Indirect forcing occurs when chemical transformation of 
the original gas produces or destroys a gas or gases that 
themselves are greenhouse gases. The indices reflect the 
cumulative radiative forcing over some chosen time period 
of interest. The choice of time horizon is a user choice that 
depends upon issues such as the time-scales of the climate 
system and the emphasis on long-term versus short-term 
potential climate changes. Future changes in the numerical 
indices are likely as research in related areas yields 
improved input to the calculations, implying that whatever 
framework is adopted for the use of these indices, it must 
have flexibility to incorporate what could be substantial 
changes in the specified numerical values of the indices. 
The set of Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) for 
greenhouse gases that is presented in this chapter is an 
updating and expansion of that presented in the 1992 
assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC, 1992). The time horizons of the GWPs are 
20, 100, and 500 years, as was the case in IPCC (1992). 
GWPs have a number of important limitations. The GWP 
concept is difficult to apply to gases that are very unevenly 
distributed and to aerosols. For example, relatively short-
lived pollutants such as the nitrogen oxides and the volatile 
organic compounds (precursors of ozone, which is a 
greenhouse gas) vary markedly from region to region 
within a hemisphere and their chemical impacts are highly 
variable and non-linearly dependent upon concentrations. 
Further, the indices and the estimated uncertainties are 
intended to reflect global averages only, and do not 
account for regional effects. They do not include climatic 
or biospheric feedbacks, nor do they consider any 
environmental impacts other than those related to climate. 
The major changes since IPCC (1992) are the following: 
• 
GWPs for 16 new chemical species have been 
calculated, bringing the number now available to 38. 
The new species are largely hydrofluorocarbons 
(MFCs), which are being manufactured as substitutes 
for the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and the very 
long-lived fully fluorinated compounds: SF() and the 
perfluorocarbons. SF() is manufactured mainly for 
insulation of electrical equipment. The main source 
of CF4 and C-,Fft is production as accidental by-
products of aluminium manufacture, while other 
perfluorocarbons have been suggested as potential 
CFC and halon substitutes. 
The decay response of a pulse of CO, in the 
atmosphere, which is the reference for the CWPs, 
was derived from a balanced carbon model in which 
sinks are constrained to match sources that was 
deemed (see Chapter I) representative of the current 
understanding 
of the global carbon cycle. The 
reference for the GWPs of IPCC (1990, 1992) was a 
three-parameter fit involving an unbalanced carbon 
model. The present GWPs arc 10-20% larger than 
they would otherwise have been because of the 
different reference. 
• 
For those species addressed in IPCC (1992), a 
majority of the (1WP values are larger, typically by 
10-30%. These changes are largely due to (i) 
changes in the carbon dioxide (CO-,) reference noted 
above and (ii) improved values for atmospheric 
lifetimes, particularly those species that are removed 
by chemical reactions in the troposphere. 
• 
Both the direct and indirect components of the (1WP 
of methane (CH4) have been estimated. The indirect 
component is now deemed to be better understood 
than at the time of the previous IPCC reports. The 
effects that were incorporated include methane's 
influence on lengthening its own atmospheric decay 
response time and on production of tropospheric 
ozone and stratospheric water vapour. The sum of 
these effects is estimated to increase substantially the 
total GWP for CH4 compared to its direct GWP. 
Uncertainties in evaluating these effects arise from 
incomplete understanding of dynamical and 
chemical atmospheric processes (especially the use 

2/0 
of the decay response time described in Chapter 2). 
The product of the methane GWP and its estimated 
annual anthropogenic emission is comparable to that 
of C0 2 over a 20-year time horizon and is a 
significant fraction for longer time horizons. 
The sensitivity of the GWPs to a changing future 
atmosphere has been explored. As was done in IPCC 
(1990, 1992), the composition of the background 
atmosphere used in the GWP calculations presented 
herein was the present-day abundances of CO-,, CH4, 
and nitrous oxide (N 20), which were assumed 
constant into the future. Since this is not a realistic 
assumption, the sensitivity of the GWPs to a 
changing future atmosphere was also explored. For 
example, a choice of an increasing CO-, abundance 
(from 360 ppmv currently to 650 ppmv by the end of 
the 22nd century) in the background atmosphere 
would produce 20% larger GWPs for the longer time 
horizons. The sensitivity of the direct GWPs to some 
of the changes likely to be associated with an altered 
climate, namely altered water vapour and clouds, 
was also explored. The results suggest that the 
changes in GWPs would not be substantial. 
• 
A typical uncertainty, relative to the C02 reference, 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
in the direct GWPs presented herein is estimated to 
be ±35%. The range stems from uncertainties in the 
relative radiative forcing per molecule and lifetimes 
in the atmosphere. Larger uncertainties apply to the 
estimation of indirect effects, but these are difficult 
to quantify. 
Reliable indirect GWPs are difficult to estimate for the 
ozone-depleting gases (e.g., CFCs and the bromine-
containing halons) and hence are not included in this 
report. Better estimates of the negative, indirect component 
of the GWP arising from the reduced radiative forcing 
from ozone losses in the lower stratosphere require a 
detailed understanding of several factors including the 
vertical profile of the ozone loss (see Chapter 4), the role 
of bromine and chlorine in destroying stratospheric ozone, 
and the photochemical effectiveness of each ozone-
depleting gas. 
Reliable radiative forcing indices for gases that form 
atmospheric aerosols (e.g., sulphur dioxide, S02) cannot 
currently be formulated meaningfully, chiefly because of 
the lack of understanding of many of the processes 
involved (e.g., composition of the aerosols, radiative 
properties) and because of uncertainties regarding the 
climate response to the inhomogeneous spatial 
distributions of the aerosols (Chapter 3). 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
211 
5.1 Introduction 
This chapter addresses the numerical indices that can be 
used to provide a simple representation of the 
contributions of emissions of different atmospheric trace 
gases to greenhouse warming. In general terms, such 
indices are used to estimate the relative impact of emission 
of a fixed amount of one greenhouse gas compared to 
another for globally averaged radiative forcing of the 
climate system over a specified time scale. This focus 
leads to several key questions. What types of indices are 
there? How representative are they of the relative 
contributions of the greenhouse gases to the radiative 
forcing of the climate system? How well can all of the 
contributions of a trace gas be embodied in a single index? 
What are the most policy-relevant aspects of the 
uncertainties associated with radiative forcing indices? 
In addressing these questions, this chapter draws heavily 
on the information in the preceding chapters of this report 
(cross-referenced herein), the earlier climate-system 
reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) (IPCC, 1990; 1992), the ozone-depletion reports of 
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and 
the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) (WMO 
1990, 1992, 1995), and recent journal publications. While 
the major objective of the text that follows is to update the 
information on radiative forcing indices, another goal is to 
note the aspects of such indices that involve user choices, 
with the aim of stimulating comments that could enhance 
the usefulness of the corresponding section on this topic in 
the forthcoming IPCC full scientific assessment of the 
understanding of climate change (IPCC, 1995). 
In this introduction we summarise the utility of such 
radiative forcing indices, describe the types of indices that 
have been developed, and outline the physical quantities 
and choices upon which they depend. In the subsequent 
sections of this chapter, we describe the calculations of the 
indices considered, outline the input data used and 
assumptions made in the calculations, show the sensitivity 
of the results to some of the specifications and 
assumptions, present the resulting numerical indices, 
describe their uncertainties, and discuss key features of the 
radiative forcing indices that are likely to be of prime 
interest to their users. 
5.1.1 Utility of Trace-Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
5.1.1.1 Changes in radiative forcing as the basis for 
measures of induced climate change 
As described in Chapter 4 (see in particular Table 4.1), 
calculations made with climate models indicate that, for 
well-mixed greenhouse gases at least, the relationship 
between changes in the globally integrated adjusted 
radiative forcing at the tropopause and global-mean 
surface temperature changes is independent of the gas 
causing the forcing. Furthermore, similar studies indicate 
that, to first order, this "climate sensitivity" is relatively 
insensitive to the type of forcing agent (e.g., changes in the 
atmospheric concentration of a well-mixed greenhouse gas 
such as CCs or changes in the solar radiation reaching the 
atmosphere). Spatial variations of radiative forcing can 
influence regional climate responses (e.g., Wang ct al., 
1991, 1993). Such variations are not currently considered 
in the formulation of relative indices for climate change, 
but could be important (e.g., see Section 4.4.1.1). 
The first-order forcing-response relationship is the 
scientific basis for using changes in radiative forcing as the 
common mode for (i) comparing some of the natural 
causes of climate change (e.g., solar forcing) to some of 
the human-caused interferences in the climate system (e.g., 
well-mixed greenhouse gases) or (ii) intercomparing the 
relative radiative-forcing roles of the numerous greenhouse 
gases. This practice is further strengthened by two facts. 
First, the indices represent radiative forcing, not climate 
response. There are fewer uncertainties associated with 
calculating changes in radiative forcing than with 
calculating climate-system responses, e.g., global mean 
surface temperature, sea level, or precipitation. Second, the 
indices are relative quantities, not absolute. Calculating the 
alteration in radiative forcing due to addition of a fixed 
amount of greenhouse gas A relative to the same addition 
of greenhouse gas B can be done more accurately than 
having to know the absolute alteration in radiative forcing 
due a change in a single greenhouse gas alone. The GWP 
may be usefully thought of as a proxy for assessment of 
the relative roles of different greenhouse gases, assuming 
that the climate system responds linearly to perturbations 
in radiative forcing. 
5.1.1.2 Uses of radiative forcing indices 
The availability of a simple and representative index that 
quantifies the relative roles of additions of the various 
greenhouse gases in causing climate change would have 
considerable practical value (i) in the assessment of the 
relative or aggregate contributions of the many human 
activities that can cause such changes and (ii) in the 
potential decisions as to how best to minimise the 
magnitude of the impact of such activities on the climate 
system. Indeed, as nations approach the discussion of 
policies that could reduce the likelihood of human 
perturbation of the Earth's climate system, some countries 
are incorporating comparative trace-gas indices in their 
formulation of approaches to reducing their trace-gas 
emissions. Furthermore, the Parties of the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change will seek enhanced 
scientific input regarding such indices as one of the tools 
for meeting the Convention's commitment to "prevent 
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate 
system". 

2/2 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
Provided international agreement can be reached on a 
set of indices that would place the various greenhouse gases 
on an equivalent scale, this could allow countries to choose 
a course of action that is the most appropriate for them 
(economically, technically, socially, etc.) in meeting their 
commitment to help reduce radiative forcing. Examples of 
the utility of these indices would be the following: 
They can be used to rank the emissions of the 
various countries, i.e., a radiative-forcing-scaled net 
emission for each country could include all 
greenhouse gases on a common scale and hence 
could represent that country's current or projected 
net contribution to greenhouse warming. 
They can be the quantitative basis to a collective 
"basket" approach to greenhouse-gas 
emission 
reductions within a given country. For example, the 
product of a compound's radiative-forcing index and 
the amount by which the emissions of that 
compound are reduced (or the removal of that 
compound is increased) could yield the equivalent 
reduction in global radiative forcing achieved. 
Therefore, this index could also be the quantitative 
basis of the "trading" of one type of emission 
reduction for another within a national goal or quota. 
They can contribute to economic assessments of 
trade-offs between alternative technologies, e.g., 
weighting by radiative forcing indices in comparing 
the merits of one fuel against another. Such 
comparisons could also be modified to include 
efficiency and other technological factors. 
They can function 
as a quantitative 
signal to 
governmental and industrial policy makers, thereby 
encouraging some activities and discouraging others. 
For example, the flagging of possible candidate 
substitutes for the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) that 
have high radiative forcing indices could identify 
them for possible avoidance. 
• 
Together with other information, they can be used as 
a part of the basis for total environmental impact 
assessments 
where several different factors or 
actions are considered. For example, environmental 
labelling of products or environmental audits of 
industrial processes. 
5.1.2 Definition of Relative Radiative Forcing Indices 
5.1.2.1 General characteristics 
The relative radiative forcing indices that have been 
formulated to date have two noteworthy general features: 
A relative 
radiative 
forcing 
index is not purely a 
geophysical quantity, such as is a change of temperature. 
Rather, these indices are user-oriented constructs whose 
calculation involves not only an understanding of a few 
relevant Earth-system processes (e.g., radiation transfer 
and chemical removal), but also some policy-oriented 
choices (e.g., a selection of the time span of interest). 
Hence, such indices per se are not subject to observation 
and testing in the sense of many climate-system 
predictions, but are best judged 
by (i) 
their 
representativeness of the overall radiative forcing role of 
the specified trace gas and (ii) their overall usefulness to 
those who formulate and establish policies regarding the 
greenhouse 
gases. We differentiate 
below 
the 
characteristics that are based on the understanding of 
geophysical processes and those that stem from policy-
oriented choices. 
The focus in the formulation of radiative forcing indices is 
on the effect of anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse 
gases. Chapters 1 and 2 describe how emissions control 
atmospheric concentrations, while Chapter 4 describes 
how the atmospheric concentration of a chemical species 
determines its contribution to the total radiative forcing. 
Chapter 4 also illustrates how the changes in greenhouse 
gas concentrations that have occurred in the past have 
altered the total radiative forcing (also see Figures 2.2 to 
2.4 of IPCC, 1990). However, from the viewpoint of 
formulating policies for reductions in greenhouse gases. 
indices that denote the relative 
radiative roles of 
anthropogenic 
emissions, 
rather 
than 
absolute 
concentration changes caused by human activities, have 
received more attention (see Section 2.2.1 of IPCC, 1990). 
That emission-based emphasis continues here. 
5.1.2.2 Primary factors 
Common to all greenhouse gases are three major factors -
two technical and one user-oriented- that determine the 
relative contribution of addition of 1 kilogram of a 
greenhouse gas to radiative forcing and hence are the 
primary input in the formulation, calculation, and use of 
relative radiative forcing indices. Assessment of the 
absolute, rather than relative, radiative forcing involves the 
additional factor of total quantity emitted and is addressed 
both in Chapter 4 and in Figure 5.7. 
Technical factors 
Factor 1: The strength with which a given species absorbs 
long wave radiation and the spectral location of its 
absorbing wavelengths. Chemical species differ markedly 
in their abilities to absorb long-wave radiation. Overlaps of 
the absorption spectra of various chemical species with 
one another (especially H70, C09, and, to a lesser extent. 
03) are important factors. In addition, while the absorption 
of infrared radiation by many greenhouse gases varies 
linearly with their concentration, a few important OIK-

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
213 
display non-linear behaviour (e.g., CO^, CH4, and N-,0). 
For those gases, the relative radiative forcing will depend 
upon concentration and hence upon the scenario adopted 
for the future trace-gas atmospheric abundances. A key 
factor in the greenhouse role of a given species is the 
location of its absorption spectrum relative to the region in 
the absorption of atmospheric water vapour through which 
most outgoing planetary thermal radiation escapes to 
space. Consequently, other things being equal, chemical 
species that have strong absorption band strengths in the 
relatively weak water vapour "window" are more 
important greenhouse gases than those that do not. This is 
illustrated in Figure 5.1, which shows how the 
instantaneous radiative forcings due to the pulse emission 
of 1 kilogram of various long-lived gases change as the 
concentrations decay away in time after they have become 
well mixed (e.g., about a year after injection into the 
atmosphere). The relevant point here is on the left-hand 
scale at t = 1, namely, that the radiative forcing of an equal 
emission of the various gases can differ by as much as four 
orders of magnitude. Laboratory studies of molecular 
radiative properties are a key source of the basic 
information needed in the calculation of radiative forcing 
indices. The status of such spectroscopic data of 
greenhouse gases is discussed in detail in Section 4.2. 
Factor 2: The lifetime 
or response 
time of the given 
species 
in the atmosphere. 
Greenhouse gases differ 
markedly in how long they reside in the atmosphere once 
emitted. Greenhouse gases that persist in the atmosphere 
for a long time are more important, other things being 
2 
F 
5 
m 
r 
7i 
n 
5 
(0 
XJ 
if 
V) 
n 
o 
r 
at 
c 
fi 
c 
1 0 - 1 0 
10-11 
10'% 
m-|a 
in-" 
I D - ' : 
io-'G 
10-17 
= 
i 
i i i i i i i | 
i 
i i i i n i | 
i 
i i i i i i t 
: 
~ ~ * 
- ~ . ^ 
Lifetime~10,000 yr f 
r 
N 
z 
\ 
— 
t 
= 
HCFC - 225ca\ 
-2.5 yr 
» 
1 
i 
= 
» 
i 
I I I I I I I I 
i 
I ' I I I I I I 
V 
N20 
_ 
^ S r 1 2 0 y r = 
\ 
^°2l 
\ H F C - 1 3 4 a " 
\ 
-14 yr 
| 
1 Illlllll 1-
1 
10 
100 
1000 
Time (yr) 
Figure 5.1: Instantaneous radiative forcing (Wm"2 kg"1) versus 
time after a pulse release for several different greenhouse gases. 
The C02 decay response function and other aspects of the 
calculations are described in Section 5.2.1. 
equal, in radiative forcing than those that are shorter lived. 
This point is also illustrated in Figure 5.1. The initial 
dominance of the band strength in determining the 
instantaneous radiative forcing at early times can be 
overwhelmed by the lifetime factor at later times. As 
described in Chapters 1 and 2, the atmospheric lifetime of 
a gas is determined largely by the Earth-system process(es) 
that remove the gas from the atmosphere, e.g., the 
stratospheric photolytic decomposition of N-,0 and the 
chemical destruction of CH4 in the troposphere by the 
hydroxy 1 radical. Knowledge of these varied and often 
complex processes stems from laboratory investigations, 
field studies, and theoretical modelling. The status of this 
understanding of the atmospheric lifetime of greenhouse 
gases is further assessed in Chapters I and 2. After 
emission into the current or projected atmosphere, the 
time-scale for removal of most greenhouse gases is 
equivalent to the lifetime (see definitions in Chapter 2). In 
some cases, the time scale for removal of a gas from the 
atmosphere cannot be simply characterised or is dependent 
upon the perturbation and/or the background atmosphere 
and other sources; in these cases (chiefly CO-, and CH4) 
we refer to removal of a pulse as the response time or 
decay response. 
User-oriented factor 
Factor 3: The time period over which the radiative 
effects 
of the species are to be considered. 
Since many of the 
responses of the Earth's climate to changes in radiative 
forcing are long (e.g., the centennial-scale warming of the 
oceans), it is the cumulative 
radiative forcing of a 
greenhouse gas, rather than its instantaneous value, that is 
of primary importance to crafting a relevant radiative 
forcing index. As a consequence, such indices involve an 
integral over time. Rodhe (1990) has noted that the choice 
of time interval can be compared to cumulative-dosage 
effects in radiology. IPCC (1990, 1992) used integration 
time horizons of 20, 100, and 500 years in calculating the 
indices. Figure 5.2 shows the integrals of the decay 
functions in Figure 5.1 for a wide range of time horizons. 
It illustrates the need for the user of the radiative forcing 
indices to select the time period of consideration. A 
strongly absorbing, but short-lived, gas like HCFC-225ca 
will contribute more radiative forcing in the short term 
than a weaker-absorbing, but longer-lived, gas like N 20; 
however, in the longer term, the reverse is true. Methane is 
a key greenhouse gas discussed extensively in Section 
5.2.5; its integrated radiative forcing would lie below that 
of N , 0 and reach a plateau more quickly because of its 
shorter lifetime. 
The spread of numerical values of the radiative forcing 
indices reported in Section 5.2.4 below largely reflects the 
influence of these three major factors. 

2/4 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
•C- 
10-8 
>. 
Z- i0-io 
10"11 
10-'2 
10-'3 
10-'" 
10-15 
c 
I 
Q. 
CD 
c 
E 
£ 
o 
O 
o 
u* 
J 
L 
< I i i111 
1 
l l l l l l | 
| 
I I 
...••"" 
HFC-134a 
N20 
- 
I 
I 
I I i i m l 
I 
i l l 
1 It 
1 III 
1 
10 
Time 
100 
horizon (yr) 
1000 
Figure 5.2: Integrated radiative forcing (Wnr2 kg' yr) for a 
range of greenhouse gases (from Figure 5.1). 
5.1.2.3 Additional factors 
There are other factors, some of them substantial, that 
influence the degree to which a given gas contributes to 
radiative forcing. 
Indirect effects 
In addition to their direct radiative effects described above, 
many chemical species also have indirect effects on 
radiative forcing that arise largely from atmospheric 
chemical processes. For example, a radiatively important 
product of the oxidative removal of CH4 is stratospheric 
water vapour, a greenhouse gas. Hence, the total 
contribution of CH4 emissions to radiative forcing should 
ideally be the sum of the direct and indirect effects. In the 
case of CH4, the indirect contribution may be roughly 
comparable and additive to the direct effect. 
Indirect effects may also be opposite in sign to the direct 
effects. An example is the set of chemicals that deplete the 
stratospheric ozone layer. In addition to the well-known 
direct (positive) contributions to radiative forcing of 
ozone-depleting species, the resulting ozone loss in the 
lower stratosphere reduces the radiative forcing at the 
tropopause, thereby introducing a negative component to 
the indices of these compounds. Observations of ozone 
loss suggest that this forcing varies substantially with 
season and location and is also significant in the global 
average (Section 4.3). 
Another class of chemical species that is relevant to 
radiative forcing is the set that are not significant 
greenhouse gases themselves, but whose emissions affect 
the concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols via 
atmospheric chemical processes. The nitrogen oxides and 
volatile organic compounds from surface and/or high 
altitude pollution sources are examples of this class, since 
they are capable of forming ozone and changing the 
oxidising capacity of the atmosphere. 
As explained in Chapter 2, the atmospheric chemical 
processes that drive many of these indirect effects are 
difficult to characterise adequately, thereby limiting the 
ability of current models to calculate the potentially 
important indirect contributions of many gases. 
Particularly for species that are chemically removed from 
the atmosphere on short time-scales (days to months, such 
as volatile organic compounds), chemical and radiative 
impacts are believed to be highly non-linear and regional 
in nature, thus complicating the derivation of global 
radiative forcing. While these effects will not be quantified 
here, they could be important. 
Role of a changing atmosphere 
As noted above, the radiative properties of the atmosphere, 
which are determined by atmospheric composition, 
influence the degree to which a given greenhouse gas 
contributes to greenhouse forcing. Since the atmospheric 
concentrations of absorbing gases continually change, this 
aspect of a radiative forcing index is a time-varying 
quantity. Indeed, a somewhat "circular" situation cannot be 
avoided: an index is calculated for an assumed set of future 
greenhouse gas concentrations and then the subsequent use 
of that number in policy decisions can cause the future 
concentrations to be different from those originally 
assumed! In past IPCC assessments, the then-current 
atmospheric abundances of greenhouse gases were 
assumed, for simplicity, to be fixed throughout the 
integration over the time horizon. In this chapter, we 
explore the sensitivity of radiative forcing indices to future 
scenarios of atmospheric composition. Similarly, since 
ambient water vapour and clouds are also major factors in 
atmospheric absorption, the sensitivity of calculated 
indices to likely climate-induced changes in these 
parameters is also examined. The sensitivity of GWPs to 
atmospheric aerosols is likely to be similar to or less than 
the sensitivity to clouds because of similarities in radiative 
properties. These sensitivity tests provide some insight into 
how the infrared transmission and hence the indices would 
be different in a potentially perturbed future climate or 
altered aerosol distribution. However, this analysis does 
not consider possible future changes in atmospheric 
chemistry, circulation, biospheric processes, or other 
climate feedbacks that could result in significant change-
in the lifetimes of many trace gases and hence in their 
GWPs. 
The consideration of a changing future atmosphere her 
does not imply that the definition of the GWP should W 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
215 
altered to include such changes. Rather, the sensitivity 
tests described below suggest that the relative integrated 
radiative forcing of different greenhouse gases is not 
radically altered when several important aspects of likely 
future atmospheric change are taken into account, thereby 
strengthening the use of GWPs under a range of 
conditions. 
5.1.2.4 Formulations 
of radiative forcing indices 
Global Warming Potential 
Based on the major factors summarised above, the relative 
potential of a specified emission of a greenhouse gas to 
contribute to a change in future radiative forcing, i.e., its 
Global Warming Potential (GWP), has been expressed as 
the 
time-integrated 
radiative 
forcing 
from 
the 
instantaneous release of 1 kg of a trace gas expressed 
relative to that of 1 kg of a reference gas (IPCC, 1990): 
GWP(x) = 
ax»[x(t)]dt 
J 0 
rTH 
\ 
ar»[x(t)]dt 
J 0 
(5.1) 
where 77/ is the time horizon over which the calculation is 
considered; ax is the climate-related, radiative forcing due 
to a unit increase in atmospheric concentration of the gas 
in question; [x(t)] is the time-decaying abundance of a 
pulse of injected gas; and the corresponding quantities for 
the reference gas are in the denominator. The adjusted 
radiative forcings per kilogram, a, are derived from 
infrared radiative transfer models. As noted above, ar is a 
100000 
Q. 
|10000 
I 
! 
I 
1000 
100 
1 
' 
' I I 1111 
1— I I I I * 111 
T — r m r r a 
C2F6 
Lifetime~10,000 yr 
Ns~2.5yr 
^ 
N20 
-120 yr 
10 I 
1—' ' 
I 
LL 
1 
10 
100 
Time horizon (yr) 
1000 
Figure 5.3: Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) for a range of 
greenhouse gases with differing lifetimes, as in Figures 5.1 an 
5.2, using C0 2 as the reference gas. 
function of time when future changes in CO-, are 
considered. Time-dependent changes in </( or lifetimes are 
not explicitly considered here. The trace gas amounts. 
[.v(/)] and [r(t)\, remaining after time t are based upon the 
atmospheric lifetime or response time of the gas in 
question and the reference gas, respectively (see Chapters 
1 and 2). 
The reference gas has been taken generally to be CO-,, 
since this allows a comparison of the radiative forcing role 
of the emission of the gas in question to that of the 
dominant greenhouse gas that is emitted as a result of 
human activities, hence of the broadest interest to policy 
considerations. Figure 5.3 shows the GWPs for C\F(), 
HFC-134a, HCFC-225ca, and N , 0 for different time 
horizons with CO, as the reference gas. This figure 
illustrates the way in which the lifetime of a gas dictates 
the variation of its GWP over different time horizons. 
When the lifetime of the gas in question 
differs 
substantially from the response time of the reference gas, 
the GWP is sensitive to the choice of time horizon, i.e., for 
HFC-134a and HCFC-225ca (shorter) and for (\F,, 
(longer). When the lifetime of the gas in question is 
comparable to the response time of CO, (nominally on the 
order of 150 yr, although it is clear that the removal of 
CO, cannot be adequately described by a single, simple 
exponential lifetime; see Section 5.2.1 and Chapter I), the 
GWP is relatively insensitive to choice of lime horizon, 
i.e., for N,0. The initial GWPs (for time horizons much 
shorter than the lifetime of the gas or the reference) simply 
reflect the relative radiative forcing per molecule 
compared to the reference gas (see Figure 5.1). For longer 
time horizons, those species that decay more rapidly than 
the reference gas display sharply decreasing GWPs, with 
the slope of the decay being dependent mainly on the 
lifetime of the gas in question. Gases with lifetimes much 
longer than that of the reference gas (e.g., C,F(|) display 
steeply increasing GWPs over their lifetimes. 
A key aspect of GWP calculations is thus the choice of 
the reference gas. Unfortunately from the perspective of its 
selection as the reference gas, the atmospheric response 
time of CO, has the largest scientific uncertainty of the 
major greenhouse gases. As described in Chapter I, the 
uptake of CO, is a complex process involving the 
biosphere, ocean, ocean-atmosphere exchange rates, deep 
ocean sediments, etc. Furthermore, C O , is also re-
circulated among these reservoirs at an exchange rate that 
is poorly known at present, and it appears that the budget 
of CO, is difficult to balance with current information. As 
a result, when CO, is used as the reference, the numerical 
values of the GWPs of all greenhouse gases are likely to 
change, perhaps substantially, in the future simply because 
research will improve the understanding of the removal 
processes of CO,. 

2/6 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
Absolute Global Warming Potential 
A variant formulation (e.g., Wigley, 1994a,b) is to 
consider simply the integrated radiative forcing of the gas 
in question: 
r-TH 
AGWP(x)= 
ax»[x(t)]dt 
^ 0 
(5.2) 
[Units: Wm"2 kg"'yr] 
The advantage of this formulation is that the index is 
independent of the calculated Absolute Global Warming 
Potential (AGWP) of C02. An important disadvantage is 
that the absolute value of radiative forcing depends upon 
many factors that are poorly known, such as the 
distributions and radiative properties of clouds (e.g., Cess 
et al., 1993). Figure 5.2 shows the AGWPs for several 
gases as a function of time horizon. 
Other formulations 
Fisher et al. (1990) and WMO (1990) presented GWP 
calculations for CFCs and HCFCs integrated over the 
entire lifetimes of the species rather than to fixed time 
horizons. It can be shown that if lifetimes do not vary with 
time and if radiative forcing varies linearly with 
concentration, this definition is equivalent to the IPCC 
(1990) formulation over infinite time horizons (see Lashof 
and Ahuja, 1990; Rodhe, 1990). Fisher et al. (1990) also 
used CFC-11 as their reference gas, since they were 
primarily interested in the relative radiative forcing among 
CFCs and their substitutes. In contrast, Hammond et al. 
(1990) suggested use of the instantaneous relative radiative 
forcings (Figure 5.1) rather than their integrated values 
over chosen time horizons (Figures 5.2 and 5.3). Section 
5.1.2.2 discussed the user-oriented factors relating to the 
need for and choices of time horizon. 
Lashof and Ahuja (1990) used a similar definition to 
IPCC (1990) and argued for use of infinite time horizons 
together with "discount rates" designed to reflect 
increasing uncertainty with time (e.g., to account for the 
possibility that new technologies will emerge to solve 
problems). Other authors such as Reilly and Richards 
(1993) have argued that GWPs should include damage 
factors, which could tend to offset future discounts. 
Harvey (1993) proposed an alternative GWP index that 
accounts for the duration of capital investments in the 
energy sector. The possibility of coupling such factors to 
the GWP definition requires detailed study of economics 
and policy implications, together with the requirement for 
scientific accuracy, and is beyond the scope of the present 
review. 
Finally, it may be argued that the GWP should be based 
on the actual temperature 
response 
(or "realised 
warming") rather than radiative forcing. Clearly, the 
temperature responses (and associated changes such as sea 
level) are not only the ultimate "end result" associated with 
climate studies, but are also more readily understood by 
non-scientists. However, as noted as Section 4.8, 
evaluation of the temperature response requires 
understanding of the responses of climate to changes in 
radiative forcing, which would introduce additional 
uncertainties in a trace-gas index beyond those associated 
with radiative forcing changes. 
5.1.3 General Scientific Limitations of a Simple Index 
The conceptual framework outlined above captures the 
major facets of the relative roles of greenhouse gases in 
altering radiative forcing of the climate system. 
Inaccuracies in a calculated GWP stem from uncertainties 
in the input data and processes noted above, e.g., uncertain 
molecular band strengths and inadequately characterised 
chemical processes, notably those that influence indirect 
effects. Estimates of the effects of those uncertainties have 
been given in Chapters 1 - 4, and many are explicitly 
noted in association with the results presented below. 
Other more user-oriented inaccuracies and limitations have 
been discussed elsewhere in this chapter. 
The need to specify a time horizon is a user choice, not a 
GWP uncertainty. Similarly, the choice of a reference 
future atmosphere for the calculation of a GWP is not, in a 
strict sense, an uncertainty, but rather is largely an agreed-
upon selection of a future scenario for atmospheric 
composition. Further, the GWP as defined here is only a 
measure of relative radiative forcing, not a measure of 
potential damage resulting from possible climate change 
that includes economic or other variables. These 
limitations should be kept in mind in economic or policy 
analysis. 
However, there are some conceptual problems 
associated with the scientific formulation of a single index 
for all gases (IPCC, 1990, 1992). A few are worth 
emphasising: 
• 
Insofar 
as it is intended 
to be 
globally 
representative, the GWP concept is difficult to apply 
to gases that are very unevenly distributed and to 
aerosols. As noted in Chapter 2, the shorter-lived 
gases frequently have very inhomogeneous spatial 
distributions. For example, carbon monoxide 
abundances are larger in the Northern Hemisphere 
than in the Southern, reflecting the relative 
magnitudes of human-influenced emissions. 
Furthermore, relatively short-lived pollutants such as 
the nitrogen oxides and the volatile organic 
compounds (important precursors of ozone) vary 
markedly from region to region within a hemisphere 
and their chemical impacts are highly variable aid 
non-linearly dependent upon concentrations. lie 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
217 
accuracy of calculation and meaning of a globally 
averaged forcing, particularly relative to a more-
evenly distributed gas like CO,, is hence weakened. 
Aerosols also have spatially inhomogeneous sources 
and very short atmospheric lifetimes; hence, their 
spatial distributions can be quite variable. As a 
result, the comparison of the radiative forcing by 
aerosols and ozone precursors compared to that of 
C0 2 is problematic (Section 4.4), but potentially 
quite important. 
• 
GWPs for greenhouse gases with vertical profiles or 
latitudinal variations of radiative forcing that are 
markedly different from the reference gas have 
larger inaccuracies. The vertical and latitudinal 
distribution of the radiative perturbation of a 
greenhouse gas can influence the partitioning of the 
long-wave radiative-flux perturbation in the 
troposphere-surface climate system. Gases with 
markedly different distributions of their radiative 
flux perturbations may influence the climate system 
(particularly regionally) in different ways that are not 
reflected simply in the GWP ratio (Wang et al., 
1991). Thus, the use of a common scale afforded by 
GWPs may be weakened (see Section 4.8). 
• 
Warming and cooling components of the GWPs for 
each of the ozone depleting gases may be difficult to 
characterise. Ozone losses in the lower stratosphere 
are larger at higher latitudes, hence, the associated 
cooling has a latitudinal variation that differs from 
that of the direct warming due to the ozone depleters. 
Further, the globally averaged cooling is sensitive to 
the vertical profile of the ozone change (see Section 
4.3), and the ozone depletion caused by each gas 
depends upon its chemical properties. Incorporating 
such 
different 
geographic 
forcings 
and 
photochemical effects from direct and indirect 
components into a single radiative forcing index 
likely requires detailed study of chemical ozone-loss 
processes and associated radiative forcing that is 
beyond the scope of the present assessment. 
5.2. Calculation of Global Warming Potentials 
5.2.1 Reference Molecule 
Carbon dioxide has generally been adopted as the 
reference molecule for GWP calculations and is a principal 
greenhouse gas for many policy concerns. However, IPCC 
(1990) underlined the implications of such a choice for 
uncertainties in GWPs. Wigley (1994a,b) has emphasised 
the uncertainty in accurately defining the denominator for 
GWP calculations if CO? is used as the reference 
molecule, and suggested the use of "Absolute" or AGWPs 
based on Equation 5.2. Wuebbles et al. (1994b) have also 
noted the importance of uncertainties in the carbon cycle 
for calculations of GWPs when CO, is used as the 
reference. Current carbon cycle models do not include 
possible climate feedbacks. It is important to note that the 
budget of CO-, must be carefully balanced in some way, 
with detailed accounting of trends, sources, and sinks (see 
Chapter 1). While recognising these issues, Caldeira and 
Kasting (1993) discuss feedback mechanisms that tend to 
offset some of these uncertainties for GWP calculations. 
Carbon dioxide added to the atmosphere decays in a 
highly complex fashion, showing an initial fast decay over 
the first 10 years or so, followed by a more gradual decay 
over the next 100 years or so, and a very slow decline over 
the thousand year time scale, mainly reflecting transfer 
processes in the biosphere, ocean, and deep ocean 
sediments, respectively. Because of the different time 
constants for CO, removal processes, the uptake of CO, is 
quite different from that of other trace gases and is not well 
described by a single lifetime (Moore and Braswell, 1994). 
Figure 5.4 shows the decay over time of a pulse of CO, 
from the range of carbon cycle models discussed in 
Chapter 1. Even after several centuries, a portion of the 
pulse remains in the atmosphere because of slow transfer 
to the deep ocean sinks. Figure 5.4 shows that the range in 
decay response among the various models considered in 
this assessment is rather small; the "Bern" model as used 
in Chapter 1 of this document was chosen as representative 
and used for the decay response of C0 2 for the GWP 
calculations presented in Section 5.2.4 below. 
i~i 
i i i i i—i i i i i i i ' i 
r-"-
c 
o 
1 
2 0.2 
O.o i 
i 
I 
i 
I i 
I i 
I i 
I ' 
I ' 
I 
' 
' 
' 
I ' 
0 
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 
Year 
Figure 5.4: Impulse response for an injection of C02 versus 
time from several different carbon cycle models (see Chapter I) 
assuming future C02 concentrations follow the S650 profile 
shown in Figure 1.12 (see Section 5.2.2.1). 

27& 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
5.2.2 Spectral 
Properties 
of the Present 
and 
Future 
Atmosphere 
The spectral absorption characteristics of most of the 
major greenhouse gases are now rather well known as a 
result of laboratory studies (see Chapter 4 and references 
therein). Weak spectral lines for ozone and methane have 
been included in databases such as HITRAN, but are 
unlikely to be important for GWP analyses (see Chapter 
4). The radiative band strengths of many HFCs and 
HCFCs have been measured in the laboratory (e.g., 
Clerbaux et al., 1993). While significant uncertainties do 
remain in band strengths for some of these molecules, as 
described in Chapter 4 and in more detail in WMO (1994), 
it is important to note that their concentrations and 
emission rates in the present atmosphere are quite small, so 
that their contribution to current radiative forcing is not 
presently significant. As noted in Chapter 4, the radiative 
forcings per molecule used in this report are very close to 
those recommended in IPCC (1990) and are believed to be 
accurate to within about 25%. The estimated radiative 
forcings per molecule of HFC-125 and -152a have 
changed relative to IPCC (1992), by +15% and +8%, 
respectively. 
To provide realistic evaluations of GWPs for specified 
time horizons and estimate their uncertainties, future 
changes in the radiative properties of the atmosphere must 
be considered. Some of these changes to the present state 
can be estimated based upon scenarios (e.g., C 0 2 
concentrations), while others are dependent upon the 
evolution of the entire climate system and are poorly 
known (e.g., clouds and water vapour). 
5.2.2.1 Trace gas 
composition 
In IPCC (1990), an unchanging atmosphere was assumed 
with the trace gas concentrations, hence the radiative 
properties of the atmosphere, unchanging in time. 
However, likely (but unforecastable) changes in CO,, CH4, 
or N , 0 concentrations will lead to future changes in the 
radiative forcing per molecule of those gases (and perhaps 
others whose spectral bands overlap with them), as noted 
previously. The radiative properties of C 0 2 are particularly 
sensitive to changes in concentration, since the large 
optical depth of CO, in the current atmosphere makes its 
radiative 
emission 
depend 
logarithmically 
on 
concentration. Thus, the forcing for a particular 
incremental change of C 0 2 will become smaller in the 
future, when the atmosphere is expected to contain a larger 
concentration of the gas. In the case of CH4 and N 20, there 
is a square-root dependence of the forcing on their 
respective concentrations (IPCC, 1990); hence, just as for 
CO,, the forcings due to a specified increment in either gas 
are expected to become smaller for future scenarios. For 
the other trace gases considered here, the present and 
likely future values are such that the direct radiative 
forcing is linear with respect to their concentrations and 
hence is independent of the scenario. 
We explore here the impact of future changes in CO, 
concentrations upon GWP calculations and compare these 
results to those obtained for an unchanging atmosphere. 
For example, Figure 5.5 illustrates the decay response of a 
pulse of C 0 2 from the Bern carbon cycle model for 
constant atmospheric C 0 2 and for the S650 CO, scenario 
discussed in detail in Chapter 1. The S650 Scenario 
includes C 0 2 concentrations that increase from the 1993 
level of about 356 ppmv to a stabilised value of about 650 
ppmv near the end of the 22nd century. The differences 
occur largely at the later times (>75 yr). 
For reference to earlier IPCC reports, we also show in 
Figure 5.5 the C 0 2 response function that was used in 
IPCC (1990, 1992). The fractional C 0 2 decay was 
parametrized as a sum of three exponential functions 
crudely characterising the C 0 2 removal processes: 
F[C02(t)] = 
0.30036exp(-f/6.993)+0.34278exp(-f/71.109) 
+0.35686exp(-f/815.727). 
(5.3) 
The derivation was based upon an unbalanced ocean-
atmosphere model (Oeschger et al., 1975). Its favourable 
comparison to the results of the balanced ocean models in 
Chapter 1 could be largely fortuitous, since a cancellation 
of effects could have occurred in its derivation. The faster 
initial (first several decades) decay of added CO, 
calculated in the current models reflects rapid uptake by 
en 
c 
'c 
1 
3 
1.0 
0.8 
IPCC (1990, 1992) 
atmospheric COz constant 
3 
0.6 
Q. 
E 
O 
O 
c 
o 
8 
0.4 
0.2 
Carbon cycle model, 
atmospheric C02 increasing 
(S650) 
Carbon cycle model, 
atmospheric C02 constant 
_L 
100 
200 
300 
Time (yr) 
400 
500 
Figure 5.5: Impulse response for an injection of CO, versus 
time for the adopted carbon model for two future CO, scenarios: 
(i) constant current CO, concentrations and (ii) the increasing 
CO, concentrations of the S650 profile shown in Figure 1.I2. 
Also shown for reference is the three-exponential function used 
to represent the CO, decay response in IPCC (1990. 1992). 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
219 
Atmospheric C02 constant 
(pre-industrial) 
-30 
•Atmospheric C02 
increasing (S650) 
_L 
100 
200 
300 
Time (yr) 
400 
500 
Figure 5.6: The sensitivity of the AGWP of C02 to the choices 
of future C02 scenarios other than constant current 
concentrations: (i) constant pre-industrial concentrations (280 
ppmv) and (ii) the increasing concentrations of the S650 profile 
shown in Figure 1.12. 
the biosphere and is believed to be an important 
improvement. 
Figure 5.5 illustrates the fact that the dependence of the 
AGWP of C0 2 upon choice of future atmospheric C02 
concentrations is not a highly sensitive one. This critical 
point is further quantified in Figure 5.6, which shows, for 
the adopted CO., decay response, how the AGWP would 
differ for choices of future atmospheric CO., scenarios 
other than constant current concentrations. A constant 
atmosphere at pre-industrial values (280 ppmv) would 
yield AGWPs for C02 different by less than 20% for all 
time horizons. 
Similarly, 
the 
increasing 
CO\ 
concentrations of the S650 Scenario would yield AGWPs 
that are smaller by 15% or less as compared to constant 
current concentrations. Note that values of -15% do not 
imply a change in sign of the AGWP or GWP, only that 
the AGWP becomes as much as 15% smaller when 
possible increases in future CO-, abundances up to 650 
ppmv are considered rather than constant current values. 
The effects are small because decreases in the radiative 
forcing per molecule due to the increasing CO, 
atmospheric abundance tend to be opposite in sign to those 
due to the changed CO, decay response of balanced CO, 
models (see Caldeira and Kasting, 1993 and Wigley, 
1994a). This similarity in AGWPs suggests that the 
relative radiative effect of each added kilogram of gas is 
not strongly dependent upon future CO, abundances, but 
the total absolute radiative forcing will, of course, be 
strongly dependent upon future abundances (e.g., the total 
number of kilograms of added gas). 
We also considered the possible evolution of the 
radiative forcing of CH4 and N,0 and the interplay 
between the spectral overlap of these two gases using the 
IS92a Scenario published in the Annex of IPCC (1992). If 
the calculations were made with the lS92a CH4 and N,0 
scenarios rather than with the constant current values, the 
direct GWPs of CH4 would decrease by 2 to 3%, and the 
20-, 100-, and 500-yr GWPs of N,0 would decrease by 5, 
10, and 15%, respectively. The impact of the adopted 
future scenarios for CO,, CH4, and N,0 on the radiative 
forcing of other trace species was not considered here. 
5.2.2.2 Water vapour and clouds 
Water vapour 
While it is likely that water vapour will change in a future 
climate state, the effect of such changes upon the direct 
GWPs of the great majority of molecules of interest here is 
expected to be quite small. For example, the model of 
Clerbaux et al., (1993) was used to test the sensitivity of 
the direct GWP for CH4 to changes in water vapour. Even 
for changes as large as 30% in water vapour concentration, 
the calculated GWP of CH4 changed by only a small 
percentage (C. Granier, personal communication, 1993). 
For many other gases whose radiative impact occurs 
largely in the region where water vapour's absorption is 
relatively weak, similar or smaller effects are likely. 
Clouds 
Clouds composed of water drops or ice crystals possess 
absorption bands in virtually the entire terrestrial infrared 
spectrum. By virtue of this property, they modulate 
considerably the infrared radiation escaping to space from 
the Earth's surface and atmosphere. Since cloud tops 
generally have lower temperatures than the Earth's surface 
and the lower part of the atmosphere, they reduce the 
outgoing infrared radiation. This reduction depends mainly 
on cloud height and optical depth. The higher the cloud, 
the lower is its temperature and the greater its reduction in 
infrared emission. On the other hand, higher clouds (in 
particular high ice clouds) tend to have low water content 
and limited optical depth. Such clouds are partially 
transparent, which reduces the infrared trapping effect. 
The absorption bands of several trace gases overlap 
significantly with the spectral features of water drops and 
ice crystals, particularly in the window region. Owing to 
the relatively strong absorption properties of clouds, the 
greenhouse effect of many trace molecules is diminished 
in the presence of clouds. The spectral overlap between a 
molecule and cloud acts to reduce the radiative forcing 
associated with the increase in the concentration of the 
molecule considered. For example, calculations with a 
high-spectral resolution algorithm (V. Ramaswamy, 
personal communication, 1993) show that the radiative 

220 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
forcing due to a 0-1 ppbv increase (uniform with height) in 
CFC-11 in an overcast mid-latitude summer atmosphere 
with cloudtop at 3 km is 37% less than the corresponding 
clear-sky value (0.35 Wm"2). The reduction from the clear-
sky value is as high as 83% if an overcast sky with 
cloudtop at 10 km is considered. The difference between 
clear-sky and the overcast sky forcings depends on the 
absorption features of the trace gas considered. In the case 
of CF4, the corresponding reductions from the same model 
in the overcast sky conditions with respect to the clear-sky 
value (0.097 Wm"2), are 22% (cloudtop at 3 km) and 81% 
(cloudtop at 10 km), respectively. However, it is important 
to note that the impact of changes in clouds upon GWPs 
depends upon the ratio between the change in radiative 
forcing of the gas considered and that of the reference gas, 
not the absolute change in radiative forcing of the gas 
alone (i.e., the AGWP, which is strongly affected). 
Possible future changes in cloud amounts and 
characteristics are a key element in predicting the absolute 
climate responses to greenhouse forcing. While it is not 
possible at present to fully predict future changes in cloud 
properties, Table 5.1 illustrates the range of sensitivity of 
GWPs to these effects by presenting calculations for clear-
sky conditions and calculations including a three-layer 
cloud model. The table shows that the presence or absence 
of clouds results in estimated changes of the adjusted 
relative radiative forcings of the molecules considered here 
of typically less than 12%. While these estimates are 
derived only from a single model and only for a particular 
three-layer cloud model, the consideration of a complete 
absence of clouds is an extreme test. Thus, uncertainties in 
future cloud cover due to climate change are unlikely to 
substantially impact GWP calculations. 
5.2.3 Lifetimes 
The steady-state lifetimes of atmospheric gases are largely 
dictated by their photolysis and/or oxidation by reaction 
with OH, 0(1D), and, in a few cases, CI. The estimated 
lifetimes of trace gases considered in this report were 
updated to account for improved understanding. Updated 
reaction rate constants and absorption cross-sections for 
the relevant chemical destruction processes are based upon 
laboratory measurements summarised in JPL (1992) and 
the additional sources indicated in Table 5.2 (see also 
WMO, 1995). 
Methylchloroform is a relatively short-lived gas 
destroyed mainly by reaction with the reactive OH radical 
in the troposphere (although its oceanic uptake must also 
be considered, see Butler et al., 1991). Observations of the 
trend in methylchloroform concentration, together with 
information regarding emissions and other sinks (e.g., 
oceanic uptake), can be used to deduce its lifetime and 
hence the globally averaged atmospheric OH concentration 
(Prinn et al., 1992). The lifetimes of other key gases 
destroyed by OH (i.e., CH4, HCFCs, HFCs) can then be 
inferred relative to that of methylchloroform (see, e.g., 
Prather and Spivakovsky, 1990) with greater accuracy than 
would be possible from a priori calculations of the 
complete tropospheric OH distribution, so long as the 
gases are long-lived (hence relatively well-mixed). It is 
likely that methane is also destroyed in part by uptake to 
soil (IPCC, 1992), but this process is believed to be 
relatively slow and makes a small contribution to the 
removal of this gas from the atmosphere (see Chapter 2). 
Possible soil or ocean sinks are not considered for any 
other species. 
Photochemical 
destruction 
mechanisms 
for 
Table 5.1: Change in adjusted relative radiative forcings with and without clouds for selected molecules, from the model 
of Clerbaux et al (1993). 
Species 
CFC-11 
CFC-12 
HCFC-22 
HCFC-123 
HCFC-141b 
HCFC-142b 
HFC-134a 
HFC-125 
HFC-152a 
Methane 
Nitrous oxide 
Chemical 
formula 
CFCI3 
CF2C12 
CF2HC1 
C2F3HC12 
C2FH3C12 
C2F2H3C1 
CH2FCF3 
C2HF5 
C2H4F2 
CH4 
N20 
Percentage change in adjusted relative radiative forcing 
per molecule compared to C02, due to incorporation of 
cloud feedbacks 
-11 
-12 
-11 
-11 
-10 
-11 
-12 
-11 
-12 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
221 
perfluorocarbons such as CF4, C,F6, and C6F14 are 
extremely slow. For CF4 and C,F^, the dominant loss 
process is likely to be decomposition in the airflow 
through combustors, resulting in lifetimes of the order of 
50,000 and 10,000 years, respectively (Ravishankara et al., 
1993), due to the strong chemical bonds of these species. 
Larger perfluorocarbons such as CfiF,4 have lifetimes 
exceeding a thousand years. 
5.2.4 Direct GWPs 
New direct GWPs of many gases were calculated for this 
report with the radiative transfer models developed at the 
National Center for Atmospheric Research - NCAR 
(Breigleb, 1992; Clerbaux et al., 1993), Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory - LLNL (Wuebbles et al., 
1994a,b), the Max Planck Institut fur Chemie - Mainz 
(Briihl, 1993), the Indian Institute of Technology (Lai and 
Holt, 1991, updated in 1993), and the University of Oslo 
(Fuglesvedt et al., 1994). These were compared to the 
values given in IPCC (1990). The radiative forcing a-
factors (see Equation 5.1) used in Chapters 4 and 5 of this 
report are summarised in Tables 4.2 and 4.3'; they were 
largely unchanged from IPCC (1990), with additional 
halocarbons added. In addition, the studies of Ko et al. 
(1993) and of Solomon et al. (1994) were used in deriving 
GWPs for SF6 and CF3I, respectively. Table 5.2 presents a 
composite summary of the recommended GWP results. 
With the exception of CF3I, all of the molecules 
considered have lifetimes in excess of several months and 
thus can be considered reasonably well-mixed; only an 
upper limit rather than a value is presented for CF3I. 
There have been some significant changes in the values 
used for the lifetimes of trace gases in this study as 
compared to the IPCC (1992) assessment. The estimates 
for the lifetimes of many of the gases destroyed primarily 
by reaction with tropospheric OH (e.g., HCFC-22, HCFC-
141b, HCFC-142b, etc.) are about 15% shorter than in 
IPCC (1992), due mainly to recent studies suggesting a 
shorter lifetime for CH3CC13 based upon improved 
calibration methods and upon an oceanic sink (Butler et 
al, 1991). Similarly, the estimates for the lifetimes of 
gases destroyed mainly by photolysis in the stratosphere 
(e.g., CFC-12, CFC-113, H-1301) are about 10% shorter 
than in IPCC (1992) due to a shorter estimated lifetime for 
CFC-11 and related species. Lifetime estimates of a few 
other gases have also changed due to improvements in the 
understanding of their specific photochemistry (e.g., note 
that the lifetime for CFC-115 is now estimated to be about 
1700 years, as compared to about 500 years in earlier 
assessments). 
Several new gases proposed as CFC and halon 
substitutes are considered here for the first time, such as 
HCFC-225ca, HCFC-225cb, HFC-227ea, and CF3I. Table 
5.2 also includes for the first time a full evaluation of the 
GWPs of several fully fluorinated species, namely SF(i, 
CF4, C,F(], and C(1F14. SF() is used mainly for insulation of 
electrical equipment (Ko et al.. 1993), while CF4 and C,F() 
are believed to be produced mainly as accidental by-
products of aluminium manufacture. C()F,4 and other 
perfluoroalkanes have been proposed as potential CFC 
substitutes. The very long lifetimes of these gases 
(Ravishankara et al., 1993) lead to large GWPs over long 
time-scales. 
The reference (see Equation 5.1) for the GWPs in Table 
5.2 is the adopted CO, decay response from the carbon 
cycle model (see Section 5.2.1 and Chapter 1). The GWP 
calculations were carried out with background atmospheric 
trace gas concentrations held fixed at 354 ppmv (see 
Section 5.2.2.1 and the sensitivity tests discussed therein). 
The uncertainty in the GWP of any trace gas other than 
CO, depends upon the uncertainties in the AGWP of CO-, 
and the AGWP of the gas itself. The uncertainties in the 
relative values of AGWPs for various gases depends upon 
the uncertainty in relative radiative forcing per molecule 
(estimated to be about 25% for most gases, as shown in 
Chapter 4) and on the uncertainty in the lifetimes of the 
trace gas considered (which are likely to be accurate to 
about 10% for CFC-11 and CH3CC13 as shown in Chapter 
2, and perhaps 20-30% for other gases derived from them). 
Combining these dominant uncertainties (in quadrature) 
suggests uncertainties of less than ±35% in the direct 
AGWPs for nearly all of the trace gases considered in 
Table 5.2 . We note that a few of the newest CFC 
substitutes (namely HFC-236fa, -245 ca, and -43-10 mee) 
have larger uncertainties in lifetimes since fewer kinetic 
studies of their chemistry have been reported to date. 
Uncertainties in the AGWPs for CO, depend upon 
uncertainties in the carbon cycle (see Chapter 1) and on the 
future scenario for CO,. The effect of the latter uncertainty 
is likely to be relatively small, and a range is illustrated in 
Figure 5.6 for two very different illustrative cases. 
The direct GWPs given in Table 5.2 can be readily 
converted to other frameworks such as AGWPs, GWPs for 
a changing atmosphere, and GWPs using as reference 
either a specific carbon cycle model or the three-parameter 
fit employed in IPCC (1990, 1992). Note in particular that 
Table 5.3 presents the relevant factors to carry out 
conversions to scenarios in which much different future 
C02 abundances are assumed. 
• 
To convert to AGWP units, the numbers in Table 5.2 
should be multiplied by the AGWP for the adopted 
Bern C02 carbon cycle model, with fixed C02 (354 
ppmv) scenario (i.e., Line 1 in Table 5.3) and 
1 a factors are equivalent to the AF per unit mass values listed in 
Tables 4.2 and 4.3. 

222 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
Table 5.2: Global Warming Potentials (mass basis), referenced to theAGWPfor the adopted carbon cycle model C07 
decay response and future C02 atmospheric concentrations held constant at current levels. Only direct effects are 
considered, except for methane. 
Species 
CFCs 
CFC-11 
CFC-12 
CFC-13 
CFC-113 
CFC-114 
CFC-115 
HCFCs, etc. 
Carbon tetrachloride 
Methylchloroform 
HCFC-22 (ttt) 
HCFC-141b (ttt) 
HCFC-142b (ttt) 
HCFC-123 (ft) 
HCFC-124 (tt) 
HCFC-225ca (tt) 
HCFC-225cb (tt) 
Bromocarbons 
H-1301 
Other 
HFC-23 (t) 
HFC-32 (ttt) 
HFC-43-10mee(t) 
HFC-125 (ft) 
HFC-134 (t) 
HFC-134a (ttt) 
HFC-152a (tt) 
HFC-143(f) 
HFC-143a (ft) 
HFC-227ea (f) 
HFC-236fa (f) 
HFC-245ca (t) 
Chloroform (ft) 
Methylene chloride (ft) 
Sulphur hexafluoride 
Perfluoromethane 
Perfluoroethane 
Perfluorocyclobutane 
Perfluorohexane 
Methane* 
Nitrous oxide 
Trifluoroiodomethane 
Chemical Formula 
CFC13 
CF2C12 
CCIF3 
C2F3CI3 
C,F,C1; 
c^a 
CC14 
CH3CC13 
CF2HC1 
C2FH3C12 
C2F2H3C1 
C2F3HCI2 
C2F4HC1 
C3F5HC12 
C3F5HC12 
CF3Br 
CHF3 
CH2F2 
C5H2F10 
C2HF5 
CHF2CHF2 
CH2FCF3 
C2H4F2 
CHF2CH2F 
CF3CH3 
C3HF7 
C]H2Fg 
C,H3F, 
CHCI3 
CH,Cl2 
sp; 
CF4 
% 
c-QFg 
(^fw 
CH4 
N20 
CF3I 
Lifetime and Reference 
years 
50±5 
102 
640 
85 
300 
1700 
42 
5.4+0.6 
13.3 
9.4 
19.5 
1.4 
5.9 
2.5 
6.6 
65 
250 
6 
20.8 
36.0 
11.9 
14 
1.5 
3.5 
55 
41 
250 
7 
0.55 
0.41 
3200 
50000 
10000 
3200 
3200 
14.5±2.5 
120 
<0.005 
(b) 
(c) 
(a) 
(c) 
(a) 
(a) 
(c) 
(b) 
(d) 
(d) 
(d) 
(d) 
(d) 
(d) 
(d) 
(c) 
0) 
(d) 
(h) 
(d) 
(e) 
(d) 
(d) 
(k) 
(d) 
(g) 
(h) 
(d) 
(d) 
(d) 
(a) 
(a) 
(a) 
(a) 
(a) 
(0 
(c) 
(f> 
Global Warming Potential (time horizon) 
20 years 
5000 
7900 
8100 
5000 
6900 
6200 
2000 
360 
4300 
1800 
4200 
300 
1500 
550 
1700 
6200 
9200 
1800 
3300 
4800 
3100 
3300 
460 
950 
5200 
4500 
6100 
1900 
15 
28 
16500 
4100 
8200 
6000 
4500 
62±20 
290 
<5 
100 years 
4000 
8500 
11700 
5000 
9300 
9300 
1400 
110 
1700 
630 
2000 
93 
480 
170 
530 
5600 
12100 
580 
1600 
3200 
1200 
1300 
140 
290 
4400 
3300 
8000 
610 
5 
9 
24900 
6300 
12500 
9100 
6800 
24.5+7.5 
320 
« 1 
500 years 
1400 
4200 
13600 
2300 
8300 
13000 
500 
35 
520 
200 
630 
29 
150 
52 
170 
2200 
9900 
180 
520 
1100 
370 
420 
44 
90 
1600 
1100 
6600 
190 
1 
3 
36500 
9800 
19100 
13300 
9900 
7.5+2.5 
180 
< « 1 
(t) 
(tt) 
(ttt) 
a 
b 
c 
d 
Includes direct and indirect components (see Section 5.2.5) 
Indicates HFC/HCFCs under consideration for specialised end use (see Chapter 4) 
Indicates HFC/HCFCs in production now for specialised end use (see Chapter 4) 
Indicates HFC/HCFCs in production now and likely to be widely used (see Chapter 4) 
Ravishankara, et al. (1993). 
Prather, private communication 1993, based on the forthcoming NASA CFC report and other considerations. 
Average of reporting models in NASA CFC report. Scaled to CFC-11 lifetime. 
Average of JPL (1992) and IUPAC (1992) with 277 K rate constants for OH+halocarbon scaled against 0H+CH3CC13 
and lifetime of tropospheric CH,CC13 of 6.6 yr. Stratospheric lifetime from WMO (1992) 
DeMore (1993). Used 277 K OH rate constant ratios with respect to CH3CC13, scaled to tropospheric lifetime of 6.6 yr for CH3CCI3. 
Solomon et al. (1994). 
Zhang et al. (1994) and Nelson et al. (1993) with 277 K rate constants for OH+halocarbon scaled against 0H+CH3CC13 and lifetime of 
tropospheric CH,CC13 of 6.6 yr. 
W. DeMore (personal communication, 1994) with 277 K rate constants for OH+halocarbon scaled against 
0H+CH3CC13 and lifetime of tropospheric CH,CCI3 of 6.6 yr. 
Includes the dependence of the response time on CH4 abundance (see Chapter 2) 
Schmoltner et al. (1993) with 277 K rate constants for OH+halocarbon scaled against 0H+CH3CC13 and lifetime of tropospheric CH3CC13 "t 
6.6 yr. 
Barry et al. (1994) with 277 K rate constants for OH+halocarbon scaled against 0H+CH3CC13 and lifetime of tropospheric CH3CC13 of 6.6 > 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
223 
multiplied by 1.291 x 10"13 to convert the AGWP of 
C02 from per ppmv to per kg on a global basis. 
• 
To convert to GWP units using one of the other 
indicated carbon cycle models and/or trace-gas 
future scenarios, the numbers in Table 5.2 should be 
multiplied by the AGWP for the adopted Bern CO, 
carbon cycle model, fixed CO-, (354 ppmv) scenario 
(Line 1 in Table 5.3) and divided by the AGWP 
value in Table 5.3 for the carbon cycle model and/or 
scenario in question. 
• 
To convert to GWPs that are based on the same 
reference as was used in IPCC (1990,1992), the 
numbers in Table 5.2 should be multiplied by the 
AGWP for the adopted Bern C0 2 carbon cycle 
model, fixed C0 2 (354 ppmv) scenario (Line 1 in 
Table 5.3) and divided by the AGWP value in Table 
5.3 for the C02-like gas, IPCC (1990) decay 
function, fixed C0 2 (354 ppmv) (i.e., last line in 
Table 5.3). 
5.2.5 Indirect Effects 
5.2.5.1 General characteristics 
In addition to the direct forcing caused by injection of 
infrared absorbing gases to the atmosphere, some 
compounds can also modify the radiative balance through 
indirect effects relating to chemical transformations. When 
the full interactive chemistry of the atmosphere is 
considered, a very large number of possible indirect effects 
can be identified, ranging from the production of 
stratospheric water vapour as an indirect effect of H, 
trends (see, e.g., Khalil and Rasmussen, 1990) to changes 
in the HC1/C10 ratio and hence in ozone depletion 
resulting from CH4 injections. 
The effects arising from such processes are difficult to 
Table 5.3: Absolute GWPs (AGWPs) (Wnr2 yrppmv'tf. 
Case 
C02, Bern carbon cycle model, fixed C02 (354 ppmv) 
C02, Bern carbon cycle model, S650 Scenario 
C02, Wigley carbon cycle model, S650 Scenario 
C02, Enting carbon cycle model, S650 Scenario 
C02, LLNL carbon cycle model, S450 Scenario 
C02, LLNL carbon cycle model, S650 Scenario 
C02, LLNL carbon cycle model, S750 Scenario 
C02-like gas, IPCC (1990) decay function, fixed C02 (354 ppmv) 
quantify in detail (see Chapter 2), but many are highly 
likely to represent only small perturbations to the direct 
GWP and to global radiative forcing. For example, there is 
no chemical evidence at present to suggest formation of 
breakdown products of HCFCs and MFCs that are 
sufficiently long-lived to significantly affect their GWPs 
(see WMO, 1995). Recent work has shown that the 
production of products such as fluoro- and chlorophosgene 
and organic nitrates from the breakdown of HCFCs, MFCs, 
and CFCs is unlikely to represent a significant indirect 
effect on the GWPs of those species, due to the removal of 
these water-soluble products in clouds and rain (Kindler et 
al., 1994; WMO, 1995). Similarly, the addition of HCFCs 
and HFCs to the atmosphere can, in principal, affect the 
oxidising capacity of the lower atmosphere and hence their 
lifetimes, but the effect is completely negligible for 
reasonable assumed abundances of these trace gases. 
Table 5.4 summarises some key stratospheric and 
tropospheric chemical processes that do represent 
important indirect effects for GWP estimates. We 
emphasise that the processes indicated here are not 
intended to be inclusive of all possible effects, but rather to 
emphasise those most likely to be important. The processes 
and the current state of understanding of them are 
examined in Chapter 2. We summarise here the GWP-
relevant aspects. 
CH4: change in CH4 lifetime 
Small changes in CH4 concentrations can significantly 
affect the atmospheric OH concentration, rendering the 
response time for the decay of the added gas substantially 
longer than that of the ensemble (i.e., longer than the 
nominal 10-yr lifetime for CH4). This is due to the non-
linear chemistry associated with relaxation of the coupled 
OH-CO-CH4 system (see Lelieveld et al., 1993; Prather, 
20 year 
0.235 
0.225 
0.248 
0.228 
0.247 
0.246 
0.247 
0.267 
Time horizon 
100 year 
0.768 
0.702 
0.722 
0.693 
0.821 
0.790 
0.784 
0.964 
500 year 
2.459 
2.179 
1.957 
2.288 
2.823 
2.477 
2.472 
2.848 
t Multiply these numbers by 1.291 x 1()13 to convert from per ppmv to per kg. 

224 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
Table 5.4: Important indirect effects on GWPs 
Species 
Indirect effect 
Sign of effect on GWP 
CHA 
CFCs, HCFCs, 
Bromocarbons 
CO 
NOx 
NMHCs 
Changes in response times due to changes in tropospheric OH 
Production of tropospheric 0 3 
Production of stratospheric H20 
Production of C02 (for certain sources) 
Depletion of stratospheric 0 3 
Increase in tropospheric OH due to enhanced UV 
Production of tropospheric 0 3 
Changes in response times due to changes in tropospheric OH 
Production of tropospheric C02 
Production of tropospheric 0 3 
Production of tropospheric 0 3 
Production of tropospheric C02 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1994; and Chapter 2 for further details). This effect was 
discussed in IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992) as an indirect 
effect on OH concentrations, and thus is not new. It arises 
through the fact that small changes in OH due to addition 
of a small pulse of CH4 slightly affect the rate of decay of 
the much larger amount of CH4 in the background 
atmosphere, thereby influencing the net removal of the 
added pulse. It is critical to note that the exact value of the 
CH4 pulse response time depends upon a number of key 
factors, including the absolute amount of CH4, size of the 
pulse, etc., making its interpretation complex and case-
dependent. The detailed explanation of the effect is 
presented in Prather (1994) and in Chapter 2, which forms 
the basis for the present assessment. 
CH4: production of stratospheric H 20 
The production of stratospheric water vapour by methane 
oxidation involves relatively simple chemistry and 
represents a potentially significant indirect effect (Briihl, 
1993; Lelieveld et al., 1993). It is clear from theory and 
observations (Jones et al., 1986) that nearly two water 
vapour molecules are produced per methane molecule 
destroyed. Calculations of the impact of this process on the 
CH4 GWP presented below employ multi-dimensional 
models for methane and water vapour transport, together 
with a detailed treatment of stratospheric chemistry. 
CH4, CO, NOx, NMHCs: production of tropospheric 
ozone 
Tropospheric 0 3 is a strong greenhouse gas (see Chapter 
4), but one whose abundance is strongly coupled to the 
distributions of reactive OH and NOx (NO + N02), making 
accurate calculation of the tropospheric 0 3 distribution a 
notoriously difficult problem in atmospheric chemistry. 
Tropospheric ozone production is initiated by oxidation of 
reduced carbon compounds, including CO, CH4, and non-
methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs). These compounds and 
NOx are emitted from a variety of human-influenced 
sources. Hence, production of tropospheric 0 3 represents 
an indirect effect of these species (see Chapter 2). 
There are substantial inhomogeneities and other 
complexities to contend with regarding the indirect GWPs 
of CO, NOx, and the NMHCs. The lifetime of NOx in the 
troposphere is only a few days, while those of CO and 
NMHCs are of the order of months to days. The short 
lifetime of NOx coupled with scattered sources (especially 
from anthropogenic emissions) leads to highly variable 
surface concentrations ranging from a few tenths to tens of 
ppbv in the polluted boundary layer. For this range of NOx 
abundances, the photochemistry of 0 3 production in the 
troposphere is a complex and highly non-linear function of 
added NOx (e.g., Lin et al., 1988; Thompson, 1992). This 
non-linearity, together with the difficulty of accurately 
calculating the transport and removal of NOx species, 
imply that the indirect effect of ozone production from 
surface NOx emissions will be subject to large 
uncertainties. While NMHCs and CO have somewhat 
longer lifetimes ranging from days to months, these gases 
are also strongly influenced by local sources, transport 
processes (particularly venting from the boundary layer). 
and non-linear chemistry. These factors render calculation 
of the indirect GWPs associated with their surface release 
extremely uncertain and hence their GWPs will not lie 
calculated in this report. This does not imply that they are 
not significant for radiative forcing. 
The indirect effect of ozone production through additii i 
of CH4 also depends upon the abundance and distribute ; 
of NOx in the troposphere. However, the long lifetime 
CH4 (order of 10 years) implies that injections of this L 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
225 
will be distributed throughout the troposphere, and thus its 
distribution is not dependent upon the details of transport 
phenomena, such as boundary layer venting and 
convection. It is also important to recognise that ozone 
production in the mid- and upper troposphere is more 
effective for radiative forcing than that near the surface 
(see Chapter 4), emphasising the radiative role of chemical 
ozone production processes that can take place in the free 
troposphere. Much of the indirect effect of ozone 
production through CH4 chemistry likely takes place in the 
mid- to upper troposphere, where NOx abundances 
generally exceed the approximate 10-30 pptv threshold at 
which the chemistry switches from ozone depletion to 
ozone production (see Ehhalt and Drummond, 1988; 
Fehsenfeld and Liu, 1993). These considerations suggest 
that the indirect effect of ozone production for CH4 GWPs 
may be calculated with greater confidence than those of 
CO, NOx, or NMHCs, although it is not completely 
independent of emissions of these gases. 
In summary, we present here the indirect GWP effect of 
tropospheric ozone production only for CH4. Additional 
GWP quantification must await further study of the model 
intercomparisons described in Chapter 2, additional field, 
laboratory, and theoretical characterisation of the processes 
involved in tropospheric ozone production, and further 
work on the radiative forcing impacts of regional and 
global ozone changes described in Chapter 4. 
CFCs, HCFCs and bromocarbons: depletion of 
stratospheric ozone 
Stratospheric ozone depletion by halocarbons causes 
significant cooling near the tropopause and hence is 
believed to induce a negative radiative forcing of the 
surface-troposphere system (Ramaswamy el ah, 1992; 
IPCC, 1992, WMO, 1992; ). A recent General Circulation 
Model (GCM) calculation suggests that the globally 
averaged radiative flux change at the tropopause due to 
ozone depletion can be related to surface temperature 
responses (see Chapter 4). However, quantitative 
evaluation of the magnitude of this effect requires detailed 
knowledge of the vertical profile of ozone loss 
(Schwarzkopf and Ramaswamy, 1993). Further, a full 
evaluation of the radiative impact of each halocarbon 
requires detailed consideration of the photochemical 
effectiveness of each contributing gas (particularly 
bromocarbons), and future scenarios for halocarbon and 
ozone change (see Daniel et ai, 1994). Hence, the indirect 
effects of halocarbons will not be included here, but will 
be considered in WMO (1995), where the photochemistry 
of ozone depletion is described in detail. A point worth 
noting is the possibility that, for a given halocarbon, the 
balance of the direct (positive) and indirect (negative) 
radiative forcing components may lead to a "negative 
GWP". This clearly would introduce a new factor that 
would have to be dealt with in the use of such indices in 
policy decisions, underlining the difficulty of considering 
gases with multiple, and very different, environmental 
impacts using a single simple index. Multiple impacts 
could require more sophisticated policy tools. 
Changes in N^O and CH4 can also impact stratospheric 
ozone, but these effects are believed to be considerably 
smaller than those related to increases in halogenated 
gases. 
5.2.5.2 Indirect effects upon the GWP ofCH_, 
Recent research studies of the indirect effects on the GWP 
of methane include those of Lelieveld and Crutzen (1992), 
Briihl (1993), Lelieveld el al. (1993) and Hauglustaine et 
at., (1994a,b). In this report, we consider those results 
together with inputs from Chapters 2 and 4 of this 
document. The relative radiative forcing for methane itself 
compared to CO-, on a per molecule basis is given in Table 
4.2 and is used here. Eight multi-dimensional models were 
used to study the chemical response of the atmosphere to a 
20% increase in methane as discussed in Section 2.9. The 
calculated range of ozone increases from the full set of 
tropospheric models considered in Section 2.9 provides 
insight regarding the likely range in ozone production. 
Uncertainties in these calculations include those related to 
the NOx distributions employed in the various models, 
formulation of transport processes, and other factors 
discussed in detail in Chapter 2. The estimated uncertainty 
in the indirect GWP for CH4 from tropospheric ozone 
production given below is based upon the calculated mid-
to upper tropospheric ozone response of the models to the 
prescribed methane perturbation at northern mid-latitudes 
(see Figure 2.16) and consideration of the current 
inadequacies in the understanding of many relevant 
atmospheric processes. The calculated ozone changes from 
the model simulations of Chapter 2 for a 20% increase in 
methane implies an indirect effect that is about 25±15% of 
the direct effect of methane (or 19+12% of the total), using 
the infrared radiative code of the NCAR model. A similar 
number is estimated in Chapter 4. The upper end of this 
range is close to that presented in IPCC (1990). 
Release of CH4 leads to increased stratospheric water 
vapour through photochemical oxidation; estimates of this 
indirect effect are of the order of 5% or less of the direct 
effect of methane (4% of the total) based on the discussion 
in Chapter 4; current results from the LLNL, NCAR, and 
Mainz radiative/photochemical two-dimensional models; 
and the published literature (e.g., Lelieveld and Crutzen, 
1992; Briihl, 1993; Lelieveld el al. 1993; Hauglustaine et 
al., 1994a,b). We adopt 5% of the direct effect in the table 
below, which is smaller than the value quoted in IPCC 
(1990). 
Each injected molecule of CH4 ultimately forms C02, 

226 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
representing an additional indirect effect which would 
increase the GWPs by approximately 3 for all time 
horizons (see IPCC, 1990). However, as noted by Lelieveld 
and Crutzen (1992), this indirect effect is unlikely to apply 
to biogenic production of CH4 from most sources (e.g., 
from rice paddies), since the ultimate source of the carbon 
emitted as CH4 in this case is C02, implying no net gain of 
carbon dioxide. While non-biogenic methane sources such 
as mining operations do lead indirectly to a net production 
of CO-,, this methane is often included in national carbon 
production inventories. In this case, consideration of C0 9 
production in the GWP could lead to "double-counting", 
depending upon how the GWPs and inventories are 
combined. As shown in Table 2.3, most human sources of 
methane are biogenic, with another large fraction being 
due to coal mines and natural gas. Thus, the indirect effect 
of C0 9 production does not apply to much of the CH4 
inventory, and is not included in Table 5.5 (in contrast to 
IPCC (1990), where this effect was included). 
As in Table 5.2, the GWPs were calculated relative to 
the CCs decay response of the Bern carbon cycle model 
with a constant current C0 2 and CH4 atmosphere. Table 
5.5 summarises the composite result for methane GWPs 
and its uncertainty, and considers the breakdown of the 
effects among various contributing factors. The ranges in 
CH4 GWPs shown in Table 5.5 reflect the uncertainties in 
response time, lifetime, and indirect effects as discussed 
below. We assume a lifetime of methane in the 
background atmosphere of 10±2 years (which is consistent 
with Table 2.3). However, the response time of an added 
pulse is assumed to be much longer (12-17 years based 
upon Chapter 2). The total GWPs reported in IPCC (1990) 
including indirect effects are within the ranges shown in 
Table 5.5. The longer response time adopted here for 
methane perturbations is responsible for a large part of the 
change in methane GWP values compared to the nominal 
values including direct effects only in the IPCC (1992) 
report (although the fact that indirect effects were likely to 
be comparable to the direct effect was noted). This change 
is based entirely on the analysis presented in Chapter 2 
used to define the methane response time for this report 
(see Prather, 1994). The decay response has been 
thoroughly tested only for small perturbations around a 
background state and continuing input flux approximately 
representative of today's atmosphere. It would be different 
if, for example, large changes in methane emissions were 
to occur in the near future. It is also believed to be 
sensitive to other chemical factors such as the sources of 
carbon monoxide. The GWP determined in this manner is 
similarly valid for relatively small perturbations, e.g., those 
that would be required to stabilise concentrations at current 
levels rather than continuing the small trend (order 1%/yr) 
observed in the past decade (see Chapter 2). However, the 
GWP shown in Table 5.5 cannot be used to estimate the 
radiative forcing that occurred since pre-industrial times, 
when methane concentrations more than doubled. 
5.2.6 The Product of GWP and Estimated Current 
Emissions 
Based upon the relative radiative forcing indices that are 
the focus of this chapter and an estimate of the total 
anthropogenic emissions of these compounds, the 
contributions of current emissions of each gas or group of 
gases to the total radiative forcing expected for future time 
horizons can be estimated. It is useful to compare these 
quantities with the assessments of total forcing in the 
current atmosphere presented in Section 4.7, where 
aerosol, volcanic, and solar absolute forcings are also 
estimated. 
It is clear that the anthropogenic emissions of many 
compounds are known only approximately, and we present 
Figure 5.7 only as an approximate guide to consideration 
of relative effects. For this purpose, we assumed 
approximate average emissions of each gas over the 
decade of the 1980s. We assumed annual anthropogenic 
emissions for C0 2 of about 6.6±1.3 GtC/yr (about 19,400-
29,000 Tg/yr) for industrial and land use sources of COn 
based on Table 1.3 (taking into account fossil fuel 
combustion, cement manufacture and net global land-use 
emissions). The annual anthropogenic emissions and their 
uncertainties for CH4 and N20 were obtained from Tables 
2.3 and 2.4, respectively. We estimate annual 
anthropogenic emissions of about 1.5 Tg/yr for the sum of 
Table 5.5: Total GWP for CH4, including indirect effects, referenced to theAGWP computed for the C02 decay response 
of the Bern carbon cycle model and future C02 atmospheric concentrations held constant at current levels. 
20 year 
Time horizon 
100 year 
500 year 
Total CH4 GWP, including indirect effects and 12-17 year response time 
42-82 
Fraction of total GWP due to tropospheric 0 3 change 
19±12% 
Fraction of total GWP due to stratospheric H20 change 
4% 
17-32 
19±12% 
4% 
5-10 
19±12% 
4% 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
227 
the major CFCs (CFC-11, CFC-12, CFC-113, CFC-114, 
and CFC-115), methylchloroform, and halons, 0.005 Tg/yr 
for SF6 and 0.03 Tg/yr for CF4. Combining these emission 
estimates with the GWPs for 20- 100- and 500-year time 
horizons (see Tables 5.2 and 5.5) yields the approximate 
future integrated forcing from anthropogenic emissions 
shown in Figure 5.7. The uncertainty ranges shown reflect 
estimated uncertainties in emissions for C02, CH4, and 
N20 as indicated above, as well as uncertainties in GWPs 
for CH4 and the ozone-depleting gases. While they are 
clearly not major greenhouse gases on a global basis at 
current emission rates for time horizons considered in 
Figure 5.7, SFg and CF4 are included to illustrate the 
impact of small releases of gases with high relative GWP 
and because of their long lifetimes (see, e.g., the values for 
the 500-year time horizon). In addition, they are significant 
fractions of the total product of GWP times emissions of a 
few specific countries. For CH4, the range includes the 
uncertainties in GWPs discussed above and presented in 
Table 5.5. For the sum of CFCs and halons, it is possible 
that the net GWP is small or even negative when the 
indirect effects of ozone depletion are considered, and the 
range depicted in the figure includes the upper limit 
represented by the direct effects of these gases only. The 
figure illustrates that future anthropogenic radiative 
forcings due to current emissions are likely to be induced 
primarily by C02 and methane (but this depends upon the 
future state of the atmosphere through its effect on the 
methane response time as noted above and based upon 
Chapter 2; Figure 5.7 refers to a future concentration of 
methane close to today's value). Further quantifying the 
relative magnitudes of the two, as well as the effects of 
other gases, requires better understanding of emissions, 
response times, and indirect effects. 
5.3 A Perspective on GWPs 
5.3.7 The Insights 
Gained From Ozone 
Depleting 
Potentials (ODPs) 
The international negotiations that led to the 1987 
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone 
Layer provide an example of the utility of trace-gas 
indices. The Ozone Depletion Potential (OOP) of a 
chlorine- or bromine-containing compound is a measure of 
its relative ability to destroy stratospheric ozone. The 
Protocol tabulated such values in its "controlled 
substances" list. Although not used widely, the provisions 
of the Protocol allow a country to "trade" between 
substances, using the ODP as the scaling factor. 
Furthermore, the ODPs have been used to set limits, 
relative to the CFCs, on the HCFCs that are to replace the 
CFCs. 
The use of ODPs in the Montreal Protocol had several 
characteristics that are relevant to the consideration of 
CD 
O 
0. 
30000 
20000 
10000 
~ 1 ~ 
-
I 
J -
1 
1 
J . 
1 
1 1 
20-year time horizon 
m 
! 
i 
• • 
7 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 1 
8 
5 
% 
§1 
b 
S 
30000 - 
_,_ 
20000 
10000 — 
-10000 
8 
5 
% 
o o . 
30000 
20000 
10000 
0 
— _,_ 
T] 
J . 
1 
E3 
i 
i 
500-year time horizon 
ra 
~ ~ 
i—i 
i 
7 
i 
l 
i 
1 
i 
I 
8 
5 
% Ill 
Figure 5.7: The product of GWP with estimated annual 
anthropogenic emissions typical of the 1980s for various gases, 
for time horizons of 20, 100 and 500 years. Ranges indicate the 
range of possible uncertainties considered here in estimating 
GWPs and total anthropogenic emissions. The estimated 
emissions are approximate. Note that uncertainties in the indirect 
radiative forcing of CFCs and halons due to ozone depletion 
imply that the net GWPs for these gases could be negative, but 
this is presently uncertain. 
GWPs or AGWPs playing a similar role in the Framework 
Convention on Climate Change: 
• 
Single Values for the ODPs. The Legal Drafting 
Groups that wrote the final text of the Protocol 
required that single values be stated for the ODPs, 

228 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
despite the fact that a scientific estimate always has 
some level of uncertainty and hence a numerical 
range within which the OOP is likely to lie. The 
median value of the estimated range of possible 
values was the one provided to the Protocol. The 
same single-value issue is likely to emerge in 
discussions of the use of GWPs in implementing the 
Climate Convention with, for example, a "basket" 
approach within which greenhouse gases can be 
"traded" on a scaled basis. 
• 
Periodic 
Updates 
of ODPs 
From 
Science 
Assessments. The Montreal Protocol requires that 
periodic scientific assessments be made of the state 
of the science of the ozone layer. Updated ODPs 
have been part of these assessments, e.g., WMO 
(1992). Thus, in principle, the "certified" values can 
be altered if the advance in scientific understanding 
warrants it. However, the rapidity with which policy 
has moved subsequently to phase out all of the 
halocarbons that have high ODPs (e.g., the 1990 
Amendments) has meant that the "basket" feature of 
the Protocol and the mechanisms for updating ODPs 
is unlikely to be exercised further. Nevertheless, the 
updating provision of the Montreal Protocol suggests 
that policy formulation under the Climate 
Convention could accommodate, via a periodic 
scientific assessment process, the inevitable 
improvements that will occur in the specification of 
GWPs. Indeed, the sequence of IPCC reports are 
illustrative examples of such updates to policy-
relevant scientific information. 
• 
Model-Dependent ODPs Acceptable. ODPs are the 
product of a calculation based on a model of how 
halogens interact with stratospheric ozone. Since 
models are approximations of reality and since 
model formulations differ, so do the ODPs that they 
produce. The scatter among model results was not 
considered by policy makers as a debilitating 
complexity. It was simply taken as one indication of 
uncertainty. Since GWP calculations are an 
analogous situation, the spread of calculations from 
different models could be handled in the same 
fashion in formulating a recommended set of current 
values. 
• 
ODPs' Time Horizons. Since the calculation of an 
ODP involves integrating its contribution to ozone 
depletion into the future, a choice of time horizon 
must be made in the calculation. The original values 
supplied to policy makers in the scientific 
assessments were based only on an infinite time 
horizon, which was accepted as the policy basis 
when anticipated ozone changes were far in the 
future. However, with the recognition of large 
observed ozone depletions in the current atmosphere 
and with the development of short-lived substitutes 
for the long-lived chlorofluorocarbons, ODPs with 
short time horizons were developed. These have 
been used for some policy considerations, 
particularly those associated with selecting HCFCs 
that would limit chlorine input from these substitutes 
over the next 5 to 15 years, during which 
atmospheric halogen concentrations and hence ozone 
losses are expected to attain their peak values. This 
experience suggests that scientific considerations 
relating to time-scales of likely or observed 
atmospheric responses can help clarify choices 
relating to time horizons. 
The sinks (hence atmospheric lifetimes) of most of 
the major ozone-depleters — chlorofluorocarbons 
and bromocarbons - are well known. There is a 
greater degree of uncertainty for the major human-
influenced greenhouse gas - C0 2. Hence, the 
reference (denominator) for GWPs, and their 
numerical values for all species, are likely to change 
more than was the case for ODPs, which used CFC 
11 as the reference species. 
Stratospheric ozone depletion involved largely on.' 
family of chemical compounds - the halocarbons. \v 
contrast, there are several different types er 
greenhouse gases, thereby invoking the need ' 
understand a much broader set of processes in th 
greenhouse 
gas 
issue, 
e.g., 
stratospheric 
Complexity Introduced by the 
Bromine/Chlorine 
Interplay. The ODP of a bromine-containing species 
depends on the level of atmospheric chlorine 
assumed in the calculation. The scientific assessment 
panel described this added complexity to the 
decision makers and explained that the calculated 
ODPs were based on the current chlorine levels. 
These ODP values were accepted, demonstrating that 
such a level of complexity can be handled by the 
Protocol process and that an agreed-upon value of a 
variable, whose future value cannot be fully 
predicted, can be assimilated by the policy process. 
This experience bodes well for the assimilation of 
similar GWP complexities by the policy process, 
e.g., the dependence of GWP for CH4 on the future 
CH4 and N20 concentration scenarios. 
However, it is important to note that GWPs are more 
complex than ODPs. Hence, the use of GWPs in the future 
negotiations of the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change could be more difficult than those associated with 
the use of ODPs in the Montreal Protocol. The reasons are 
severalfold: 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
229 
photochemical removal vis-a-vis biospheric uptake. 
Hence, broad quantification of GWPs will be more 
difficult. 
The response of the stratosphere to injection of 
halocarbons is relatively rapid (time scale of the 
order of five years), while many of the climate 
responses to radiative forcing are much longer 
(order of decades to centuries). Thus, the role of 
time-scales in greenhouse gas decisions and time-
horizon choices in GWPs could be fundamental. For 
example, a relatively short response time of an 
affected system allows earlier observations of the 
response and, in principle, more opportunity to use 
such observations in policy decisions. The opposite 
is true for long response times. 
• 
The producers 
of the halocarbons 
are the 
industrialised countries. In contrast, every country 
produces and/or removes (e.g., forest sink for CO-,) 
greenhouse gases. As a result, the spectrum of 
countries that will be involved in using GWPs and in 
negotiating emission reductions will be much 
broader, implying more complex negotiations. 
• 
The halocarbons are linked to a limited part of the 
industrial sector. Greenhouse gases permeate many 
aspects of the economies of most nations, since the 
energy, transportation, and agricultural sectors are all 
involved. As above, the spectrum of the industrial 
sector involved in technically defining the ways in 
which GWPs are used and in which emission 
reductions can be accomplished will be broader, with 
similar implications. 
5.3.2 Characteristics Relevant to Uses of GWPs in Policy 
Formulation 
The choice of time horizon for GWPs 
While the selection of a time horizon of a radiative forcing 
index is largely a "user" choice (i.e., a policy decision), 
some scientific points are relevant to that selection: 
• 
Policy-relevant climate-change phenomena exist at 
both ends of the climate-change time spectrum: 
(i) If the policy emphasis is to help guard against 
the possible occurrence of potentially abrupt, 
non-linear climate responses in the relatively 
near future, then a choice of a 20-year time 
horizon would yield an index that is relevant to 
making such decisions regarding appropriate 
greenhouse gas abatement strategies. In 
addition, if the speed of potential climate change 
is of greatest interest (rather than the eventual 
magnitude), then a focus on shorter time 
horizons can be used. 
(ii) Similarly, if the policy emphasis is to help guard 
against long-term, quasi-irreversible climate or 
climate-related changes (e.g., the very slow 
build up of and recovery from sea level changes 
that are controlled by slow processes such as 
warming of the ocean), then a choice of a 100-
year or 500-year time horizon would yield an 
index that is relevant to making such decisions 
regarding appropriate greenhouse gas abatement 
strategies. 
With this awareness, policies could choose to he a 
mix of emphases. GWPs with differing time 
horizons can aid in establishing such a mix. Indeed, 
that was the case in the Montreal Protocol 
deliberations, in which the long-lived, high-OOP 
gases were the initial focus and the shorter-lived, 
lower-ODP gases were a subsequent focus. 
• 
The scientific uncertainties are very substantial for 
Earth-system processes that occur on long time-
scales. This fact implies larger inaccuracies for 
GWPs with longer time horizons compared to those 
with shorter time horizons. 
GWPs and natural sources 
The nature of the emission source of a compound - i.e., 
whether it is natural, anthropogenic, or both - does not 
figure directly into the calculation of a GWP (or an OOP). 
It is important, of course, for understanding budgets and 
trends. Other things being equal, the fact that a compound 
has large natural sources does not imply a less-accurate or 
a less-meaningful GWP. 
Awareness of improving science 
Users of GWPs need to he aware that future changes in 
numerical indices are likely as research in related areas 
yields improved input to the calculations. This implies that 
whatever framework is adopted for the use of these 
indices, it must have flexibility to incorporate what could 
be substantial changes in the specified numerical values of 
the indices. The use of ODPs in the Montreal Protocol 
indicates that the science/policy greenhouse dialogue can 
deal fruitfully with similar climate-related complexities as 
well. 

230 
Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
References 
Barry, J., H.W. Sidebottom, J. Treacy and J. Franklin, 1994: 
Kinetics and mechanism for the atmospheric oxidation of 
1,1,2-trifluoroethane. Int. J. Chem. Kin. (In press). 
Briegleb, B., 1992: Longwave band model for thermal radiation 
in climate studies. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 11475-11486. 
Briihl, C, 1993: The impact of the future scenarios for methane 
and other chemically active gases on the GWP of methane. 
Chemosphere, 26, 731-738. 
Butler, J. H., J.W. Elkins, T.M. Thompson, B.D. Hall, T.H. 
Swanson and V. Koropalov, 1991: Oceanic consumption of 
CH3CC13: Implications for tropospheric OH. J. Geophys. Res., 
96,22347-22355. 
Caldcira, K. and J.F. Kasting, 1993: Global warming on the 
margin. Nature., 366, 251-253. 
Cess, R.D., M-H. Zhang, G.L. Potter, H.W. Barker, R.A. 
Colman, D.A. Dazlich, A.D. Del Gcnio, M.Esch, JR. Eraser, 
V. Galin, W.L. Gates, J.J. Hack, W.J. Ingram, J.T. Kiehl, A.A. 
Lacis, H. Le Treut, Z-X. Li, X-Z. Liang, J-F. Mahfouf, B.J. 
McAveney, V.P. Meleshko, J-J. Morcrette, D.A. Randall, E. 
Roeckner, J-F. Roycr, A.P. Sokolov, P.V. Sporyshev, K.E. 
Taylor, W-C. Wang and R.T. Wetherald, 1993: Uncertainties 
in COT radiative forcing in atmospheric general circulation 
models. Science, 262, 1252-1255. 
Clerbaux, C , R. Colin, P.C. Simon and C. Granier, 1993: 
Infrared cross sections and global warming potentials of 10 
alternative hydrohalocarbons. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 10491-
10497. 
Daniel, J.S., S. Solomon and D.L. Albritton, 1994: On the 
evaluation of halocarbon radiative forcing and global warming 
potentials../. Geophys. Res. (Accepted) 
DeMore, W.B, 1993: Rate constants for the reactions of OH with 
HFC-134a and HFC-134. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 1359-1362. 
Ehhalt, D.H., and J. Drummond, 1988: NOx sources and the 
tropospheric distribution of NOx during STRATOZ III. In: 
Tropospheric Ozone: Regional and Global Scale Interactions, 
I. S. A. Isakscn (ed.), D. Reidel, Boston. pp217-237. 
Fehsenfeld. F.C. and S.C. Liu, 1993: Tropospheric ozone: 
Distribution and sources. In: Global Atmospheric Chemical 
Change, C.N. Wewitt and W.T. Sturgcs (eds.), Elsevier, 
London, pp 169-231. 
Fisher, D.A.. C.H. Hales, W-C. Wang, M.K.W. Ko and N.D. 
Sze, 1990: Model calculations on the relative effects of CFCs 
and their replacements on global warming. Nature, 344, 513-
516. 
Fuglestvedt, J.S., J.E. Jonson and I.S.A. Isakscn, 1994: Effects 
of reduction in stratospheric ozone on tropospheric chemistry 
through changes in photolysis rates. Tellus. (Accepted) 
Hammond. A. L., E. Rodenburg and W. Moomaw, 1990: 
Commentary in Nature, 347, 705-706. 
Harvey, L.D., 1993: A guide to global warming potentials 
(GWPs). Energy Policy, pp24-34, January, 1993. 
Hauglustaine, DA.. C. Granier, G.P. Brasscur and G. Megie, 
1994a: The importance of atmospheric chemistry in the 
calculation of radiative forcing on the climate system. J. 
Geophys. Res.. 99, 1173-1186. 
Hauglustaine, D.A.. C. Granier. and G.P. Brasseur, 1994b: 
Impact of increased methane emissions on the atmospheric 
composition and related radiative forcing on the climate 
system. Environmental Monitoring Assessment. (Accepted) 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change: The Scientific Assessment. J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
J.T. Houghton, B.A. 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1995: Climate Change: The Scientific Assessment. (In 
preparation) 
IUPAC, 1992: Evaluated kinetic and photochemical data for 
atmospheric chemistry. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 21, no. 6. 
JPL, 1992: Chemical kinetics and photochemical data for use in 
stratospheric modelling,. JPL report, Number 92-20. 
Jones, R.L., J.A. Pyle, J.E. Harries, A.M. Zavody, J.M. Russell 
and J.C. Gille, 1986: The water vapour budget of the 
stratosphere studied using LIMS and SAMS satellite data. 
Quart. J. Roy. Met. Soc, 112, 1127-1143. 
Khalil, M.A. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1990: Global increase of 
atmospheric molecular hydrogen. Nature, 347, 743-744. 
Kindler, T.P., W.L. Chameides, PH. Wine, D.M. Cunnold, F.N. 
Alyca and J.A. Franklin, 1994: The fate of atmospheric 
phosgene and the ozone depletion potentials of its parent 
compounds: CC14, C2C14, C2HC13, CH3CC13, CHC1-,. J. 
Geophys. Res. (Submitted) 
Ko, M.K.W., N.D. Sze, W-C. Wang, G. Shia, A. Goldman, F.J. 
Murcray, D.G. Murcray and C.P. Rinsland, 1993: Atmospheric 
sulphur hexafluoride: Sources, sinks, and greenhouse warming. 
J. Geophys. Res., 98, 10499-10507. 
Lai, M. and T. Holt, 1991: Ozone depletion due to increasing 
anthropogenic trace gas emissions: role of stratospheric 
chemistry and implications for future climate. Clint. Res., 1, 
85-95. 
Lashof, D.A. and D.R. Ahuja, 1990: Relative contributions of 
greenhouse gas emissions to global warming. Nature, 344. 
529-531. 
Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1992: Indirect chemical effects of 
methane on climate warming. Nature, 355, 339-342. 
Lelieveld, J., P.J. Crutzen and C. Briihl, 1993: Climate effects of 
atmospheric methane. Chemosphere, 26, 739-768. 
Lin, X., M. Trainer and S.C. Liu, 1988: On the nonlinearity of 
the tropospheric ozone production. J. Geophys. Res., 93. 
15879-15B88. 
Moore, B. Ill, and B.H. Braswell, Jr., 1994: The lifetime of 
excess atmospheric carbon dioxide. Global Biochem. Cycles, 
8, 23 -28. 
Nelson, D.D., M.S. Zahinsen and C.E. Kolb, 1993: OH reaction 
kinetics and atmospheric lifetimes of CF3CFCHCF3 and 
CF3CH,Br,. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 197-200. 
Oeschger, H., U. Siegenthaler, U. Schotterer and A. Gegelmann. 
1975: A box diffusion model to study the carbon dioxide 
exchange in nature. Tellus, 27, 168-192. 
Prather, M.J., 1994: Lifetimes and Eigenstates in atmospheric 
chemistry. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 801-804. 
Prather, M.J. and CM. Spivakovsky, 1990: Tropospheric OH 
and the lifetimes of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). ./. 
Geophys. Res., 95, 18723-18729. 
Prinn. R., D. Cunnold, P. Simmonds. F. Alyea, R. Boldi. A. 

Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
231 
Crawford, P. Fraser, D. Gutzler, D. Hartley, R. Rosen, and R. 
Rasmussen, 1992: Global averaged concentration and trend for 
hydroxy! radicals deduced from ALE/GAGE trichloroethane 
(methylchloroform) data for 1978-1990../. Geophys. Res., 97. 
2445-2462. 
Ramaswamy, V., M.D. Schwarzkopf and K.P. Shine, 1992: 
Radiative forcing of climate from halocarbon-induced global 
stratospheric ozone loss. Nature, 355, 810-812. 
Ravishankara, A.R., S. Solomon, A.A. Turnipseed and R.F. 
Warren, 1993: Atmospheric lifetimes of long-lived species. 
Science, 259, 194-199. 
Reilly, J. M. and K.R. Richards, 1993: Climate change damage 
and the trace gas index issue. Env. Res. Econ., 3, 41-61. 
Rodhe, H., 1990: A comparison of the contributions of various 
gases to the greenhouse effect. Science, 248, 1217-1219. 
Schmoltner, A.M., R.K. Talukdar, R.F. Warren, A.Mellouki, L. 
Goldfarb, T. Gierczak, S.A. Mckeen and A.R. Ravishankara, 
1993: Rate coefficients of several hydrofluorocarbons with OH 
and O('D) and their atmospheric lifetime. J. Phys. Chem., 97, 
8976-8982. 
Schwarzkopf, M.D. and V. Ramaswamy, 1993: Radiative 
forcing due to ozone in the 1980's: dependence on altitude of 
ozone change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 205-208. 
Solomon, S., J.B. Burkholder, A.R. Ravishankara and R.R. 
Garcia, 1994: "On the ozone depletion and global warming 
potentials of CF3I.7. Geophys. Res., 99, 20929-20935. 
Thompson, A.M., 1992: The oxidising capacity of the earth's 
atmosphere: probable past and future changes. Science, 256, 
1157-1165. 
Wang, W-C, M.P. Dudek, X-Z. Liang and J.T. Kiehl, 1991: 
Inadequacy of effective C0 2 as a proxy in simulating the 
greenhouse effect of other radiatively active gases. Nature, 
350, 573-577. 
Wang, W-C, Y-C. Zhuang and R.D. Bojkov, 1993: Climate 
implications of observed changes in ozone vertical 
distributions at middle and high latitudes of the northern 
hemisphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 1567-1570. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1994a: The effect of carbon cycle uncertainties 
on global warming potentials. Geophys. Res. Lett. (Submitted) 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1994b: How important are carbon cycle model 
uncertainties? In.Climate 
Change and the Agenda 
for 
Research, T. Hanisch (Ed.), Westview Press, Boulder, 
Colorado, USA, pp 169-191. 
WMO 1990; Scientific Assessment of Stratospheric Ozone. 
1989: Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report 
No. 20. World Meteorological Organisation. Geneva. 
WMO 1992; Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, 1991: 
Global Ozone Research anil Monitoring Project Report No. 
25. World Meteorological Organisation, Geneva. 
WMO 1995; Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, 1994: 
Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report No. 
37. World Meteorological Organisation, Geneva. 
Wuebbles, D.J., J.S. Tamaresis and K.O. Patten, 1994a: 
Quantified estimates of total GWPs for greenhouse gases 
taking into account tropospheric chemistry. UCRL - ID-
115850. 
Wuebbles, D.J., A.K. Jain, K.O. Patten and K..E. Grant, 1994b: 
Sensitivity of direct global warming potentials to key 
uncertainties. Climatic Change. (In press) 
Zhang, Z., S. Padmaja, R.D. Saihi, R.E. Huie and M.J. Kurylo, 
1994: Reactions of hydroxy! radicals with several 
hydrofluorocarbons : the temperature dependencies of the rate 
constants for HFC-245ca, HFC-236ea, HFC-227ea and HFC-
356ffa.7. Phys. Chem., 98, 4312-4315. 


Climate Change 1994 
Part II 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Prepared by Working Group III 


Preface to WGIII Report 
This section of the Special Report of the IPCC was 
prepared by Working Group III. It consists of two parts: a 
Summary for Policymakers and a Technical Report, 
Chapter 6. The reader should be aware of the IPCC 
procedures which were followed in producing each part. 
The Technical Report was prepared by a writing team of 
six experts from developed and developing countries in 
different regions of the world. It was subject to extensive 
peer review and government review by correspondence. 
The resulting draft was accepted by Working Group III as 
an underlying technical document. However, the content 
of the Technical Report remains the responsibility of the 
Writing Team. 
The Summary for Policymakers (SPM) was prepared by 
the Working Group III Technical Support Unit in 
consultation with the Writing Team. In addition to the 
extensive review and modification referred to above, the 
SPM was subject to line by line approval at plenary 
meetings of Working Group III. These intergovernmental 
meetings were attended 
by representatives 
of 
approximately 70 countries, with widely varying views on 
matters concerning greenhouse gases and climate change. 
In addition, several NGOs participated. 
The resulting Summary for Policymakers is thus an 
intergovernmentally negotiated text. In the course of these 
negotiations some of the draft recommendations by the 
Working Group 111 Bureau were deleted and in a few 
places, where agreement could not be reached, differing 
views of the findings are presented. 
The reader wishing to have a short resume of the 
findings of the Writing Team is referred to the Summary at 
the beginning of the Technical Report. 
James P. Bruce 
Hoesung Lee 
Richard Odingo 
Lorents Lorentsen 
Working Group III Bureau 


Summary for Policymakers: 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission Scenarios 
A Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change 


CONTENTS 
What are the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios? 
241 
How were the IS92 Emission Scenarios Evaluated? 
242 
What was not Covered by the Evaluation? 
242 
What are the Findings about Scenarios in General? 
242 
What are the Uses and Limitations of the IPCC IS92 
Scenarios? 
245 
Addressing the Gaps in Knowledge 
246 
Present Scenarios - Examples of Gaps and Needs 
246 
New Scenarios - Examples of Gaps and Needs 
246 


An Evaluation of the 1PCCIS92 Emission 
Scenarios 
241 
What are the IPCC IS921 Emission Scenarios? 
In 1992 the IPCC sponsored development of emission 
scenarios as inputs to global climate models because of the 
scarcity of comprehensive emission scenarios available in 
the literature at the time. This report by Working Group III 
presents an evaluation of the emission scenarios and 
especially a discussion of their most important input 
assumptions (see Table 1 which summarises these 
assumptions of the IS92 Scenarios) and results. Other 
scenarios are included by way of comparison to the IPCC 
Scenarios. Also covered are the appropriate uses of these 
emission scenarios in scientific assessment and policy 
making. 
Emission scenarios in this evaluation are projections of 
anthropogenic emissions of gases that have the potential to 
affect climate, based on assumptions about future trends of 
key determinants such as population, economic growth, 
technological change, land use and emission control 
policies. The six scenarios are among the most 
comprehensive available, providing estimates of direct and 
indirect greenhouse gases by source for four regions over 
the period 1990 to 2100, and covering a wide range of 
values for the key input assumptions. It is emphasised that 
this evaluation deals mostly with non-intervention 
scenarios, that is, scenarios that do not assume any climate 
policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (although they 
Table 1: Summary of assumptions in the six IPCC 1992 alternative IS92 Scenarios. 
Scenario Population 
Economic growth 
Energy supplies 
Other 
CFCs 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92c 
IS92d 
IS92e 
IS92f 
World Bank 
(1991) 
11.3 billion 
by 2100 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
2.9% 
23% 
12,000 EJ conventional oil 
13,000 EJ natural gas. 
Solar costs fall to 
$0.075/kWh. 
191 EJ/year of biofuels 
available at $70/barrelf 
World Bank 
(1991) 
11.3 billion 
by 2100 
UN Medium-
Low Case 
6.4 billion 
by 2100 
UN Medium-
Low Case 
6.4 billion 
by 2100 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
24% 
2.3% 
24% 
1.2% 
2.7% 
24% 
World Bank 
(1991) 
11.3 billion 
by 2100 
UN Medium-
High Case 
17.6 billion 
by 2100 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
3.5% 
34% 
24% 
23% 
Same as "a" 
8,000 EJ conventional oil 
7,300 EJ natural gas 
Nuclear costs decline 
by 0.4% annually 
Oil and gas same as "c" 
Solar costs fall to 
$0.065/kWh 
272 EJ/year of biofuels 
available at $50/barrel 
Legally enacted and 
internationally agreed 
controls on SOx, NOx and 
NMVOC emissions. 
Efforts to reduce emissions 
of SO,, NO, and CO in 
developing countries by 
middle of next century. 
Same as "a" plus 
commitments by many 
OECD countries to 
stabilise or reduce C0 2 
emissions. 
Same as "a" 
Emission controls extended 
worldwide for CO, NO,, 
NMVOC and SO,. Halt 
deforestation. Capture and 
use of emissions from coal 
mining and gas production 
and use. 
18,400 EJ conventional oil Emission controls which 
Gas same as "a" 
increase fossil energy costs 
Phase out nuclear by 2075 
by 30%. 
Oil and gas same as "e" 
Solar costs fall to 
$0.083/kWh 
Nuclear costs increase to 
$0.09/kWh 
Same as "a" 
Partial compliance 
with Montreal 
Protocol. 
Technological transfer 
results in gradual 
phase out of CFCs in 
non-signatory 
countries by 2075. 
Global compliance 
with scheduled phase 
out of Montreal 
Protocol. 
Same as "a" 
CFC production phase 
out by 1997 for 
industrialised 
countries. Phase out 
of HCFCs. 
Same as "d" 
Same as "a" 
t Approximate conversion factor: 1 barrel = 6 GJ. 
Source of Table: Leggett et al., IPCC, 1992. 
1 The emissions scenarios developed by the IPCC in 1992 are commonly referred to as the IS92 Scenarios. The six scenarios are 
labelled IS92a through IS92f. 

242 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
may assume emission controls for other environmental 
reasons). This applies to five out of the six IS92 Scenarios, 
and to all other scenarios that we call non-intervention 
scenarios. 
Emission scenarios and the assumptions upon which 
they are based "are inherently controversial because they 
reflect different views of the future. The results of 
scenarios can vary considerably from actual outcomes 
even over short time horizons. Confidence in scenario 
outputs decreases substantially as the time horizon 
increases, because the basis for the underlying assumptions 
becomes 
increasingly 
speculative. 
Considerable 
uncertainties surround the evolution of the types and levels 
of human activities (including economic growth and 
structure), technological advances, and human responses to 
possible environmental, economic and institutional 
constraints. Consequently, emission scenarios must be 
constructed carefully and used with great caution."1 
Therefore, an informed assessment of the possible 
consequences of uncertain future emissions paths 
necessitates the use of a range of scenarios. 
How were the IS92 Emission Scenarios Evaluated? 
The factors outlined in the Terms of Reference and the 
Work Plan for Working Group III were considered, but it 
must be recognised that there are no accepted criteria for 
evaluating scenarios in the scientific literature.2 Since 
scenarios deal with the future, they cannot be compared to 
observations. As an alternative, the "reasonableness" of 
their input assumptions and methodology can be 
examined. This can be done in part by seeking to establish 
the internal consistency of various assumptions over time, 
including possible interactions between assumptions such 
as those that might relate the evolution of systems for 
energy use, economic growth, land use and population. 
"Reasonableness" can also be examined by comparing 
several models in an organised intercomparison exercise. 
Such an intercomparison was outside the scope of this 
evaluation. 
Instead, the IS92 emission scenarios were evaluated by 
comparing the range of their emission projections and their 
major input assumptions with those of other published 
non-intervention scenarios. While this comparison does 
not answer all questions about the scenarios, it does 
provide information about the position of the scenarios 
relative to other work in the scientific community, and it 
was feasible in the short time available for this evaluation. 
Since few other scenarios are as comprehensive 
as the 
IS92 Scenarios, 
the evaluation 
concentrates 
on a limited 
number 
of important 
greenhouse 
gases 
and 
source 
categories. 
Much of the evaluation centres on C O , 
emissions from human activities: the most important 
category of emissions. Also covered are emissions of 
methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (N 20) and sulphur (S) 
emissions from the energy sector, as well as CO-, from 
deforestation, and CH4 and N 9 0 from selected land use 
sources. Both global and regional emission scenarios are 
evaluated. 
What was not Covered by the Evaluation? 
Neither the types of models used for scenario development 
nor the sensitivity of input variables to government actions 
were evaluated. Both of these topics can best be addressed 
by comparing the different models used to compute 
emission scenarios. This intercomparison requires the full 
cooperation of different modelling groups and extensive 
analysis, and there was neither the time nor funds available 
in the evaluation for this task. The scenarios also were not 
compared to the emission inventories or emissions 
projections of countries because there were too few 
country estimates available to make 
substantial 
improvements in regional and global emission scenarios. 
What are the Findings about Scenarios in General? 
Almost all published 
reference 
scenarios 
(including the 
IS92 Scenarios) 
show an increase in annual 
greenhouse 
gas emissions over the next century. Only one of the six 
IS92 Scenarios, IS92c, shows a decline in annual CO, 
emissions between 1990 and 2100. Even it projects 
increases in emissions of almost all of the other direct and 
indirect greenhouse gases (e.g., methane, nitrous oxide) 
except the halocarbons controlled by the Montreal 
1 J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney, Climate 
Change 1992: The Supplementary 
Report to the IPCC 
Scientific 
Assessment, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Cambridge, 1992, page 9. 
2 Working Group Ill's Terms of Reference referred to in tin-
Work Plan require that its evaluation of the IS92 Scenarios 
should result in a report on the "validity, appropriateness and 
utility" of "a range of internally consistent scenarios for future 
emissions based on reasonable economic, demographic and 
technological projections, and taking account of gaps and 
uncertainties in available knowledge, especially concerning the 
evolution of socio-economic development and technology: 
where possible, policy assumptions should reflect their 
economic and social consequences." 
This report evaluates the IS92 scenarios in the light of nir-t 
of the specific factors outlined in Part III, Emissions Scenario-. 
Chapter 5, "Consideration of Consistent Scenarios." of r\ 
approved WG III Work Plan but does not evaluate the IS':: 
Scenarios according to all of the above factors because of i\ 
great difficulty in doing so in the available time. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Annual energy-related CO2 emissions 
243 
60 -i 
5 
a 
c o I 
E 
CD 
CD 
• o 
1 
C 
CO 
O 
40-
Higher assumed 
GNP or population 
growth or energy 
and carbon Intensity 
20-
Lower assumed 
GNP or population 
growth or energy 
and carbon Intensity 
2000 
2050 
Year 
2100 
Annual energy-related 
methane emissions 
Annual energy-related nitrous 
oxide emissions 
METHANE 
NITROUS OXIDE 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
IPCC range 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
I 
I Range of non-IPCC 
I 
I reference scenarios 
Annual CO2 emissions from 
deforestation 
Cumulative energy-related carbon 
5", 
4 
3 
x 0 
5 u 
8 
-2 
-3 
. 
1 1 
1990 
TH 
V H 
2010 
i 
*> 
v 39-1 
=5*^—- 1-6 
&? = = S^^S 
/ » ] 
2030 
2050 
Year 
— - V A
3 3 "
2 
• 
I • • 
2070 
i 
• 
i 
• • 
2090 
emissions 
3500 
HM.M 
M 
Figure 1: Annual emissions of C02, CH4 and N20 from energy-related sources, annual emissions of C02 from deforestation, and 
cumulative C02 emissions from energy related sources. 

244 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Protocol. Global estimates of CH4 and N-,0 emissions 
from energy in 2100 vary by a factor of six or seven 
(Figure 1). 
The set of published scenarios show a very wide range 
of projected annual C02 emissions by 2100. For energy-
related C07 emissions, the extremes in the literature span a 
huge range, from 1.2 to 60 GtC per year1 in 2100, and 
diverge greatly from 1990 to 2100. The IS92 Scenarios are 
representative of the range of views found in the published 
scenarios regarding energy-related C0 2 emissions. The 
IS92 Scenarios bracket a large part of this range, spanning 
from 4.6 to 34.9 GtC per year. It has been suggested by some, 
however, that comparing the results of the IS92 Scenarios 
is not informative, since this report has not analysed the 
reasonableness of the other scenarios or their assumptions. 
They further believe that the 110 year IS92 Scenarios and 
the other 100 year scenarios are equally speculative. 
Energy-related emissions currently dominate other types of 
emissions, and are expected to do so for the next century. 
Figure 1 also shows emissions of CO, related to 
deforestation. Net deforestation contributes about 18% to 
current total CO-, emissions, and most scenarios estimate 
that this percentage will decline in the future. Unlike 
energy emissions which diverge with time, land use 
emissions have their widest range (0.8 to 4.8 GtC per year) 
in the middle of the 21st century. Most scenarios of this 
type then converge on zero by the end of the century 
because they project that driving forces of deforestation 
equilibrate or forests are depleted. However, the amount of 
information available for non-energy-related C0 7 is more 
limited than information available for energy-related CO\ 
emissions. Very few global scenarios of CH4 and N 20 
emissions from land use are available. This could be 
remedied by additional research. 
The wide range of projected emissions of the IS92 and 
other scenarios stems in large part from differences in 
scenario input assumptions. 
For energy-related CO, 
emissions, population and economic growth assumptions 
usually play a key role as well as assumptions that 
influence the amount of carbon-based fuels used in the 
economy. For land use CO-, emissions, the deforestation 
rate and the carbon content of vegetation are particularly 
important input assumptions. Future emission estimates 
can also vary because of differences in model structures 
and methods used to compute emissions. This analysis has 
not examined the relative importance of modelling factors 
compared to input assumptions in determining results and, 
therefore, it seems unwise to draw strong conclusions. 
However, EMF-12 intercomparisons2 for energy C0 7 
emission with harmonised input assumptions about 
population and economic activity provide information on 
how future emission estimates can vary because of 
differences in models as well as differences in input 
assumptions. 
What input assumptions are important to the 1S92 
Scenarios 
in particular? 
In addition to the factors 
mentioned above, other assumptions are important in 
influencing the estimates of energy-related C09 emissions 
in the IS92 Scenarios. These include labour productivity, 
the growth of demand for energy in developing countries 
as incomes rise, and the rate of technological improvement 
of energy efficiency. 
Cumulative emissions have a smaller range than annual 
emissions. Cumulative energy-related emissions are an 
important factor in the determination of future atmospheric 
concentrations of long-lived greenhouse gases. 
Accordingly, the annual emissions as given in the IS92 
Scenarios have been summed over the periods 1990 to 
2100 (long-term perspective) and 1990 to 2025 (short-term 
perspective). 
• 
Long-term perspective (1990 to 2100): the 
cumulative emissions of the IS92 Scenarios range 
between 700 and 2080 GtC (the corresponding range 
for non-IPCC scenarios is 490-3450 GtC) (see 
Figure 1). The cumulative net emissions from 
deforestation and changing land use range between 
30 and 320 GtC. 
• 
Short-term perspective (1990 to 2025) the 
cumulative emissions as given by IS92 Scenarios 
range between 230 and 330 GtC. 
It is of interest to note that emissions due to fossil fuel 
use between 1860 and 1990 amount to 215 GtC and due to 
deforestation and changing land use 80-120 GtC. 
Reference is made to the Working Group I Summary for 
Policymakers for a discussion of the range of future 
changes of carbon dioxide concentrations in the 
atmosphere on the basis of the IS92 Scenarios. 
Current commitments have a relatively small impact on 
the IS92 emission scenarios. A number of governments 
have emphasised the need to assess the impact on 
emissions scenarios of commitments to limitation of 
greenhouse gases referred to in the Framework Convention 
on Climate Change. In response, an analysis has been 
undertaken with the assumptions and results presented in 
the box on "Scenarios of Current Commitments". 
1 The symbols "GtC" stand for gigatonnes of carbon dioxide 
emissions in units of carbon (C). a gigatonne is 109 tonnes ;mJ 
it is the same as a petagram (1015 grams) of emission-.. 
National inventories prepared for the Conference of Pariv^ 
measure emissions in thousands of tonnes (Gg) of carh -ii 
dioxide (COS). lPg = 106Gg. To convert Gt of carbon (O M 
Gt of carbon dioxide (CO,) multiply by 3.67 (i.e. by 44/12). 
2 The Energy Modelling Forum (EMF) at Stanford University ; 
the USA organises model comparisons. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
245 
Scenarios of Current Commitments 
40 
t 
f 
-a 1 
30 
20 
10 
_l 
1_ 
IS92e scenario 
IS92e with current 
commitments of OECD 
IS92e with current commitments 
OECD. E.Europe and former 
Soviet Union 
IS92a scenario 
*—_ IS92a with current 
commitments of OECD 
IS92a with current commitments 
OECD. E.Europe and former 
Soviet Union 
IS92c scenario 
with and without current 
commitments 
1980 
2000 
2020 
2040 
Year 
2060 
2080 
2100 
This graph depicts a set of optimistic scenarios for global C02 emissions based on current commitments under Article 
4 of the Framework Convention on Climate Change. These are optimistic scenarios because they assume that the 
countries making commitments under the Convention will freeze their emissions after 2005 at their committed levels. 
The current commitment scenarios are compared to the lowest, highest and intermediate IPCC reference scenarios. 
For each reference scenario, two cases of current commitments are shown: 
• 
Case 1: All OECD countries comply with commitments noted in Climate Change Policy Initiatives, Volume 1 
OECD Countries, 1994 Update (OECD, 1994) and freeze emissions at these levels after year 2005; 
• 
Case 2: All OECD countries comply with their commitments as in Case 1, plus countries in Eastern Europe and 
the former USSR freeze their emissions in year 2000 at their 1990 levels. 
As a result of these assumptions, C02 emissions are reduced by about 8 to 12% (depending on the year considered) 
relative to the intermediate IPCC reference scenario (IS92a). Percentage reductions are slightly larger for the highest 
IPCC Scenario (IS92e). Current commitments have no effect on global emissions of the lowest IPCC Scenario (IS92c) 
because emissions in this reference case are lower than they would be for either Case 1 or 2. 
What are the Uses and Limitations of the IPCC IS92 
Scenarios? 
Is one IS92 Scenario more likely than another? The 
likelihood that scenarios are close to real future 
developments depends mainly on the actual evolution of 
key input variables. The IS92a Scenario, for instance, 
provides a reasonable central case projection of global 
emissions. Its world population projections are close to the 
medium projections of three international organisations, 
and its global economic growth assumptions are close to 
the average of other published scenarios. However, it 
should be clear that being an intermediate scenario is not 
the same as being the most likely scenario. 
The intermediate inputs of the IS92a Scenario yield, at 
the global level, annual C0 2 emission estimates that are 
near the centre of the range of published scenarios 
designed for similar purposes, at least up to 2050. IS92a is 
not, however, representative of the central case of other 
scenarios at the regional level. 
The full range of scenarios should be used for climate 
analysis. Considering the degree of uncertainty, the wide 
range of views about future emissions, and the absence of 

246 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
a most likely scenario, it is unwise to use only one scenario 
for climate analysis. Rather, it is recommended to use the 
full range of IS92 Scenarios for this purpose. Users of the 
IPCC Scenarios are cautioned, however, that the lowest 
(IS92c) has emission levels and some input assumptions 
that are more characteristic of a policy, rather than a 
reference, scenario. 
The IS92 emission scenarios are not suitable for other 
purposes. The IS92 Scenarios were not designed for other 
purposes, and indeed they are not suitable for assessing 
consequences of intervention to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions, to examine the feasibility and costs of 
mitigating greenhouse gases, nor as input to negotiating 
possible emission reductions. However, they do help set 
the context for such negotiations by indicating the possible 
range of emissions if no mitigation takes place. New 
scenarios will be needed for these other purposes. 
Addressing the Gaps in Knowledge 
Present Scenarios - Examples of Gaps and Needs 
The estimation of non-CO-, emissions is weak in current 
scenarios and needs to be improved. There is a lack of 
knowledge or agreement on how to represent the processes 
of non-CO-, emissions in emission models. Work is needed 
to improve the estimation of emissions, based on a 
comprehensive all-gas approach. 
Emissions inventory data should be used to improve 
baseline data of scenarios. One of the largest sources of 
uncertainty in CO, and non-C02 emission scenarios is the 
uncertainty of base year emission estimates. Countries and 
organisations are beginning to compile inventories of their 
anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases under the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, and these data 
should be used to improve base year estimates in new 
scenarios. 
More detailed work has to be done to compare the driving 
forces, particularly the economic assumptions, behind the 
IS92 Scenarios, their sensitivities, and the validity of the 
assumptions used. 
New Scenarios - Examples of Gaps and Needs 
• 
New reference scenarios are needed to explore a 
variety of economic development pathways. 
• 
Policy scenarios are needed to explore a variety of 
climate policies, instruments 
and programmes, 
already developed or yet to be developed, and their 
results 
in terms of greenhouse 
gas emission 
reductions. For emission scenarios to be used for 
estimation of feasibility and costs of mitigation 
measures, it is not only important to analyse the 
costs of emission reductions, but also to assess the 
costs and benefits of the impacts of emissions on the 
natural environment and society. Therefore scenarios 
developed for this purpose should be coupled with 
their impact on the environment and society in the 
form of consistent, comprehensive, sustainable 
development scenarios of global change. 
Policies should be tested for robustness against a 
wide range of reference emission estimates. Given 
the wide divergence of possible future emissions, it 
is wise to assess whether proposed policies will 
achieve their emissions objectives under a wide 
range of scenarios. 
Policy studies should focus on cumulative 
emissions over a period of time rather than annual 
emissions of a particular year, as climate impacts are 
related to cumulative emissions rather than annual 
emissions and cumulative emissions have a lower 
range of uncertainty than annual emissions. 
• 
Endogenous capacity-building is crucial. Special 
effort is needed to improve the capabilities of 
researchers to analyse and develop scenarios, 
especially in developing countries and in countries 
with economies in transition. With this in mind, it is 
especially important to build their capabilities to (i) 
estimate base year emissions, (ii) prepare data on the 
driving forces of emissions, and (iii) run computer 
models of emissions. 

6 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission Scenarios 
J. ALCAMO, A. BOUWMAN, J. EDMONDS, A. GRUBLER, 
T. MORITA, A. SUGANDHY 


CONTENTS 
Summary 
6.1 Background and Scope 
6.1.1 Terms of Reference 
6.1.2 Scope of Evaluation 
6.1.3 Approach to the Evaluation 
6.2 The IPCC IS92 Scenarios 
6.2.1 The ASF Model 
6.2.2 Overview of the IS92 Scenarios 
6.2.3 GDP Assumptions 
6.2.4 Population Assumptions 
6.2.5 The Relationship between GDP per capita and 
Population 
251 
6.4 Comparison of Land-Use-Related Scenarios 
257 
257 
257 
258 
259 
260 
260 
262 
263 
264 
63 Comparison of Energy-Related Scenarios 
265 
6.3.1 Global Energy Scenarios 
265 
6.3.1.1 Results from global C0 2 emission scenarios 265 
6.3.1.2 Components of global C0 2 scenarios 
268 
6.3.2 Regional C0 2 Scenarios 
270 
6.3.2.1 China and Centrally Planned Asia 
277 
6.3.2.2 Eastern Europe and former USSR (EEFSU) 277 
6.3.2.3 Africa 
280 
6.3.2.4 USA 
280 
6.3.3 Scenarios for CH4 and N20 
281 
6.3.4 Scenarios for Sulphur Emissions 
281 
6.3.5 Different Variables: their Relative Importance 
and the Sensitivity of Emissions to them 
282 
6.3.6 Discussion of Scenarios for Energy-Related 
Emissions 
283 
6.4.1 Results from C0 2 Global Scenarios 
6.4.2 Results from C0 2 Regional Scenarios 
6.4.3 Factors Affecting C0 2 Emissions from 
Deforestation and Afforestation 
6.4.3.1 Rate of deforestation 
6.4.3.2 Carbon content of vegetation 
6.4.4 Results from Global Scenarios of CH4 and N2Q 
284 
286 
286 
289 
289 
290 
290 
6.4.5 Results from Regional Scenarios for CH4 and N20 291 
6.4.6 Factors Affecting CH4 and N20 Emissions from 
Land-Use 
292 
6.4.6.1 Factors affecting emission of CH4 from rice 
production 
292 
6.4.6.2 Factors affecting emission of CH4 from 
enteric fermentation 
293 
6.4.6.3 Factors affecting emission of N20 from 
fertilised agricultural soils 
293 
6.4.7 Discussion of Scenarios of Land-Use Emissions 
293 
6.5 Discussion and Recommendations 
294 
6.5.1 What Are the Uses and Limitations of the IS92 
Scenarios? 
296 
6.5.2 The Question of New Scenarios 
297 
6.5.3 The Process of Developing Scenarios 
297 
6.5.4 Integrated Scenarios 
298 
6.5.5 Dissemination of Scenarios 
298 
Acknowledgements 
298 
Supplementary Table: Scenarios Reviewed in this Report 299 
References 
301 


SUMMARY1 
Scenarios of greenhouse gas emissions play an important 
role in the analysis of potential climate change. From a 
scientific standpoint, they provide a departure point for 
analysing the potential occurrence and impacts of climate 
change; from a policy perspective they provide 
information about the consequences of action or inaction 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Recognising the 
pivotal role of these scenarios, the IPCC undertook the 
development of a comprehensive and international set of 
emission scenarios as part of its First Assessment (1990). 
In 1992 the original reference scenario, SA90, was updated 
with new information and six new reference scenarios 
were developed: IS92 a-f (reported in IPCC (1992)). 
This report presents an evaluation of the six IS92 
Scenarios. Other published scenarios are also taken into 
account, but only by way of comparison with the IS92 
Scenarios. It is emphasised that this evaluation deals 
mostly with non-intervention scenarios, that is, scenarios 
that do not assume any climate policies to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions (although they may assume 
emission controls for other environmental reasons). This 
applies to five of the six IS92 Scenarios and to all other 
scenarios that we call non-intervention scenarios. Policy 
scenarios are only briefly discussed in the evaluation. 
Because of the limited time available for this evaluation, 
it focuses exclusively on C02, CH4, N20 and S emission 
scenarios from energy and land-use activities. Other 
sources of greenhouse gases and sinks are not discussed. 
Time constraints also made it impossible to evaluate 
scenario results for all regions. Therefore, the evaluation 
was limited to a few case study regions from the 
industrialised and the developing world. 
It is also important to note that no other scenarios other 
than the IS92 Scenarios were evaluated. Therefore the 
reader should be aware that any shortcomings identified 
for the IS92 Scenarios in this evaluation may or may not 
apply to other scenarios. 
Despite the somewhat limited focus of the evaluation, it 
is believed that a wider scope would not have led to 
significantly different conclusions. 
Approach to Evaluation 
Because there are no generally accepted procedures for 
evaluating these or other kinds of scenarios, a new 
approach is proposed. The approach consists of a set of 
purposes of scenarios, together with criteria to satisfy those 
purposes. The following purposes of scenarios are 
suggested: 
• 
Purpose 
1. 
As 
input 
to 
evaluating 
the 
environmental/climatic consequences of "non-
intervention", i.e. no action to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
• 
Purpose 
2. 
As 
input 
to 
evaluating 
the 
environmental/climatic consequences of intervention 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
• 
Purpose 3. As input to examining the feasibility and 
costs of mitigating greenhouse gases from different 
regions and economic sectors, and over time. This 
purpose can include setting emission reduction 
targets and developing scenarios to reach these 
targets. It can also include examining the driving 
forces of emissions and sinks to identify which of 
these forces can be influenced by policies. 
• 
Purpose 4. As input for negotiating possible 
emission reductions for different countries and 
geographic regions. 
Because the IS92 Scenarios were only designed for 
Purpose 1, this evaluation centres on the suitability of the 
scenarios for this purpose. 
The mixed scientific/policy nature of the scenarios 
makes it difficult to separate scientific from policy 
objectives. Indeed, Purposes 1 and 2 have both scientific 
and policy goals. From the scientific side, they explore 
future states of the global climate system, and from the 
policy side, they assess the consequences on climate and 
society of different emission levels. 
No accepted methods exist for evaluating whether the 
IS92 Scenarios are satisfactory for Purpose 1 above, or any 
1 This Summary was accepted as a Technical Summary by the 
IPCC Working Group III Plenary. 

252 
An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios 
of the other purposes.1 Scenarios deal with the future, so 
they cannot be compared with observations. The 
"reasonableness" of a scenario can be evaluated by its 
assumptions and methodology, but this is best done by 
comparing several models in an organised exercise. 
However, this approach was outside the scope of this 
evaluation. We have chosen instead to evaluate the IS92 
emissions scenarios by comparing the range of their 
emission projections and their major input assumptions 
with those of other non-intervention scenarios. Although 
this comparison does not answer all questions about the 
scenarios, it provides information about their position 
relative to other work in the scientific community, and it 
was feasible in the short time available for this evaluation. 
Energy-Related Scenarios — How Different Are Their 
Results? 
Global Results 
There are many more scenarios related to energy than to 
land-use because the models and methods used to estimate 
energy emissions are more detailed and advanced than 
those for land-use emissions. In addition, existing energy 
models could easily be adapted to compute C02 emissions. 
As a result, much of the scenario comparison focuses on 
energy-related emissions with the following results: 
• 
Energy-related emissions currently dominate other 
types of C02 emissions and will continue to do so in 
the future under all scenarios considered. 
Almost all published non-intervention scenarios 
(including the IS92 Scenarios) show an increase in 
energy-related C0 2 emissions over the next century. 
Only one of the six IS92 Scenarios, IS92c, shows a 
decline in total C0 2 emissions between 1990 and 
2100. 
• 
For energy-related C0 2 emissions, the extremes in 
the literature span a very wide range, from 1.2 to 60 
GtC/yr in 2100. (1 GtC stands for one gigatonne 
(109 tonnes) of carbon. A gigatonne is equal to a 
petagram.) The IS92 Scenarios bracket a large part 
of this range, spanning the range 4.6 to 34.9 GtC/yr. 
• 
The estimates of emissions diverge greatly with 
time. The difference between the high and low IS92 
Scenarios is less than a factor of 2 in 2025, but by 
2100 it is nearly a factor of 8. The highest and lowest 
non-IPCC scenarios reviewed here vary by a factor 
of 3 in 2025 and a factor of 50 in 2100. 
• 
This wide range can be explained mostly by 
differences in the input assumptions for the 
scenarios, particularly assumptions regarding 
economic and population growth, and the amount of 
carbon-based fuels in the economy. Another factor is 
the uncertainty of the models used to compute the 
scenarios. 
The cumulative energy-related emissions of the 
scenarios from 1990 to 2100 range from 492 to 3447 
GtC (a factor of 7), which is considerably smaller 
than the range of annual emissions in 2100. The 
cumulative emissions of the IS92 Scenarios fall 
within this range (700 to 2078 GtC). 
• 
The cumulative emissions of energy-related C0n 
from 1860 to 1990 were about 215 GtC. This amount 
is exceeded by even the IS92c Scenario (the lowest 
IPCC scenario) which would result in energy-related 
emissions of 700 GtC from 1990 to 2100. 
• 
Cumulative emissions are important for climate 
analysis because C0 9 and other direct greenhouse 
gases can affect climate for decades to centuries after 
they are emitted because of the integrative nature of 
the atmosphere-ocean system. 
• 
Whether or not C0 2 emissions will accumulate in 
the atmosphere depends on many factors that are 
partly taken into account by carbon cycle models. 
Model calculations of this sort from Working Group 
I indicate that the emissions of the IS92c Scenario 
could raise atmospheric concentrations of CO^ to 
approximately 480 ppmv2 by 2100. Hence, even the 
lowest IPCC Scenario (which would result in lower 
C02 emissions in 2100 than at present) could lead to 
a build-up of C02 in the atmosphere. 
Compared with C02, far fewer scenarios are available 
for CH4, N 20 and other greenhouse gas emissions. For 
these scenarios an additional source of uncertainty is 
important, namely, the uncertainty of baseline emission 
estimates. Thus, non-C02 scenarios have an overall lower 
reliability than C0 2 scenarios. IS92 estimates of energy-
related CH4 and N20 emissions have a range of a factor of 
6 to 7 in the year 2100. The range of the IS92 Scenarios 
for non-C0 2 emissions overlap with the few other 
published scenarios of this type. 
1 The Terms of Reference referred to in the Work Plan require 
that the evaluation of the IS92 Scenarios by Working Group 111 
should result in a report on the "validity, appropriateness and 
utility" of "a range of internally consistent scenarios for future 
emissions based on reasonable economic, demographic and 
technological prjections, and taking account of gaps am! 
uncertainties in available knowledge, especially concerning the 
evolution of socio-economic development and technolo. \: 
where possible, policy assumptions should reflect th.ir 
economic and social consequences." This chapter evaluates the 
IS92 Scenarios in the light of most of the specific facie > 
outlined in Part III, "Emissions Scenarios", Chapter "\ 
"Consideration of Consistent Scenarios," of the approved v < I 
III Work Plan, but does not evaluate the IS92 Sccnu -
according to all the above factors because of the u; ! 
difficulty in doing so in the time available . 
2 1 ppmv = 1 part per million by volume. 

An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios 
2JU 
Global scenarios of sulphur emissions are virtually 
unknown outside of the IS92 Scenarios. Baseline emission 
estimates are quite good for the OECD regions but less 
reliable elsewhere. In the IS92 Scenarios, estimates of 
energy-related sulphur emissions in the year 2100 range by 
somewhat less than a factor of 5. 
Regional Results 
There are many regional and country estimates of energy-
related C02 emissions, but the estimates do not correspond 
to the IS92 regions, so comparison was not possible. The 
following comments can be made about the few scenarios 
available for comparison: 
• 
The range of results is about the same as that of the 
global scenarios. 
• 
For the region Eastern Europe and Former Soviet 
Union, the IS92 Scenarios have a higher trend than 
more recent scenarios that take into account the 
decline in economic activity in this region. 
• 
The range of IS92 Scenarios is in the lower half of 
the range of non-intervention estimates for the USA. 
Energy-Related Scenarios — How Do Their 
Components Compare? 
Both the IS92 Scenarios and other scenarios examined in 
this report rely on large numbers of input assumptions. It 
was not possible in this evaluation to assess the differences 
between all these assumptions. Rather, in this evaluation 
the projections of energy-related C0 2 emissions were 
broken down into four components, and these components 
were compared across the scenarios. The four components 
were: population growth, economic growth, energy 
intensity (the amount of primary energy used per unit 
GDP), and carbon intensity (the amount of carbon emitted 
per unit primary energy consumed). 
• 
Some of these components are specified as model 
inputs, and some are derived from 
model 
calculations. 
• 
Nearly all scenarios show a downward trend in 
energy intensity. The energy intensities of the IS92 
Scenarios have a narrower range than those of other 
scenarios. 
• 
The carbon intensity of all IS92 Scenarios shows a 
downward trend, whereas the carbon intensity of 
some non-IPCC scenarios shows an upward trend. 
• 
Assumed changes in energy and carbon intensities 
have an important influence on estimates of 
emissions, especially in the second half of the next 
century. 
• 
The range of economic growth assumptions for the 
IS92 Scenarios is representative of the range in other 
global scenarios (this statement applies to scenarios 
of both energy-related and land-use emissions). The 
economic growth rates used for the IS92 Scenarios 
are generally lower than historical rates, but would 
nevertheless lead to large increases in per capita 
GDP in all regions. 
Recent population estimates support the plausibility 
of the medium population growth rate assumed in 
the IS92 Scenarios. 
The IS92 Scenarios have the lowest and highest 
global population growth rates of all the scenarios 
reviewed. The low projection (IS92c) results in 
declining global population in the 21st century. 
These figures are taken from UN projections and are 
not inconsistent with other recent high and low 
estimates. 
It is outside the scope of this report to evaluate the 
various critical issues related to population 
projections, such as population ageing, the Earth's 
carrying capacity, and the relationship between 
economic development and demographic trends. 
More research 
is needed to improve our 
understanding of these issues so that we can better 
judge the consistency and likelihood of population 
projections and in turn improve our estimates of 
future emissions. 
In general, the components of the IS92 Scenarios are 
fairly representative of other global scenarios but not 
of regional scenarios. For example, the IS92 
Scenarios span a much smaller range of assumptions 
of future energy intensity for China and the USA 
than the range found in non-IPCC scenarios. Hence 
the IS92 Scenarios only represent part of the range of 
regional perspectives contained in the scenarios 
examined here. 
Energy-Related Scenarios — To What Factors Are 
Emission Estimates Most Sensitive? 
Some of the uncertainty regarding future emission 
projections can be attributed to the different methods and 
models used to compute emissions. However, the evidence 
from model comparisons indicates that model differences 
explain only a small part of the wide range of emission 
estimates found in the literature. Most of this range arises 
from differences in the input assumptions of the scenarios. 
The input assumptions that have the most effect on the 
range of emission estimates are those concerning 
population growth, economic growth and the amount of 
carbon-based fuel in use in the economy. 
The IS92 Scenarios are also sensitive to assumptions 
about labour productivity, the growth of demand for 
energy in developing countries as incomes rise, and the 
rate of improvement in end-use energy efficiency not 
related to fuel prices. 

254 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Land-use-Related Scenarios — How Different Are 
Their Results? 
Global Results 
Far fewer scenarios are available for land-use emissions 
than for energy emissions, and global estimates are more 
common in the literature than regional estimates. The 
following comments can be made about global C0 2 
scenarios related to land-use: 
• 
Net deforestation accounts for about 18% of current 
total C0 2 emissions, and most scenarios assume that 
this percentage will decline in the future. 
• 
Projected emissions of C 0 2 resulting from 
deforestation differ widely. Unlike energy-related 
emissions which diverge with time, land-use 
emissions have their widest range (0.2 to 4.8 GtC/yr) 
before the middle of the 21st century. Most scenarios 
converge to zero by the end of the century because 
they project that either the forces causing 
deforestation equilibrate or forests are depleted. 
• 
The IS92 Scenarios fall within the lower half of the 
range of other global land-use C0 2 scenarios. 
• 
The range of cumulative emissions over the period 
1990 to 2100 is 30 to 320 GtC. Cumulative 
emissions have an upper bound set by the maximum 
available amount of terrestrial biomass that could be 
oxidised (about 600 GtC neglecting afforestation). 
No similar upper limit is foreseen for energy-related 
emissions in the next century. 
Regional Results 
The few published regional land-use scenarios for C0 2 and 
other greenhouse gases exhibit considerable differences. 
The IS92 Scenarios sometimes fall inside and sometimes 
fall outside the range of other scenarios. The range of 
emission estimates is about the same for regional scenarios 
as it is for global scenarios, and the regional and global 
scenarios converge in a similar way by the year 2100. 
Land-use-Related Scenarios — How Do Their Inputs 
Compare and To What Are Their Emission Estimates 
Sensitive? 
The assumed rate of deforestation is the most 
important factor influencing emissions of C0 2 
related to deforestation. Most scenarios make simple 
assumptions about the causes of deforestation, 
although some use models to simulate land 
conversion. The different ways of representing 
deforestation lead to different estimates of 
deforestation rates: the scenarios examined agree 
that forest clearing will diminish by 2100 for the 
reasons cited above. 
• 
Assumptions about the carbon content of vegetation 
also strongly influence estimates of C0 2 emissions. 
The scenarios examined take a wide variety of 
approaches to estimating future emissions. This 
variety reflects lack of knowledge or agreement on 
how best to represent emission-generating processes 
related to land-use. 
• 
Not only are these processes poorly understood, but 
baseline estimates differ between scenarios. 
Differences in baseline estimates lead to even greater 
differences in future emission estimates. Results 
from studies of current emission inventories are 
needed to improve these baseline estimates. 
The IS92 Scenarios do not account for the feedback 
of climate to land-use emissions, and this is one 
reason why their results differ from those of other 
scenarios. However, climate feedbacks are quite 
uncertain; thus including them in estimates of land-
use emission scenarios may or may not improve 
these estimates. 
• 
In general, the IS92 Scenarios do not cover the range 
of input assumptions found in other scenarios related 
to land-use emissions. 
What Are the Uses and Limitations of the IS92 
Scenarios? 
In evaluating the IS92 Scenarios it is important to recall 
that they were developed only to accomplish Purpose 1. 
The IS92 Scenarios fulfil the most important criteria for 
this purpose. Specifically, their global results span the 
range of results from other scenarios, and in this sense can 
be said to reflect the current range of views about future 
emission estimates. Moreover, the IS92 Scenarios are 
among the most comprehensive scenarios available in their 
coverage of all important greenhouse gases and precursors 
of ozone and sulphate aerosol. Also the scenarios are 
sufficiently documented in reports and in digital form to 
allow their comparison with other scenarios, and to be 
used as input files for climate models. As a consequence, 
they are useful for Purpose 1, namely as an input to 
atmosphere/climate 
models 
for 
examining the 
environmental/climatic consequences of not acting to 
reduce greenhouse emissions. 
Although the IS92 Scenarios were designed with 
Purpose 1 in mind, it is interesting to ask whether they are 
useful for any of the other purposes. They should not he 
used for Purpose 2 (evaluating the consequence- of 
intervention to reduce emissions), because five of the M\ 
IS92 Scenarios have emission estimates that ire 
substantially higher than policy scenarios published in he 
literature. 
The IS92 Scenarios are inadequate for Purpo . 3 
(estimation of feasibility and costs of policies) bei .\e 
five out of the six scenarios do not include mitic >n 

An Evaluation of the 1PCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
255 
measures specifically targeted towards climate change. 
The IS92 Scenarios have limited value as reference 
scenarios for mitigation studies because their input 
assumptions and results do not have sufficient detail for 
geographic regions and sectors. Another reason that the 
IS92 Scenarios are inadequate for purpose 3 is that 
regional results and regional input assumptions of the IS92 
Scenarios do not cover the full range of views found in 
other scenarios. 
The IS92 Scenarios are not appropriate for Purpose 4 (as 
input to negotiating possible emission reductions) because 
of the high uncertainty of current greenhouse gas estimates 
from many sectors and countries. However, the IS92 
Scenarios do help set the context for such negotiations by 
indicating the possible range of emissions if no mitigation 
takes place. It is again noted that the IS92 scenarios were 
not intended for Purpose 4. 
For the reasons noted above, it is recommended that 
researchers use the IS92 Scenarios solely as input to 
atmosphere/climate 
models 
for 
examining 
the 
consequences of not acting to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions (Purpose 1). 
Is One Scenario More Likely Than Another? 
In some ways IS92a is an intermediate scenario. Its global 
C02 emissions fall near the middle of other scenarios at 
least up to the year 2050, and some of its input 
assumptions are intermediate. For example, its population 
assumptions are equal or close to the medium projections 
recently published by three different international 
organisations. In other ways, however, IS92a is not 
intermediate, particularly in some of its input assumptions. 
In any event, being an intermediate scenario is not the 
same as being the most likely scenario. Indeed, at this time 
there is no objective basis for assigning a likelihood to any 
of the scenarios. Furthermore, given the degree of 
uncertainty about future emissions, we recommend that 
analysts use the full range of IS92 Scenarios rather than a 
single scenario as input to atmosphere/climate models. 
Users of the IS92 Scenarios are cautioned, however, that 
the lowest scenario (IS92c) has emission levels and some 
input assumptions that are more characteristic of an 
intervention than a non-intervention scenario. 
The Question of New Scenarios 
Because the IS92 Scenarios are neither designed nor 
suitable for Purposes 2, 3, and 4, new scenarios may be 
needed to fulfil these purposes. It is worth repeating that 
this report did not judge the suitability of non-IS92 
Scenarios to satisfy these purposes. 
New scenarios, if developed, should especially include 
improvements in the estimation of baseline and future non-
COT emissions, particularly from the land-use sector. 
Although we did not judge the adequacy of all current 
scenarios, it is likely that new reference scenarios will be 
needed for the following: 
(i) to take into account the latest information on 
economic restructuring, especially in the CIS, 
Eastern Europe, Asia and Latin America; (We note 
that economic restructuring in Eastern Europe and 
the CIS was partly taken into account in the IS92 
Scenarios, but it would be worthwhile to include 
more recent information.) 
(ii) to evaluate the possible consequences of the 
Uruguay Round amendments to the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; 
(iii) to explore a variety of economic development 
pathways (e.g., a closing of the income gap between 
industrialised and developing regions); 
(iv) to examine different trends in technological 
change; and 
(v) to take into account the latest information about 
current emission commitments in connection with 
the Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
The current commitments to stabilise emissions under 
the Convention, if maintained over the course of the next 
century, could result in large reductions of emissions in 
certain regions, but on a global basis a reduction of 10% or 
less is expected in C0 2 emissions (relative to the IS92a 
Scenario). This percentage reduction is somewhat greater 
or less depending on the year and scenario. This is an 
optimistic scenario, in particular because it assumes that 
countries will freeze their emissions after the year 2005 
according to their current commitments. 
New scenarios are also needed that are consistent with 
limits on atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases 
by specified dates. These scenarios should be related to the 
carbon stabilisation modelling exercises being performed 
by IPCC Working Group I. 
The Process of Developing Scenarios 
It is recommended that the IPCC or another suitable 
organisation act as an "umbrella" under which different 
groups can develop comparable, comprehensive emission 
scenarios. The process for developing scenarios should 
draw on current experience in harmonising scenarios and 
model calculations and should emphasise: 
• 
Openness: scenario development should be open to 
wide participation by the research community, 
particularly from developing countries. Openness 
requires extensive documentation of modelling 
assumptions and inputs. 

256 
• 
Pluralism: A diversity of groups, approaches and 
methodologies should be encouraged, although they 
should be harmonised as noted below. 
• 
Comparability: Reporting conventions for input and 
output should be standardised. 
• 
Harmonisation: 
Input 
assumptions 
and 
methodologies for the scenarios should be 
harmonised to provide a common benchmark for 
scenarios from different groups. 
To accomplish Purpose 3 for emission scenarios 
(estimation of feasibility and costs of mitigation 
measures), it is important not only to analyse the costs of 
emission reductions but also to assess the costs and 
benefits of the impacts of emissions on the natural 
An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios 
environment and society. Therefore, scenarios developed 
for this purpose should be coupled with their impact on the 
environment and society in the form of consistent, 
comprehensive and integrated scenarios of global change. 
Current and new scenarios should be widely 
disseminated to countries, international organisations, non-
governmental organisations and the scientific community. 
As part of this effort, a central archive should be 
established to make available the results of new scenarios 
to any group. The archive should also make available some 
aspects of the models and the input assumptions used to 
derive the scenarios. In addition, special effort is needed to 
improve the capabilities of researchers to analyse and 
develop scenarios, especially in developing regions. The 
IPCC can play a role in these activities. 

An Evaluation of the IPCC1S92 Emission Scenarios 
2.57 
6.1 Background and Scope 
6.1.1 Terms of Reference 
This chapter presents an evaluation of the IPCC IS92 
emission scenarios. The evaluation is a response to a 
request from the Chairman of the Intergovernmental 
Negotiating Committee for the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change that IPCC prepare "an evaluation of 
current scenarios of greenhouse gas emissions " before the 
March 1995 meeting of the Conference of Parties (United 
Nations General Assembly document A/AC.237/30). 
According to the approved work plan, the key question for 
the evaluation is: "Which issues and uncertainties about 
key variables may critically affect future net greenhouse 
gas emissions and aerosol concentrations?" Among the 
issues to be explored are: 
• 
the types of models available for scenario 
development; 
• 
the assumptions made in developing the IS92 
Scenarios; 
• 
the relative importance and sensitivity of different 
variables in determining future emissions; 
• 
the relationship of the scenarios to the emission 
inventories of countries; 
• 
the appropriate uses, capabilities and limitations of 
emission scenarios; 
• 
the need for future work on scenarios. 
The Bureau of Working Group III further recommended 
that this evaluation "build heavily" on the scenarios 
published in the IPCC 1992 Supplement (First Session of 
Working Group III, Montreal, 3 May, 1993, WGIII/lst/ 
Doc.l, Rev.2). 
An appropriate question at the outset is: "Who is the 
audience for this evaluation?" The Work Plan of Working 
Group III implies both a scientific and a policy audience 
by asking for recommendations on new scenarios that 
would " serve the needs of climate modelling, planning of 
response measures, and provision of information to the 
Conference of Parties". Indeed, scenarios by their nature 
have both scientific and policy aspects: from a scientific 
standpoint, they provide a reference point for computing 
the potential occurrence and impacts of climate change; 
from a policy standpoint they provide information about 
the consequences of intervention or inaction to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. In practice, however, it is 
difficult to separate the scientific from the policy aspects 
of scenarios, and in this chapter we do not try. 
In this chapter we present the scope and approach of the 
evaluation, give a brief overview of IS92 Scenario 
assumptions and results, compare the IS92 and other 
scenarios (at this stage we examine much more closely the 
assumptions and results of the IS92 Scenarios) and discuss 
the uses and limitations of scenarios, together with our 
recommendations. 
6.1.2 Scope of Evaluation 
Only six months were available to meet the INC deadline 
for this evaluation. This time constraint, together with the 
lack of a budget for further analysis, led us to narrow the 
focus of the evaluation: 
• 
Only the most recent IPCC scenarios are evaluated. 
These scenarios are reported in the IPCC (1992) and 
in Pepper et al., (1992), and are referred to as the 
"IS92 Scenarios". 
• 
The IS92 Scenarios are only compared with other 
published "non-intervention" scenarios because the 
IS92 Scenarios are intended to be "non-intervention" 
scenarios (that is, they do not make assumptions 
about climate policies that would reduce greenhouse 
gases). Some intervention (or "policy") scenarios are 
reviewed, but only to compare them with the lowest 
IS92 Scenarios. 
The evaluation focuses on emissions related to 
energy and land-use activities because they are the 
primary sources of greenhouse gases. Non-
anthropogenic, "natural" emissions are not 
considered. 
Principal attention is given to C0 2 emissions 
because of the critical contribution of C0 2 to 
radiative forcing and less attention is given to CH4 
and N20 emissions. 
Scenarios for sulphur emissions are investigated, but 
not scenarios for major precursors of ozone. 
• 
Sinks of gases, such as carbon sequestration in forest 
plantations, are omitted. An exception is made when 
C02 from deforestation is discussed, because part of 
the discussion of deforestation concerns carbon 
uptake by vegetation. 
Certain tasks are not part of the evaluation: 
This evaluation focuses almost exclusively on 
scenario results and input assumptions rather than on 
the methodology behind them. This approach was 
taken because much more time would be needed to 
assess properly the methodology of the scenarios and 
because the IS92 Scenarios appear to be more 
sensitive to the input assumptions than to the 
methodology. 
We did not perform a sensitivity analysis of the 
model used to generate the IS92 Scenarios because 
the funds needed for this work were not available. In 
any case, analysis would be best performed as part of 
a more extensive comparison involving several 

258 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
models. This comparison would require the 
cooperation of various modelling groups and would 
take longer than the time available for the evaluation 
of the emission scenarios. 
We did not compare 1990 baseline emissions for the 
IS92 Scenarios with emission inventories of different 
countries because too few inventories were available 
to be compared. However, as more inventories 
become available, we recommend that they be used 
to examine and update the baseline emissions for the 
scenarios. 
We did not attempt to identify the likelihood of any 
of the scenarios. It is our view that there is no 
objective method of assessing the likelihood of all 
the key assumptions that will influence future 
emission estimates, especially over the 110-year time 
horizon of the IS92 Scenarios. The poor track record 
of economic and energy forecasts indicates our 
inability to predict even the near-term future. Thus, 
we do not attempt to identify the most likely 
emission scenario. 
6.1.3 Approach to the Evaluation 
A scenario, in the most general sense, is "a sequence of 
events", or "an account of a possible course of action or 
events" (Merriom-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 10th 
edition, 1993). An emission scenario is a projection of 
future emissions based on specific assumptions about key 
determinants such as population, economic growth, energy 
intensity, land-use or emission control policies. Sometimes 
scenarios are confused with emission profiles, targets, or 
other concepts (see Box 1). Emission scenarios are also 
sometimes confused with the methodology used to 
generate them. In most cases emission scenarios are 
generated 
with 
mathematical 
models or other 
computational tools, although in some cases they are 
developed in an ad hoc manner. As noted above, this 
chapter focuses almost exclusively on scenario results and 
input assumptions rather than on the methodology behind 
them. 
Because emission scenarios fall in the grey area between 
science and policy, it is difficult to select an appropriate 
benchmark by which to judge them. Box 2 makes a first 
attempt at specifying the major purposes of emission 
scenarios. We recognise that there may be other valid 
purposes. 
Criteria for achieving these purposes are ranked 
according to "very important", "important" and "desirable" 
in Table 6.14, presented later in the chapter. 
The IS92 Scenarios were only developed with Purpose 1 
in mind. Therefore, the scenarios are evaluated in this 
chapter mainly in the light of how they comply with this 
purpose. The other purposes are discussed in Section 6.5.2 
which covers the need for new scenarios. 
Purpose 1 is the most straightforward use of emission 
scenarios. In this case, a non-intervention emission 
scenario is developed, and then used as input for a climate 
model which computes the effect of the emissions pathway 
on the build-up of greenhouse gases, changes in 
temperature, precipitation and other climate variables. The 
results from the climate model are then sometimes used to 
evaluate the impacts of climate change on sea level rise. 
agricultural productivity and other indicators. This type of 
emission scenario also serves as a reference point for the 
intervention scenarios developed for Purpose 2 and for 
BOX 1: TERMINOLOGY RELATED TO EMISSION SCENARIOS 
Emission scenario 
Projections of future emissions based on specific assumptions about key determinants. 
such as population, economic growth, technological change, land-use trends or emission 
control policies. 
Non-intervention or 
reference scenario 
Intervention or policy 
Scenario 
Emission profile 
Emission target 
Emission trend 
An emissions scenario that does not make any assumptions about climate policies to 
reduce greenhouse gases. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish non-intervention and 
intervention scenarios. For example, assumed high prices for fossil fuels could stem from 
either resource scarcity or carbon taxes aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
An emission scenario that makes assumptions about climate policies to reduce greenhouse 
gases. Policies must be directed towards mitigating climate change. 
Level of future emissions derived directly or indirectly from a specific objective. 
A target emission level for a particular date. 
A projection of future emissions that is not based on specific determinants or objectives. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
259 
BOX 2. PROPOSED PURPOSES OF EMISSION SCENARIOS 
Purpose 1. 
To evaluate the environmental/climatic consequences of "no intervention" to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. For this purpose a non-intervention scenario is devised, and then used as input for a 
climate or similar model to evaluate the scenario's environmental/climatic consequences. 
Purpose 2. 
To evaluate the environmental/climatic consequences of intervention to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. For this purpose an intervention scenario is devised, and then used as input for a climate 
or similar model to evaluate the scenario's environmental/climatic consequences. 
Purpose 3. 
To examine the feasibility and costs of mitigating greenhouse gases from different regions and econ-
omic sectors and over time. This purpose can include setting emission reduction targets and 
developing scenarios to reach these targets. It can also include examining the driving forces of 
emissions and sinks to identify which of these forces can be influenced by policies. 
Purpose 4. 
As input for negotiating possible emission reductions for different countries and geographic regions. 
assessing the benefits of reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
In our view, a scenario or set of scenarios must comply 
with three important criteria to fulfil Purpose 1. The first 
two criteria relate to the use of the emission scenario as 
input for atmosphere/climate models while the last 
criterion concerns the credibility of the scenarios: 
• 
Comprehensiveness. The scenarios must take into 
account all important greenhouse gases, including 
precursors of ozone and sulphate aerosol. 
Comprehensiveness is important so that radiative 
forcing is not incorrectly calculated by the climate 
model. 
• 
Documentation of output. Sufficient detail should be 
provided for emissions by type, region (if available) 
and sector, to allow comparisons with other 
scenarios and to prepare inputs for atmosphere/ 
climate models. 
• 
Emission estimates and input assumptions for the 
scenario should reflect a range of views. A single 
reference scenario is inadequate for Purpose 1. 
Instead, a range of scenario results should be 
prepared which take into account the uncertainties in 
the basic driving forces of emissions. The emission 
estimates and input assumptions of the scenarios 
should reflect the current range of views. 
We examine the comprehensiveness of the IS92 
Scenarios in Section 
6.2, and briefly 
discuss 
documentation of output in Sections 6.2 and 6.5. The third 
criterion, the question of whether the IS92 Scenarios 
represent the current range of views of experts, is a central 
topic of this chapter. The topic is covered in Sections 6.2, 
6.3 and 6.4 by comparing the emission projections and 
major input assumptions of the IS92 Scenarios with those 
of other published non-intervention scenarios. We 
recognise that the published scenarios only give the views 
of a limited number of experts, principally from 
industrialised countries. Nevertheless, this comparison 
provides information about the position of the scenarios 
relative to other work in the scientific community; also, the 
comparison can be performed in the short time available 
for this evaluation. 
All published scenarios used for our comparisons are 
treated equally. We recognise that some scenarios may 
have been prepared by a single researcher using a simple 
model, whereas others may have been developed using an 
elaborate methodology and been subjected to extensive 
review. However, an evaluation of methodology is outside 
the scope of this report. 
Although we consider the three criteria discussed above 
to be the most important benchmarks for Purpose 1, three 
other criteria follow these in importance: 
• 
Reproducibility 
• 
Sensitivity analysis 
• 
Internal consistency 
These criteria are elaborated later in the chapter (see 
Table 6.14). 
6.2 The IPCC IS92 Scenarios 
This evaluation covers the six IS92 Scenarios. They are 
described in Leggett et al. (1992), and in more detail in 
Pepper et al. (1992). The reader is referred to these 
publications for details about the scenarios; only a brief 
overview is presented here. 
The basic purpose of the scenarios is to explore possible 

260 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
pathways of greenhouse gas emissions in the absence of 
new policies to reduce them. The scenarios are among the 
most comprehensive ever developed in their coverage of 
all important greenhouse gases - carbon dioxide (CO-,) , 
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N-,0), halocarbons, sulphur 
oxides (SOx), and precursors of tropospheric ozone 
including nitrogen dioxides (NOx), volatile organic 
compounds (VOC) and carbon monoxide (CO). The 
scenarios take into account control of stratospheric ozone 
depletion and local air pollution problems, and this 
coverage leads to reductions in emissions of some 
greenhouse gases. Moreover, the IS92b Scenario includes 
the commitments of some OECD countries to stabilise or 
reduce CO, emissions, as the commitments were known 
up to 1992. Nevertheless, since these emission control 
commitments in IS92b do not have a large effect on global 
emissions, we will refer to the entire set of IS92 Scenarios 
as "non-intervention" scenarios. 
6.2.1 The ASF Model 
The USA Environmental Protection Agency model called 
the "Atmospheric Stabilisation Framework" (ASF) was 
used to develop the IS92 Scenarios (Lashof and Tirpak, 
1990). The model performs calculations for nine regions. 
Results for the nine regions are available in electronic 
form, but in IPCC reports these results have been 
aggregated into four regions: OECD, Eastern Europe and 
former USSR, China and Centrally Planned Asia', and 
"Other". The ASF combines modules for computing 
emissions from energy, industry, agriculture, forests and 
land conversion using common assumptions for 
population, economic growth and structural change. 
Thousands of input assumptions define a case in the 
ASF.2 Fortunately, not all assumptions are equally 
important. The findings of the Energy Modelling Forum 
indicate that fossil fuel carbon emissions are highly 
sensitive to assumptions about the rate of improvement of 
end-use energy efficiency, but relatively insensitive to the 
form of the model used to generate the scenario. The 
uncertainty analysis conducted by Edmonds et al. (1986) 
on the energy component of the ASF ranked the three most 
important factors influencing the variation in reference 
case fossil fuel CO, emissions to be labour productivity 
(the prime determinant of GDP), the income elasticity of 
demand for energy in the developing world (reflecting 
structural change rates) and the rate of exogenous end-use 
energy intensity improvement. In addition, fossil fuel CO, 
emissions in the energy component of the ASF model have 
been shown to be highly sensitive to the assumed costs and 
supply of renewable energy sources (Edmonds et al., 
1986) as well as the environmental costs of extracting 
fossil fuels. 
The energy component of the ASF model is insensitive 
to population growth assumptions in the short-term, but 
sensitive to this assumption in the long-term.3 In the long 
term, fossil fuel CO, emissions are roughly proportional to 
population. 
The model is relatively insensitive to changes in 
assumed fossil fuel resources, the elasticity of interfuel 
substitution, the price elasticity of demand for energy and 
emission coefficients for fossil fuel carbon. The fossil fuel 
resource base provides no meaningful constraint on carbon 
emissions for the next century. Fuel price variation is 
constrained by energy transformation technologies and the 
variety of alternative energy forms available, so the model 
is insensitive to the elasticity of interfuel substitution. 
Although fossil fuel CO, emissions are insensitive to the 
assumed price elasticity of demand for energy, this 
parameter strongly influences the cost of achieving 
emissions reduction targets (Edmonds and Barns, 1992). 
Sensitivity analysis of emission estimates is taken up again 
in Section 6.3. 
The land-use component of the ASF is also strongly 
influenced by assumptions about GDP and population. 
6.2.2 Overview of the IS92 Scenarios 
To explore a variety of possible pathways for future 
emissions, the IS92 Scenarios span a wide range of 
assumptions for population, GDP, agriculture, energy and 
other factors. Specific assumptions are made for each of 
nine regions. An overview of the key assumptions is given 
in Table 6.1. 
Among other recent developments, the IS92 Scenarios 
take into account the London Amendments to the Montreal 
Protocol; the revised population forecasts of the World 
Bank and United Nations; the report of the Energy and 
Industry Subgroup of IPCC (IPCC-EIS, 1990); the 
political and economic changes in the former Soviet 
Union, Eastern Europe and the Middle East; and new data 
on tropical deforestation and sources and sinks of 
greenhouse gases. 
1 In the ASF model this region includes Cambodia. Laos. 
Mongolia, North Korea and Vietnam. 
2 A distinction is sometimes made between model parameters 
and input assumptions. Model parameters are assumptions that 
remain constant from case to case, whereas input assumptions 
are the set of assumptions whose variation defines cases. Trae 
are no formal rules for determining which variables are nvJel 
parameters and which are input assumptions, and the bound..rv 
partitioning assumptions into these two sets can change. 
3 Increases in population do not affect GDP for 15 year- rhe 
time required for an infant to reach labour force ;- t. 
Therefore increases in energy demand due to increas 
n 
population are countered by decreases in energy demamt ;e 
to lower per capita income levels. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
26/ 
The IS92a Scenario adopts intermediate assumptions (as 
compared to the other IS92 Scenarios) about population 
and economic growth. The major difference between the 
IS92b and IS92a scenarios is, as noted above, that IS92b 
takes into account information available up to 1992 on the 
commitments of some OECD countries to stabilise their 
C0 2 emissions. The IS92a and b Scenarios give emission 
estimates that are intermediate compared with those of the 
other IS92 Scenarios (Table 6.2). 
The IS92c Scenario assumes the lowest rates of 
population and economic growth (relative to the other IS92 
Scenarios) and severe constraints on fossil fuel supplies. 
As a result, it is the lowest emission scenario and the only 
one showing a decreasing emission trend (Table 6.2). 
IS92d assumes the low population growth rate of lS92c but 
a higher economic growth rate. The net result is that it has 
the second lowest future emission estimates. At the other 
extreme, the lS92e Scenario assumes intermediate 
population growth and high economic growth rates with 
plentiful fossil fuels. Consequently, this scenario has the 
highest estimates of future emissions (Table 6.2). IS92C 
uses the highest population estimates of the IS92 
Scenarios, but lower economic growth assumptions. It is 
the second highest emission scenario (Table 6.2). 
We provide more detail about the assumptions and 
results of the IS92 Scenarios in the remainder of the report. 
Table 6.1: Summary of assumptions in the six IPCC 1992 alternative 1S92 Scenarios. 
Scenario Population 
Economic growth 
Energy supplies 
Other 
CFCs 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92c 
IS92d 
IS92c 
IS92f 
World Bank 
(1991) 
11.3 billion 
by 2100 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
2.9% 
12,000 EJ conventional oi 
2.3% 
13,000 EJ natural gas. 
Solar costs fall to 
$0.075/kWh. 
191 EJ/yearofbiofuels 
available at $70/barrelf 
World Bank 
(1991) 
11.3 billion 
by 2100 
UN Medium-
Low Case 
6.4 billion 
by 2100 
UN Medium-
Low Case 
6.4 billion 
by 2100 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
24% 
23% 
24% 
1.2% 
2.7% 
24% 
World Bank 
(1991) 
11.3 billion 
by 2100 
UN Medium-
High Case 
17.6 billion 
by 2100 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
1990-2025: 
1990-2100: 
3.5% 
34% 
24% 
23% 
Same as "a" 
8,000 EJ conventional oil 
7,300 EJ natural gas 
Nuclear costs decline 
by 0.4% annually 
Oil and gas same as "c" 
Solar costs fall to 
$0.065/kWh 
272 EJ/year of biofuels 
available at $50/barrel 
Legally enacted and 
internationally agreed 
controls on SOx, NOx and 
NMVOC emissions. 
Efforts to reduce emissions 
of SO,, NOx and CO in 
developing countries by 
middle of next century. 
Same as "a" plus 
commitments by many 
OECD countries to 
stabilise or reduce C02 
emissions. 
Same as "a" 
Emission controls extended 
worldwide for CO, NOx, 
NMVOC and SO,. Halt 
deforestation. Capture and 
use of emissions from coal 
mining and gas production 
and use. 
18,400 EJ conventional oil Emission controls which 
Gas same as "a" 
increase fossil energy costs 
Phase out nuclear by 2075 
by 30%. 
Oil and gas same as "e" 
Solar costs fall to 
$0.083/kWh 
Nuclear costs increase to 
$0.09/kWh 
Same as "a" 
Partial compliance 
with Montreal 
Protocol. 
Technological transfer 
results in gradual 
phase out of CFCs in 
non-signatory 
countries by 2075. 
Global compliance 
with scheduled phase 
out of Montreal 
Protocol. 
Same as "a" 
CFC production phase 
out by 1997 for 
industrialised 
countries. Phase out 
ofHCFCs. 
Same as "d" 
Same as "a" 
t Approximate conversion factor: 1 barrel = 6 GJ. 
Source of Table: Leggett et ai, IPCC, 1992. 

262 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Table 6.2: Selected results of the six IS92 Scenarios. 
Scenario 
Scenario year 
1990 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 
co2 
(GtC) 
7.4 
12.2 
20.3 
11.8 
19.1 
8.8 
4.6 
9.3 
10.3 
15.1 
35.8 
14.4 
26.6 
C H 4 
(Tg) 
506 
659 
917 
659 
917 
589 
546 
584 
567 
692 
1072 
697 
1168 
Emissions per year1 
N 2 0 
(TgN) 
12.9 
15.8 
17.0 
15.7 
16.9 
15.0 
13.7 
15.1 
14.5 
16.3 
19.1 
16.2 
19.0 
s 
(TgS) 
98 
141 
169 
140 
164 
115 
77 
104 
87 
163 
254 
151 
204 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92c 
IS92d 
IS92e 
IS92f 
1 The figures for C02 are anthropogenic emissions. The figures for CH4, N20 and S are combined natural and anthropogenic 
emissions. Natural emissions in 1990 are estimated as: CH4 = 340 TgCH4, N20 = 4.7 TgN, and S = 74 TgS. It is generally assumed 
that natural emissions will remain constant; thus anthropogenic CH4, N20 and S emissions for any scenario and year can be 
estimated by subtracting the figures for natural emissions presented in the text from the numbers in the body of the table. 
6.2.3 GDP Assumptions 
Both the energy-related and land-use emission estimates 
are strongly influenced by the assumptions about GDP and 
population growth. Although a detailed analysis of these 
assumptions is outside the scope of this report, the 
following paragraphs highlight some tentative conclusions 
and important issues concerning these assumptions. We 
begin by briefly reviewing the total GDP growth 
assumptions of the IS92 Scenarios. 
The assumptions of the intermediate IS92 Scenarios 
(IS92a and b) are partly based on the reference scenario of 
the Energy and Industry Subgroup of the First IPCC 
Assessment (IPCC-EIS, 1990) for the period up to 2025. 
Near-term growth rates in the IPCC-EIS scenario were 
adjusted downwards in Eastern Europe, CIS and Persian 
Gulf to reflect the consequences of events occurring at the 
beginning of the 1990s. As noted by the developers of the 
IS92 Scenarios (Leggett, et al., 1992), the medium 
assumptions for near-term economic growth are generally 
below or at the low end of the range given by the World 
Bank for 1990-2000 (Table 6.3). In addition, the medium 
assumptions for economic growth in the period 1990-2025 
are lower than most regions experienced from 1965 to 
1989 with the exception of Africa, Eastern Europe and the 
CIS (Table 6.3). For these regions it was assumed that 
structural adjustments will lead to higher than historical 
growth in the medium-term. For the period 2050-2100, all 
the IS92 Scenarios assume that economic growth will slow 
because of saturation of consumption and expected slower 
population growth (Table 6.3). 
Because of the uncertainty of future economic growth 
trends, the low (IS92c) and high (IS92e) estimates span a 
wide range of possibilities. 
The following additional points can be made about the 
GDP growth assumptions of the IS92 Scenarios: 
• 
As noted in Section 6.3, the high and low rates of 
growth of global average GDP in the IS92 Scenarios 
are quite representative of the wide range of views 
expressed in other published scenarios. However. 
somewhat higher and lower global growth rates can 
be found in the literature about energy scenarios. 
• 
With regards to regional results, there are many 
cases in which the IS92 Scenarios are higher or 
lower than any other scenario. In the case of Eastern 
Europe and the CIS, the IS92 Scenarios take into 
account economic restructuring in these regions, bnt 
they assume higher economic growth rates in the 
near term than more recent scenarios. 
• 
Although the medium assumptions of the ISCi: 
Scenarios are lower than historical growth rates, tin.. 
nevertheless imply a substantial increase in / 
capita GDP. For example, in the second half of t 
next century, per capita GDP in East Asia and I.e.; 
America will exceed current levels in OECD Euro, 
Nevertheless, a large gap will remain betwi 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Table 6.3: Growth Assumptions of total GDP (average annual rate) 
26J 
OECD 
USSR/E.Europettt 
China & CP$ Asia 
Other 
Global 
1965 
1989 
32% 
1.3% 
7.6% 
4.7% 
-
World Bankt 
Lowft 
1990 
2000 
2.4% 
32% 
5.6% 
3.8% 
-
Hightt 
1990 
2000 
3.1% 
36% 
6.7% 
4.5% 
-
1990 
2025 
1.8% 
1.5% 
42% 
3.0% 
24% 
IS92c 
1990 
2100 
0.6% 
0.5% 
2.5% 
2.1% 
12% 
IS92a 
1990 
2025 
2.5% 
2.4% 
5.3% 
4.1% 
24% 
1990 
2100 
1.7% 
1.6% 
3.9% 
3.3% 
2.3% 
IS92e 
1990 
2025 
3.0% 
32% 
6.1% 
4.8% 
3.5% 
1990 
2100 
22% 
2.4% 
4.7% 
4.1% 
34% 
Source: Leggett, et al. (1992). 
t 
Source: World Bank (1991). 
ft 
Estimated using projections of regional growth in GDP per capita and country estimates of 
GDP, population and population growth from 1990 to 2000. 
ttt 
World bank data do not include all countries in Eastern Europe. 
| 
CP = Centrally planned economies. 
incomes of developed and developing regions, and 
there is the need to develop emission scenarios 
which assume a closing of this income gap. 
• 
Emission estimates can be improved by GDP 
projections that take into account the economic 
restructuring under way in many regions. 
Summary of the discussion of GDP assumptions: the 
range of total economic growth assumptions of the IS92 
Scenarios is representative of the range of other global 
scenarios. However, these assumptions are not always 
representative on the regional level. The economic growth 
rate assumptions of the IS92 Scenarios are generally lower 
than historical rates, but they would still lead to large 
increases in per capita GDP in all regions. 
6.2.4 Population Assumptions 
The influence of population assumptions on future 
emission estimates is significant. The following can be 
said about the population assumptions of the intermediate 
IS92 Scenarios: 
• 
The medium global assumption of the IS92 Scenarios 
(11.3 billion people in year 2100) is based on the latest 
projection of the World Bank (1991) (Table 6.4). 
• 
For year 2025, the IS92 medium population 
projection is close to the latest medium projections 
of both the UN (1992) and the International Institute 
of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) (Lutz et al., 
1994) (Table 6.4). 
• 
For year 2100 the three medium projections are still 
somewhat close (Table 6.4). 
The projections of the World Bank, UN and IIASA were 
all made using the cohort-component approach to 
demographic projections, but they employed different 
assumptions about changes in demographic variables. 
Hence, it is significant that the medium projections are 
close. Examination of the low and the high population 
assumptions for the IS92 Scenarios indicates that: 
• 
The low and high global assumptions of IS92 
Scenarios (6.4 to 17.6 billion in year 2100) are the 
latest medium-low and medium-high projections of 
the UN (1992) (Table 6.4). (The World Bank did not 
provide high or low projections with its most recent 
medium projections.) 
• 
The low and high projections of IS92 Scenarios are 
the highest and lowest projections of all published 
scenarios reviewed in this report. Hence, for 
emission scenarios, they cover, and expand, the full 
range of views about future population. 
• 
Recent IIASA high projections are close to the high 
projections of the IS92 Scenarios (Table 6.4). The 
low IIASA projection, however, is somewhat above 
the IS92 low projections (Table 6.4). 
Despite the importance of long-term population 
assumptions in estimating future emissions, there have 
been few reviews of these assumptions. In one such 
review, Morita et al. (1993) reviewed the assumptions of 
global models and concluded that a plausible range of 
global population projections for year 2100 was 5.66 to 
19.16 billion people. This range is somewhat lower and 
higher than the range of the IS92 assumptions (Table 6.4). 
The lower bound is from Nordhaus and Yohe (1983), and 

2W 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
the upper bound is the high projection of the UN (1992). 
Morita el al. (1993) point out that fertility rates 
corresponding to the low population projection actually 
occurred in Japan from 1975 to 1985, and rates 
corresponding to the high projection occured during the 
period from 1947 to 1950. From this perspective Morita et 
al. judged that these projections are not implausible. 
Because population growth assumptions strongly 
influence future emission projections, it would be helpful 
to assess their relative likelihood. Unfortunately, this 
assessment is not possible at present because of many 
unresolved issues related to population projections. For 
example, the feasibility of low projections is related to the 
issue of a rapidly ageing population. Lutz et al. (1994) 
pointed out that the IIASA low population projection for 
2100 (the IS92 low projection is even lower; see Table 6.4) 
is based on assumptions about low fertility and mortality 
rates, and these low rates would lead to an unprecedented 
ageing of the population. In its low population projection, 
the percentage of the population over 60 increases in 
industrialised countries from 17.4% to 44.9% between 
1990 and 2100, and in developing countries it increases 
from 6.9% to 40.2%. To judge the likelihood of the low 
population projections of IS92 or any other scenario, it is 
important to assess the response of societies to the 
increasing burden of an ageing population on their social 
welfare systems (see, e.g. Lutz et al. 1994). 
Another critical issue is the relationship between high 
population projections and the Earth's carrying capacity, 
i.e. the ability of societies to provide food and resources 
for their populations. The UN projections do not take this 
concern into account, since mortality rates are never 
assumed to increase even for the highest population 
increases. There is very wide disagreement over the size of 
the Earth's carrying capacity; estimates made since the 
1980s range from 2 billion to over 33 billion people, 
depending on a large variety of assumptions (see review in 
Heilig, 1994). This range can be compared to the IS92 
Table 6.4: Population projections (in millions) 
Source 
1990 
IS92a, b & c from World Bank(1991) 
5,252 
IS92c & d from UN Medium-Low 
5,252 
UN Medium 
5,252 
lS92f from UN Med-High 
5,252 
1IASA Low 
5,252 
1IASA Central 
5,252 
1IASA High 
5,252 
high population assumption of 17.6 billion people in 2100. 
If the low figure for carrying capacity is correct then even 
the current population cannot be sustained, whereas the 
high figure implies that IS92 projections are theoretically 
possible. To judge the feasibility of the high population 
assumptions of the IS92 Scenarios or any scenario, it 
would be beneficial to try and narrow the range of 
estimates about global carrying capacity. 
These are only two of the many issues related to 
demographic studies that require further research and 
understanding before progress can be made in assessing 
the likelihood of different population assumptions. 
Another key issue, the relationship between population and 
GDP per capita is taken up in the next subsection. 
Summary of the discussion of population assumptions: the 
plausibility of the medium population growth assumption 
of the IS92 Scenarios 
is supported 
by other recent 
population projections. The low and high projections of 
the IS92 Scenarios 
cover and expand the range of 
assumptions found in other published scenarios. The IS92 
projections are taken from authoritative projections of 
world population growth and are not inconsistent with 
other recent population projections. However, to assess 
the likelihood of the low and high population assumptions, 
more research is needed to improve our understanding of 
critical issues related to population projections, such as 
carrying capacity and possible fertility responses to 
population ageing. 
6.2.5 The Relationship between GDP per capita and 
Population 
This section reviews the issue of the consistency between 
population and GDP per capita assumptions in the IS92 
Scenarios. This topic was briefly raised by the developers 
of the scenarios themselves (Leggett et al., 1992). The 
IS92 Scenarios combine high population with high GDP 
2025 
8,414 
7,591 
8,472 
9,445 
8,093 
8,955 
9,872 
2100 
11,312 
6,415 
11,186 
17,592 
9,126 
12,562 
16,090 
Source: Lcggett et al. (1992), except 11ASA projections from Lutz et al. (1994). 

An Evaluation of the IPCC1S92 Emission Scenarios 
2AS 
per capita assumptions and low population with low GDP 
per capita assumptions. Although these combinations are 
logical for performing a sensitivity analysis of key input 
assumptions, they also imply that high population growth 
can accompany high economic growth and conversely low 
population growth can accompany low economic growth. 
However, the developers of the scenarios offer the opinion 
that GDP per capita and population are most likely 
negatively correlated (Leggett et al., 1992). 
Actually, there are many opinions about the connection 
between population and GDP per capita. Three of these 
are: 
(i) High population 
growth is compatible 
with high 
economic growth (or low population growth with low 
economic growth). As noted, this opinion is implied, if not 
intended, by the IS92 Scenarios. In support of this view, 
Boserup (1981) argued that a larger population density allows 
for investments in infrastructure and stimulates techno-
logical progress and the growth of financial institutions. 
(ii) Population 
growth is negatively 
correlated 
to 
economic growth. The reasoning behind this argument is 
that improved economic status leads to lower birth rates 
and eventually lower population growth. This belief is 
embedded in conventional 
thinking 
about 
the 
"demographic transition" of societies, which holds that 
fertility in a society goes down as its standard of living 
goes up. A related point of view is that population growth 
leads to resource and capital constraints that in turn reduce 
GDVper capita growth. 
In support of a negative correlation between population 
and GD? per capita, Morita et al. (1994) derived a 
relationship between total fertility rate and per capita 
income from Japanese data from the period 1950 to 1985. 
Applying this relationship globally, they back-calculated 
the annual per capita GDP growth rate that corresponds to 
the population growth rates of the IS92a scenario. In this 
way they estimated that the IS92a Scenario should have an 
effective annual per capita GDP growth rate of 3% rather 
than the 1.7% actually used. Hence, Morita et al. (1994) 
suggest that the population and economic assumptions of 
this scenario may be inconsistent. 
(iii) Population 
growth and economic 
growth 
are 
independent. Recent field surveys in developing countries 
have led demographers to begin to argue that the empirical 
evidence does not support either of the preceding points of 
view, and that the fertility rate in many countries is much 
more clearly related to the educational level of women and 
the existence of family planning programmes than any 
economic indicators (see, e.g., UN, 1987; Lutz 1994; 
Westhoff, 1994). 
As a final comment on this issue, we note that it is 
possible that the relationship between population and 
income can vary between cultures and that the three 
different relationships may actually correspond to different 
stages in a society's development. 
Summary of the discussion of the relationship between 
population and GDP per capita: there are at least three 
points of view about this relationship, and it is beyond the 
scope of this evaluation to pass judgement 
on their 
validity. It is important to note, however, that the issue of 
population and GDP per capita is relevant to judging the 
consistency and likelihood of population and economic 
assumptions, 
which in turn affect future 
emission 
projections. Hence, it would be beneficial to improve our 
understanding of the relationship between population and 
GDP per capita. 
6.3 Comparison of Energy-Related Scenarios 
In this section we compare the IS92 energy-related 
emission scenarios to other published non-intervention 
scenarios. The goal of this comparison is to determine the 
degree to which the IS92 Scenarios reflect the range of 
emissions and major input assumptions found in other 
scenarios at both the global and the regional level. 
We analyse global and regional emissions. Scenarios of 
C02, CH4 and N 20 are examined, although the IS92 
Scenarios consider the full spectrum of greenhouse gases. 
Because of the limited scope of this evaluation, the 
regional analysis is limited to four representative regions: 
China and Centrally Planned Asia, Eastern Europe and the 
former Soviet Union, Africa, and the United States. These 
regions are selected because they are at different stages of 
economic development. 
For global and regional emissions we first assess the 
accuracy of the base year (1990) emission data in 
comparison to the latest emission inventory as described in 
UN energy statistics (Marland et al., 1989 and 1993). 
Next, we compare future emission paths for IS92 to the 
range of emissions of other published non-intervention 
scenarios with similar methodologies and the range 
spanned by the 16th and 84th percentile (median 
plus/minus one standard deviation) of the poll of energy 
scenarios assembled by the International Energy 
Workshop 
(Manne 
et 
al., 
1991; Manne 
and 
Schrattenholzer, 1993, 1994). Finally, we compare the 
main input assumptions and scenario components of the 
IS92 with similar aspects of other published scenarios. 
6.3.1 Global Energy Scenarios 
6.3.1.1 Results from global C02 emission scenarios 
Of all the greenhouse gas emissions, C0 2 is the most 

266 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
studied. Of all the CO, sources, fossil fuel combustion is 
the most studied. This interest arises because fossil fuel 
CO., emissions contribute more to current and potential 
future climate change than any other single gas released by 
any other single human activity. C09 emissions dominate 
the IS92 Scenarios (IPCC, 1992). There is also more 
literature on scenarios of global fossil fuel carbon 
emissions than on those of land-use emissions. This is 
because the models and methods used to estimate energy-
related emissions are more detailed and advanced than 
those used to compute land-use related emissions, and 
because existing energy models can easily be adapted to 
generate C02 emissions. 
It is interesting that the scenarios developed in the past 
decade (beginning in 1983) have a narrower range of 
future emission estimates than those developed in the 
previous decade. Scenarios no longer anticipate emissions 
of greater than 90 GtC/yr in the year 2050, as considered, 
for example, by Siegenthaler and Oeschger (1978), Jason 
(1979), and Bacastow and Keeling (1981). The highest 
estimate of the post 1983 period projects emissions of 35 
GtC/yr in the year 2050, (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990). 
The IS92 scenario estimate of base year (1990) 
emissions, 6 GtC/yr, is close to the estimate of 5.9 GtC/yr 
by Boden et al. (1992) and Marland et al. (1993). 
Estimates for 1990 from other published scenarios range 
from 5.4 GtC/yr to 6.8 GtC/yr. 
Future estimates of emissions diverge substantially with 
time (Figure 6.1) and only resemble each other in that they 
almost all increase with time. A notable exception is the 
IS92c Scenario, which declines from 1990 to 2100. For the 
year 2025, the spread of non-IS92 scenario emissions 
ranges from 6.7 GtC/yr in Ausubel et al. (1988), to 19.8 
GtC/yr in Lashof and Tirpak (1990). The IS92 Scenarios 
range from 7.4 (IS92c) to 13.5 GtC/yr (IS92e). As another 
indication of the range of views of the energy community, 
the 16th and 84th percentile range from the International 
Energy Workshop (IEW) scenario poll is between 6.9 
GtC/yr and 10.9 GtC/yr for the year 2020. 
By the year 2100 the range of non-intervention 
scenarios expands significantly, with the IS92 Scenarios 
extending from 4.6 GtC/yr to 35 GtC/yr, a factor of more 
than seven. The lowest non-IS92 scenario examined is 
given by Ausubel et al. (1988), 1.2 GtC/yr, and the highest 
is given by Ogawa (1990) at 60 GtC/yr, a range of a factor 
of 50. This range also encompasses the range of 12 
reference scenarios compared by the Energy Modelling 
Forum (the "EMF-12" study) (Weyant, 1993). These 
scenarios span from 20 GtC/yr (Global-Macro) to 43 
GtC/yr (CETA). The EMF-12 results are particularly 
60 -i 
9 
c o 
(/) 
CO 
"E 
m 
o 
•g 'I 
•o c o 
•s 
CO 
O 
4 0 -
2 0 -
0-L 
2000 
2050 
Year 
2100 
Higher assumed 
GNP or population 
growth or energy 
and carbon intensity 
Lower assumed 
GNP or population 
growth or energy 
and carbon intensity 
Figure 6.1: Energy-related global CO, emissions for various scenarios. Shaded area indicates coverage of IS92 Scenarios. Number-
correspond to list of scenarios in the Supplementary Table. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
267 
0 3 6 B 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 61 84 87 90 
Rang* (Qt C/yr) 
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 61 64 67 90 
Ring* <Qt C/yr) 
0 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 46 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81 84 87 9 
Rangt (at C/yr) 
Figure 6.2: Histograms depicting distribution of different 
scenario estimates of energy-related global C02 emissions for 
three scenario years. 
2000 
Year 
2100 
Figure 63: Results from uncertainty analyses showing 5th and 
9th percentile of global CO, emissions. Also shown are IS92 
estimates (code numbers beginning with "1"), with their range 
indicated by the shaded area (IS92 results are not from 
uncertainty analysis). Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in 
the Supplementary Table. 
interesting because they were obtained from models with 
harmonised input assumptions about population and 
economic activity. Consequently, these results highlight 
how future emission estimates can vary because of 
differences in models and in input assumptions. 
Histograms of projected emissions (Figure 6.2) show 
that emission estimates are relatively closely clustered in 
the year 2020, but also diverge subsequently. The 
frequency of the mode also becomes smaller and smaller 
with time, indicating that the scenarios agree less and less 
about the central estimate of emissions. The interval that 
contains each of the IS92 cases is also indicated, and 
shows that the IS92 Scenarios bracket a majority of other 
scenarios, but never capture their full range. This 
observation is particularly apt for the year 2100. 
Throughout the period, there are always scenarios with 
substantially more or less fossil fuel carbon emissions than 
the IS92 Scenarios. 
Additional information about the range of future 
emissions can be obtained by examining results from 
detailed uncertainty analyses. These were conducted by 
Nordhaus and Yohe (1983), Edmonds el al. (1986), Manne 
and Richels (1993), and de Vries et al. (1994). 
It is noteworthy that despite the enormous range of 
results produced by the uncertainty analyses (Figure 6.3), 
emissions almost always increase with time, with the 
exception of the extremes of results. The uncertainty 
analysis of Edmonds et al. (1986) shows a range of 2 GtC 
and 87 GtC/yr for the 5th and 95th percentile cases 
respectively in the year 2075, and a range of 4 GtC to 27 
GtC/yr between the 25th and 75th percentiles. The 
uncertainty analysis of Nordhaus and Yohe (1983) spans 
the range 12 GtC to 27 GtC/yr for the year 2100 between 
its 25th and 75th percentiles, and 7 GtC to 55 GtC/yr 
between its 5th and 95th percentile cases. 
It should be emphasised that these results stem from 
differences among models and uncertainties about input 
assumptions, such as population and economic activity. By 
comparison, when input assumptions are fixed between 
scenarios, a much lower range of emission estimates is 
found. For example, it was noted above that when key 
model inputs were harmonised in the EMF-12 scenarios, 
emission estimates in year 2100 varied by only a factor of 
two rather than over a factor of 40, as found in the 
uncertainty studies. This finding is consistent with the 
recent results of de Vries et al. (1994), who only assigned 
uncertainty to model input parameters, while fixing other 
input assumptions such as population and economic 
growth relative to a base case. As a consequence, they 
computed emission estimates for the year 2050 ranging by 
only a factor of about two, from 11.3 GtC to 24.4 GtC/yr 
(5th and 95th percentiles). 
Although published energy-related emission estimates 
for 2100 vary by a factor of 50 between the highest and 

266 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
CUMULATIVE CARBON EMISSIONS 
3500 
3000 
2500 
IPCC range 
Range of non-IPCC 
reference scenarios 
• 
: 
I 
J Range of policy scenarios 
2000 -
o 
5 1500 -
500 
1950 
2100 
Figure 6.4: Range of cumulative energy-related CO^ emissions 
from IS92 and other published scenarios. 
lowest reference scenarios and by a factor more than 7 in 
the IS92 Scenarios, cumulative emissions have a much 
smaller variation. The cumulative emissions of the 
published scenarios over the period 1990 to 2100 (Figure 
6.4) vary by a factor 7 (from 492 GtC in Ausubel et al., 
1988, to 3447 GtC in Lashof and Tirpak, 1990). The 
cumulative emissions of the IS92 Scenarios vary by a 
factor of 3 between IS92c (700 GtC) and IS92e (2078 
GtC).1 
The above cumulative emission figures can also be 
compared to the cumulative energy related carbon 
emissions between 1860 to 1990 of about 215 GtC 
(Marland et al., 1989; 1PCC, 1990; Nakicenovic et al, 
1993). Thus, even the lowest reference and policy 
scenarios indicate that more energy related carbon will be 
emitted from 1990 to 2100, than in the last 130 years. 
It is important to note that cumulative emissions are not 
equivalent to the accumulation of carbon in the 
atmosphere. The relationship between emissions and 
atmospheric accumulation is described by carbon cycle 
models which are discussed in the IPCC Working Group I 
report. Carbon cycle models can be used to translate any 
time profile of carbon emissions into a corresponding time 
profile of atmospheric concentrations of CO-,. In a 
modelling exercise of this type, Working Group I of the 
IPCC estimated that the IS92c scenario could raise 
atmospheric CO-, levels to 480 ppmv by 2100 from 
approximately 350 ppmv in 1990. 
We also note that a few scenarios, for example Cline 
and Manne and Richels (1994), have explored emissions 
1 The cumulative emissions of policy scenarios are obviously 
lower, ranging from 290 GtC (Lazarus et al.. 1993) to 600 GtC 
(Lashof and Tirpak. 1990) in the scenarios reviewed. 
over even longer time periods. These cases extend beyond 
the time frame of the IS92 Scenarios, but we have not 
examined the implications of these scenarios beyond the 
year 2100. We note that cumulative emissions in these 
scenarios may be significantly greater than the cases 
examined in this report. These scenarios consider depletion 
of all available oil, gas and coal. The magnitude and 
distribution of these fuels is discussed in the chapter on 
energy supply mitigation in the IPCC Working Group II 
report. 
Summary of the discussion of results of global energv-
related CO-, scenarios: the scenarios diverge with time and 
almost all have an upward trend. Their range is much 
narrower in 2020 and 2050 than in 2100. The IS92 
Scenarios follow the same pattern, and fall within the 
range of the majority of published scenarios. The lowest 
and highest published scenarios reviewed in this report 
vary by a factor of 50 in 2100. Much of this large range, 
however, can be attributed to the wide range of input 
assumptions , such as economic activity, end-use energy 
intensity and the energy supply mix. The range of estimates 
for cumulative emissions between 1990 and 2100 is much 
narrower than for annual emissions (a factor of 7 versus a 
6.3.1.2 Components of global CO? scenarios 
The limited scope of this report makes it impossible to 
carefully examine and compare all the input assumptions 
of the published scenarios. Instead, selected energy-related 
scenarios are compared by breaking down the calculated 
emissions into different components: 
CO, Emissions = Population*(GDP/Population) 
(Energy/GDP)*(C02/Energy) 
In this equation, the ratio "Energy/GDP" represents 
energy intensity (primary energy consumed/unit of GDP). 
Energy intensity data are indexed to 1990 data because of 
the lack of comparability of GNP/GDP data in different 
studies. The ratio "C02/Energy" is the carbon intensity 
(carbon emissions/unit of primary energy consumed I. 
which reflects the amounts of carbon-based fuels used in 
the energy economy. Carbon intensity is given as kg C (il 
Such an approach for analysing the components >l 
future CO-, emissions has been proposed by Kaya (1° •') 
and applied by Edmonds and Barns (1992), Ogawa (1,! ' i 
and Grubier et al. (1993) among others. 
The decomposition of CO, emission growth into ' e 
four components provides an accounting of the sources ; 
future emissions. The decomposition is useful becaus* 
indicates where to look for differences in seen;/ 
assumptions that may account for differences in projci 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
emissions. Decomposition, however, neither identifies the 
key assumptions nor provides an explanation of the 
fundamental causes of differences in emission projections. 
Decomposition is also useful because it coincides with 
four broad areas of public policy concern that can 
potentially influence future emissions: demographics, 
economic growth and development, energy conservation, 
and energy supply. 
Population and per capita income growth are an input 
assumptions in most models. Typically, energy intensity is 
partly specified and partly computed by the model. Carbon 
intensity is usually determined by the interaction of a 
variety of assumptions, including those concerning 
availability and cost of fossil energy resources, relative 
fuel prices, and the availability and cost of renewable 
energies. 
Two additional caveats should be noted. First, for the 
purposes of this comparison, all components, not just 
population and income, are treated as independent of one 
another. This assumption may be inconsistent with some 
models which assume that components, such as per capita 
income and energy intensity are related to one another. 
Second, the influence of some components on emissions 
may depend on the aggregation level of the analysis 
(global versus regional or national). Hence, an analysis of 
the components of emissions on the global level may mask 
decisive differences between regions. For this reason, the 
component analysis should only be used to compare the 
input assumptions and the results of different scenarios, 
not, for example, to project emissions on the basis of 
population growth in different regions. 
Table 6.5 shows the growth rates of components of 
selected scenarios, including the IS92 Scenarios to 2020'. 
A I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
i 
I 
u 2000 
2100 
Year 
Figure 6.5: Trends of energy intensity for various global 
scenarios. Shaded area indicates range of IS92 scenarios. 
Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the Supplementary 
Table. 
269 
ni 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
u 2000 
2100 
Year 
Figure 6.6: Trends of carbon intensity for various global 
scenarios. Shaded area indicates range of IS92 scenarios. 
Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the Supplementary 
Tabic. 
The IS92 Scenarios are in most instances within the range 
of the alternative scenarios, although they arc not always 
representative of the range. They span a representative 
range of global economic growth rates, but the population 
growth assumptions of IS92c and d are lower and those of 
IS92f are higher than any of the published scenarios. 
Population and GDP were discussed in Section 6.2 and 
will not be discussed further here. 
Figures 6.5 and 6.6 depict the ranges of energy intensity 
and carbon intensity for published global scenarios. It is 
noteworthy that all the scenarios reviewed show 
decreasing energy intensities, with a median decrease of 
about I %/yr. The IS92 Scenarios fall within the range of a 
majority of published scenarios, although they cover a 
narrower range, especially up to 2020.2 
Most scenarios assume that carbon intensity decreases at 
a lower rate than energy intensity (Figure 6.6); in some 
cases the carbon intensity increases, indicating increased 
use of carbon-rich fuels such as synthetic fossil fuels or 
coal (Table 6.5). However, on average, carbon intensity in 
the non-intervention scenarios decreases at a rate of about 
0.2%/yr (1990 to 2020 average), a rate that is somewhat 
lower than the long-term historical average of 0.3%/yr 
(Nakicenovic et al., 1993). Up to 2020, the rate of decline 
of carbon intensity assumed in the IS92 Scenarios agrees 
1 For an analysis of the period beyond 2020, see Grubler (1994). 
2 There is a significant overlap, particularly before 2020, 
between the ranges of reference and policy scenarios, although 
the policy scenarios are generally lower. 

270 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
with the IEW poll and other reference scenarios. However, 
all the IS92 Scenarios have declining carbon intensities. 
Beyond the year 2020, the range of published reference 
scenarios shows a much wider variation than the IS92 
cases. In some non-IS92 Scenarios, carbon intensities 
increase with time owing to a rapid expansion in coal 
production and use, a case not considered in the IS92 
Scenarios.' 
The decomposition of global emissions of the IS92 and 
the non-IS92 emissions tell a generally consistent story 
about the sources of emission growth and the uncertainty 
of future emissions. In all scenarios, population growth 
and per capita income growth contribute to rising global 
CO-, emissions over time. Growing world population and 
incomes increase the consumption of energy, giving rise to 
higher emissions. The relative contribution of per capita 
income growth to global C0 2 emissions is slightly greater 
than the contribution of population growth in most but not 
all scenarios. 
Decreases in energy intensity mitigate emission growth 
in all scenarios, which is consistent with historical 
observations. With a decrease in energy intensity, energy 
consumption for a given population and per capita income 
declines. Consequently, carbon emissions also decline. 
Declining energy intensity offsets roughly one-fifth to one-
half of the effects of population and per capita income 
growth, depending on the scenario. The IS92 Scenarios 
reflect a much narrower range of changes in future energy 
intensity than other scenarios. This narrower range is the 
most important source of the narrower range of carbon 
emissions displayed in the IS92 Scenarios relative to the 
range of emissions in other published scenarios. 
Carbon intensity is projected to decline in all IS92 
Scenarios and the vast majority of other scenarios, further 
mitigating the effects of growing population and per capita 
incomes. This decline reflects a shift toward greater 
reliance on energy resources that emit less carbon per unit 
of energy. The offset from declining carbon intensity is 
typically much less than the offset from declining energy 
intensity. As in the case of energy intensity, the IS92 
Scenarios display a narrower range of changes in carbon 
intensity relative to other scenarios. A small number of 
non-IS92 Scenarios allow for the possibility of increases in 
carbon intensity over time, adding another source of 
emission growth. This possibility is not allowed for in any 
of the IS92 Scenarios. 
The decomposition of C0 2 emission growth into the 
1 Carbon intensities assumed in policy scenarios are generally 
lower than those assumed in the IS92 Scenarios and other non-
intervention scenarios, although some reference scenarios have 
quite low carbon intensities as in the case of the "methane 
economy" of Ausubel et al. (1988). 
components of population growth, per capita income 
growth, energy intensity and carbon intensity identifies the 
general sources of emission growth from energy use, but 
the decomposition does not explain why the contributions 
of the four components differ across scenarios. To 
understand the fundamental causes of differences in 
emissions from one scenario to the next, it is necessary to 
explore and evaluate differences in assumptions regarding 
the factors that determine growth in population, per capita 
income, energy intensity and carbon intensity. 
In most emission scenarios, population and per capita 
income growth, or their composite effect on total income, 
are input assumptions. These input assumptions are 
important sources of differences in projected emissions. 
However, the determinants of population and per capita 
income growth, and feedbacks between them are not 
explicitly incorporated into emission scenarios (see section 
6.2). Identifying the factors influencing population and per 
capita income growth, and exploring the uncertainties 
regarding their change over time, are therefore important 
research tasks. 
The input assumptions that drive differences in energy 
and carbon intensity across scenarios include different 
estimates of the reserves and supply costs of carbon and 
non-carbon-emitting energy resources; the income and 
price elasticities of household demands for energy, the 
production of energy-intensive goods and services, and 
many others. A particularly important component is 
technological change at both levels of energy production 
and energy end use. Because of time limitations, 
differences in assumptions regarding factors that influence 
energy and carbon intensity have not been compared 
across scenarios. Consequently, another important task to 
explore the causes of differences in energy intensity and 
carbon intensity trends and their role in shaping future 
emissions. 
Summary of the discussion of the components of global 
CO2 emissions, especially for energy and carbon intensity: 
the energy intensity assumptions of the IS92 Scenarios 
have a narrower range than similar assumptions in other 
published scenarios. The carbon intensity assumptions of 
the IS92 Scenarios all show a downward trend, but some 
of the published 
scenarios assume an upward trend 
(although most show an eventual decrease over time). An 
important task for new scenario work is to explore future 
trends for energy and carbon intensity. 
6.3.2 Regional C02 Scenarios 
The background report for the IS92 Scenarios gives resu -
for four regions: OECD, Eastern Europe and the Fori 
Soviet Union, China and Centrally Planned Asia, and : 
Rest of the World (Pepper et al., 1992). The original IS 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
271 
Table 6.5:1990 to 2020 - World average annual growth rates1 (%/yr) for selected non-intervention 
(reference) 
scenarios 
and range for intervention (policy) 
scenarios. 
Non-intervention 
scenarios3 
POP 
GDP 
capita 
GDP 
Energy 
GDP 
Carbon 
energy 
Carbon 
emissions 
1-1 IS92a 
1-2 IS92b 
1-3 IS92c 
1-4 IS92d 
1-5 IS92e 
1-6 IS92f 
8-4 IPCC-EIS 
20-3 IEW-84%2 
20-2 IEW-50%2 
20-4 IEW-16%2 
18 ECS'92 
6-1 CH4-efficiency 
16-1 CHALLENGE 
31-2 WEC A 
31-1 WECB 
3-1 E&RB 
7-1 EPA-SCW 
7-2 EPA-RCW 
12-2 GREEN 
30-112RT 
27-2 IMAGE 2.0-CW 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
1.40 
1.40 
1.10 
1.10 
1.40 
1.75 
1.24 
1.42 
1.29 
1.43 
1.43 
1.13 
1.43 
1.29 
1.40 
1.10 
1.40 
1.35 
1.75 
1.53 
1.53 
0.92 
1.75 
2.29 
1.36 
1.74 
0.78 
0.83 
2.36 
1.85 
1.68 
0.35 
1.35 
1.61 
0.35 
1.53 
1.46 
2.36 
2.92 
2.92 
2.00 
2.83 
3.71 
3.10 
3.00 
3.36 
2.78 
2.46 
2.21 
2.13 
2.55 
3.82 
3.30 
2.85 
1.79 
2.65 
2.71 
2.50 
3.00 
1.79 
2.83 
2.79 
3.82 
-0.97 
-1.08 
-0.86 
-1.10 
-1.16 
-0.85 
-0.80 
-0.75 
-1.16 
-1.71 
-0.75 
-0.78 
-0.94 
-1.50 
-1.84 
-1.03 
-0.72 
-0.70 
-0.53 
-0.99 
-0.56 
-1.84 
-0.94 
-0.99 
-0.53 
-0.24 
-0.26 
-0.55 
-0.68 
-0.11 
-0.03 
0.05 
0.05 
-0.18 
-0.67 
-0.16 
-0.85 
-0.18 
-0.01 
-0.22 
-0.23 
-0.07 
0.04 
0.14 
0.00 
-0.25 
-0.85 
-0.18 
-0.21 
0.14 
1.68 
1.54 
0.56 
1.00 
2.39 
2.19 
2.23 
1.95 
1.44 
0.63 
1.28 
0.47 
1.41 
2.25 
1.17 
1.54 
0.98 
1.98 
2.31 
1.49 
2.20 
0.47 
1.54 
1.56 
2.39 
Policy Scenarios 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
1.17 
1.29 
1.32 
1.43 
0.35 
1.35 
1.37 
2.19 
1.79 
2.65 
2.66 
3.50 
-2.40 
-1.78 
-1.74 
-1.08 
-1.94 
-1.19 
-1.16 
-0.52 
-1.31 
-0.32 
-0.29 
0.24 
1 Component growth rates do not add exactly to (sub)totals due to independent rounding errors. 
2 Component growth rates do not add as calculated from original frequency distributions. 
3 Reference for scenarios given in the Supplementary Table. 
BOLD denotes IPCC Scenarios 

272 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission Scenarios 
Table 6.6: 1990 to 2020 - China and centrally planned Asia average annual growth rates1 (%/yr) for selected non-
intervention (reference) scenarios and range from intervention (policy) 
scenarios 
Non-intervention 
scenarios3 
POP 
GDP 
capita 
GDP 
Energy 
GDP 
Carbon 
energy 
Carbon 
emissions 
1-1 IS92a 
1-2 IS92b 
1-3 IS92c 
1-4 IS92d 
1-5 IS92e 
1-6 IS92f 
8-4 IPCC-EIS 
20-3 IEW-84%2 
20-2 lEW-50%2 
20-4 IEW-16%2 
18 ECS '92 
33-2 ESCAPE SI 
37 Heetal. (c) 
31-2 WEC A 
31-1 WECB 
3-1 E&RB 
7-1 EPA-SCW 
7-2 EPA-RCW 
12-2 GREEN 
30-1 12RT 
27-2 IMAGE 2.0-CW 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
1.03 
1.03 
0.69 
0.69 
1.03 
1.31 
0.78 
0.97 
0.68 
0.94 
0.94 
0.91 
0.90 
1.02 
1.02 
0.67 
0.94 
0.93 
L31 
3.91 
3.91 
2.98 
4.09 
4.83 
3.75 
4.49 
2.01 
3.96 
5.07 
4.08 
2.34 
2.25 
4.11 
4.15 
2.01 
3.91 
3.73 
5.07 
4.98 
4.98 
3.70 
4.81 
5.91 
5.12 
5.30 
5.74 
4.79 
3.88 
3.00 
5.50 
4.67 
6.06 
5.06 
3.28 
3.17 
5.17 
4.40 
4.03 
5.21 
3.00 
4.90 
4.66 
6.06 
-1.73 
-1.73 
-1.61 
-1.88 
-2.00 
-1.57 
-2.44 
-0.96 
-1.61 
-2.49 
-1.02 
-1.42 
-1.60 
-2.85 
-2.40 
-0.22 
-0.81 
-1.21 
-0.27 
-1.36 
-0.82 
-2.85 
-1.59 
-1.52 
-0.22 
-0.32 
-0.32 
-0.51 
-0.57 
-0.21 
-0.22 
0.30 
-0.29 
-0.38 
-0.38 
-0.18 
-0.20 
-0.34 
-0.24 
-0.03 
-0.52 
-0.58 
-0.47 
0.25 
-0.38 
-0.21 
-0.58 
-0.30 
-0.28 
0.30 
2.84 
2.84 
1.51 
2.25 
3.57 
3.24 
3.04 
3.15 
2.77 
233 
1.76 
3.78 
2.75 
2.79 
2.51 
2.52 
1.74 
3.41 
4.38 
2.22 
4.13 
1.51 
2.85 
2.83 
4.38 
Policy Scenarios 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
0.81 
0.94 
0.94 
1.02 
2.25 
4.08 
3.70 
4.11 
2.34 
4.48 
4.24 
5.17 
-4.32 
-1.89 
-2.24 
-0.53 
-1.72 
-1.06 
-1.03 
-0.52 
-0.82 
7.24 
0.86 
2.2P 
1 Component growth rates do not add exactly to (sub)totals due to independent rounding errors. 
2 Component growth rates do not add as calculated from original frequency distributions. 
3 Reference for scenarios given in the Supplementary Table. 
BOLD denotes IPCC scenarios 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
273 
Table 6.7:1990 to 2020 - Eastern Europe and ex-USSR average annual growth rates' (%/yr) for selected non-
intervention (reference) scenarios and range from intervention (policy) 
scenarios. 
Non-intervention 
scenarios3 
POP 
GDP 
capita 
GDP 
Energy 
GDP 
Carbon 
energy 
Carbon 
emissions 
1-1 IS92a 
1-2 IS92b 
1-3 IS92c 
1-4 IS92d 
1-5 IS92e 
1-6 IS92f 
8-4 IPCC-EIS 
20-3 IEW-84%2 
20-2 IEW-50%2 
20-4 IEW-16%2 
18 ECS'92 
34-1 Bashmakov Base 
35-1 Sinyakera/. DAU 
31-2 WEC A 
31-1 WEC B 
3-1 E&RB 
7-1 EPA-SCW 
7-2 EPA-SCW 
12-2 GREEN 
30-112RT 
27-2 IMAGE 2.0-CW 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
0.43 
0.43 
0.31 
0.31 
0.43 
0.67 
0.70 
0.49 
0.58 
0.56 
0.52 
0.52 
0.48 
0.52 
0.45 
0.43 
0.31 
0.48 
0.49 
0.70 
1.49 
1.49 
0.95 
1.88 
2.83 
1.73 
2.49 
2.18 
0.77 
1.44 
1.85 
1.85 
1.62 
1.73 
3.80 
1.48 
0.77 
1.73 
1.85 
3.80 
1.93 
1.93 
1.26 
2.21 
3.27 
2.31 
3.20 
2.98 
2.16 
1.51 
2.68 
1.36 
2.00 
2.38 
2.38 
2.11 
2.27 
4.27 
2.51 
2.29 
1.91 
1.26 
2.29 
2.63 
4.25 
-0.66 
-0.66 
-0.69 
-1.03 
-1.37 
-0.88 
-1.14 
-1.06 
-1.42 
-2.01 
-1.52 
-0.93 
-1.09 
-1.81 
-2.13 
-1.07 
-1.29 
-2.97 
-0.63 
-2.00 
0.72 
-2.97 
-1.12 
-1.17 
0.72 
-0.24 
-0.24 
-0.50 
-0.67 
-0.19 
-0.13 
-0.17 
-0.34 
-0.36 
-0.41 
-0.24 
-0.05 
-0.41 
-0.62 
-0.38 
-0.40 
-0.17 
-0.16 
0.32 
-0.29 
-1.62 
-1.62 
-0.23 
-0.29 
0.32 
1.01 
1.01 
0.06 
0.48 
1.67 
1.28 
1.84 
0.46 
0.07 
-0.25 
0.88 
0.37 
0.49 
-0.10 
-0.18 
0.61 
0.78 
1.01 
2.19 
-0.05 
0.99 
-0.25 
0.61 
0.76 
2.42 
Policy Scenarios 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
0.37 
0.52 
0.50 
0.58 
0.77 
1.85 
2.26 
3.80 
1.36 
2.38 
2.68 
4.27 
-4.01 
-2.41 
-2.59 
-1.45 
-1.96 
-1.24 
-1.15 
-0.21 
-1.79 
•1.34 
-1.13 
-0.25 
1 Component growth rates do not add exactly to (sub)totals due to independent rounding errors. 
2 Component growth rates do not add as calculated from original frequency distributions. 
3 References for scenarios given in the Supplementary Table. 
BOLD denotes IPCC scenarios 

274 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission Scenarios 
Table 6.8:1990-2020 
- Africa average annual growth rates1 (%/yr) for selected non-intervention 
(reference) scenarios 
and range from intervention (policy) 
scenarios 
Non-intervention 
scenarios4 
POP 
GDP 
capita 
GDP 
Energy 
GDP 
Carbon 
energy 
Carbon 
emissions 
1-1 IS92a 
1-2 IS92b 
1-3 IS92c 
1-4 IS92d 
1-5 IS92e 
1-6 IS92f 
8-4 IPCC-EIS 
20-3 IEW-84%2 
20-2 IEW-50%2 
20-4 IEW-16%2 
38-1 UNEP base 
31-2 WEC A 
31-1 WECB 
3-1 E&RB 
7-1 EPA-SCW 
7-2 EPA-RCW 
27-2 IMAGE 2.0-CW 
Minimum3 
Median3 
Average3 
Maximum3 
2.63 
2.63 
2.20 
2.20 
2.63 
3.03 
2.42 
1.86 
2.94 
2.94 
1.56 
2.72 
2.42 
2.63 
1.56 
2.63 
2.49 
3.03 
1.25 
1.25 
0.40 
1.46 
2.11 
1.06 
1.55 
2.53 
2.98 
2.00 
2.29 
0.01 
1.71 
1.25 
0.01 
1.50 
1.56 
2.98 
3.92 
3.92 
2.60 
3.69 
4.80 
4.12 
4.00 
3.82 
3.64 
3.45 
4.44 
6.00 
5.00 
3.89 
2.73 
4.17 
3.92 
2.60 
3.92 
4.00 
6.00 
0.26 
0.26 
0.40 
0.09 
0.17 
0.51 
-0.48 
-0.52 
-0.28 
-0.63 
-1.40 
-0.58 
-1.67 
-1.46 
-0.17 
-0.10 
0.53 
-1.67 
-0.17 
-0.30 
0.53 
-0.21 
-0.21 
-0.39 
-0.44 
-0.19 
-0.12 
0.46 
0.10 
-0.17 
-0.09 
0.47 
1.17 
0.26 
0.07 
0.86 
0.72 
-0.16 
-0.44 
-0.09 
0.13 
1.17 
198 
3.98 
2.61 
3.32 
4.78 
4.53 
3.99 
3.33 
3.28 
3.06 
3.46 
6.61 
3.51 
2.44 
3.45 
4.81 
4.30 
2.44 
3.51 
3.85 
6.61 
Policy Scenarios 
Minimum3 
Median3 
Mean3 
Maximum3 
1.86 
2.57 
2.51 
2.94 
0.01 
1.71 
1.53 
2.53 
2.73 
4.15 
4.08 
5.00 
-2.19 
-1.46 
-1.31 
-0.30 
-4.01 
-1.13 
-1.47 
-0.11 
-0.31 
1.25 
1.21 
2.43 
1 Component growth rates do not add exactly to (sub)totals due to independent rounding errors. 
2 Refers to non-OPEC developing countries. Component growth rates do not add as calculated from 
original frequency distributions. 
3 Component growth rates do not add as calculated from original frequency distributions. 
4 References for scenarios given in the Supplementary Table. 
BOLD denotes IPCC scenarios 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
275 
Table 6.9:1990-2020 
- USA average annual growth rates1 (%/yr) for selected non-intervention 
(reference) 
scenarios 
and range from intervention (policy) 
scenarios. 
Non-intervention 
scenarios3 
POP 
GDP 
capita 
GDP 
Energy 
GDP 
Carbon 
energy 
Carbon 
emissions 
1-1 IS92a 
1-2 IS92b 
1-3 IS92c 
1-4 IS92d 
1-5 IS92e 
1-6 IS92f 
8-4 IPCC-EIS 
20-3 IEW-84%2 
20-2 IEW-50%2 
20-4 IEW-16%2 
18 ECS '92 
16-1 CHALLENGE 
36-1 EMF 12 (lowest) 
36-2 EMF 12 (highest) 
31-2 WEC A 
31-1 WECB 
3-1 E&RB 
7-1 EPA-SCW 
7-2 EPA-RCW 
32 NES 
12-2 GREEN 
30-112RT 
27-2 IMAGE 2.0-CW 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
0.57 
0.57 
0.22 
0.22 
0.57 
0.90 
0.56 
0.54 
0.56 
0.56 
0.51 
0.53 
0.43 
0.56 
0.22 
0.56 
0.52 
0.90 
2.33 
2.33 
1.72 
2.45 
2.91 
2.09 
0.90 
1.09 
1.83 
1.83 
1.63 
1.13 
2.23 
2.33 
0.90 
1.96 
1.91 
2.91 
2.91 
2.91 
1.94 
2.67 
3.49 
3.00 
1.46 
2.36 
2.20 
2.03 
1.63 
1.28 
2.20 
2.20 
2.40 
2.40 
2.15 
1.67 
2.64 
2.08 
2.27 
2.20 
2.91 
1.28 
2.20 
2.31 
3.49 
-1.81 
-1.81 
-1.59 
-1.94 
-1.98 
-1.62 
-0.20 
-0.88 
-0.96 
-1.18 
-1.21 
-0.66 
-1.38 
-1.04 
-1.94 
-2.08 
-1.09 
-1.29 
-1.83 
-0.32 
-0.97 
-1.06 
-2.17 
-2.17 
-1.29 
-1.35 
-0.20 
-0.26 
-0.26 
-0.63 
-0.88 
-0.11 
0.00 
0.16 
0.29 
0.24 
-0.22 
-0.25 
0.03 
-0.24 
0.13 
-0.44 
-0.40 
0.22 
0.00 
0.02 
-0.12 
-0.05 
0.16 
-0.22 
-0.88 
-0.11 
-0.12 
0.29 
0.78 
0.78 
-0.31 
-0.21 
1.34 
1.34 
1.42 
1.37 
1.24 
0.80 
0.15 
0.80 
0.49 
1.24 
-0.02 
-0.13 
1.26 
0.35 
0.81 
1.63 
1.23 
1.28 
0.46 
-0J1 
0.80 
0.79 
1.63 
Policy Scenarios 
Minimum2 
Median2 
Mean2 
Maximum2 
0.43 
0.53 
0.51 
0.56 
1.04 
1.83 
1.69 
2.23 
1.19 
2.14 
2.08 
2.67 
-2.88 
-1.91 
-1.87 
-0.66 
-2.98 
-1.13 
-1.18 
-0.53 
-2.30 
-0.97 
-1.08 
0.73 
1 Component growth rates do not add exactly to (sub)totals due to independent rounding errors. 
2 Component growth rates do not add as calculated from original frequency distributions. 
3 Reference for scenarios given in the Supplementary Table. 
BOLD, denotes IPCC scenarios 

276 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission Scenarios 
REGIONAL CARBON EMISSION SCENARIOS 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
O 
S 4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE AND 
FORMER SOVIET UNION 
_l 
I 
L 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
am 
IEW range 
IPCC range 
o 
34 
EMF-12 range 
CHINA & 
CENTRALLY PLANNED ASIA 
1990 
2020 
2050 
2100 
Year 
Range of non-IPCC 
reference scenarios 
J Range of policy scene-•is 
Figure 6.7: Range of regional CO^ emissions from IS92 and other published scenarios. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
277 
analysis, however, was conducted for nine regions. For our 
analysis we use the following regions: China and Centrally 
Planned Asia, Central and Eastern Europe and the former 
Soviet Union (EEFSU), Africa, and the United States of 
America (USA). These regions were selected because they 
are at different stages of economic and demographic 
development. The USA was selected because there are a 
large number of published scenarios for this region. 
Only C02 emissions are analysed because the literature 
contains few non-C02 regional scenarios. The main 
components of the different scenarios from 1990 to 2020 
are given in Tables 6.5 to 6.9 and Figures 6.7 to 6.9. 
6.3.2.1 China and Centrally Planned Asia 
The carbon emissions of the IS92 Scenarios are within the 
range of the other reference scenarios. However, their 
underlying driving forces are not representative of other 
published scenarios. The IS92 Scenarios assume GDP 
increases that are on the high side of the other scenarios, 
and their range of assumptions about energy intensity and 
carbon intensity for China is both narrower and lower than 
the range in other scenarios. 
Figure 6.7 shows the range of carbon emission scenarios 
up to the year 2100. The IS92a, IS92b, IS92d and IS92f 
scenarios are well within the 16th to 84th percentile range 
of the IEW poll for 2020. The IS92a is close to the IEW 
poll median and consequently can be considered as a 
"middle of the road" scenario. Conversely both IS92e and 
IS92c expand the range of all other long-term (2100) 
emission scenarios reviewed. IS92e is the highest, and 
IS92c is the lowest of all reference scenarios analysed. 
Analysis of the components in the growth of carbon 
emissions (Table 6.6) indicates the importance of 
economic and population growth assumptions followed by 
decreases in energy intensity. By 2100 IS92e assumes the 
highest and IS92c the lowest GDP growth rates of all 
scenarios reviewed. In all scenarios the intensity of energy 
use decreases typically by about 1.5%/yr in reference cases 
and well above 2% in policy cases (Figure 6.8). The 
resulting improvements in energy efficiency across all 
scenarios are large, but within the range of both historical 
experience and calculations of the theoretical minimum 
requirements derived from energy analysis (cf. 
Nakicenovic et al., 1993). The IS92 Scenarios have a 
narrower range of assumed energy intensities than other 
scenarios. Most scenarios also anticipate further 
decarbonisation of the energy system, i.e. a decrease in 
carbon intensity of 0.2 to 0.5%/yr (Figure 6.9). The IS92 
range is lower than other reference scenarios (cf. the IEW 
poll). Indeed, the low carbon intensities assumed in IS92c, 
IS92d and IS92e for China in the years after 2050 are more 
characteristic of policy scenarios than non-intervention 
scenarios. 
6.3.2.2 Eastern Europe and former USSR (EEESU) 
The IS92 Scenarios do not fully capture current 
perceptions about trends in energy-related emissions in 
EEFSU in the medium term (up to 2020). First, the IS92 
base year (1990) emission estimate (1.7 GtC/yr ) exceeds 
by 30% the most recent estimate based on UN energy 
statistics (1.304 GtC/yr) (Marland et «/., 1993). Second, 
the assumptions in the 1S92 Scenarios about high growth 
rates (particularly for GDP) are probably unrealistic 
considering the current economic crisis in the region. 
These assumptions lead to medium term estimates of CO-, 
emissions in the IS92 Scenarios that are higher and 
narrower in range than the estimates in other published 
scenarios (Figure 6.7). The range of IS92 Scenarios in 
2020 span from 1.8 GtC/yr to 3.0 GtC/yr, whereas the 
more recent IEW poll spans a range of 1 to 1.6 GtC/yr by 
2020. Because of uncertainty in economic trends, the range 
of medium-term emission estimates in the literature 
(Figure 6.7) is perhaps the largest of any region. 
Most long-term scenarios (including IS92) represent 
more or less a pre-1990 "business as usual" point of view, 
and that does not fully take into account the economic 
crisis in EEFSU. By 2100 the published scenarios have a 
range that differs by a factor of eight. One reason for this 
wide spread is that both IS92c and IS92d are beyond the 
emission range of other published scenarios and are more 
characteristic of policy scenarios. 
As expected, the rate of economic growth has the largest 
range of any input variable (Table 6.7). Recent scenarios 
(e.g., Bashmakov, 1992; Sinyak and Nagano, 1992) 
assume much lower values (lower by nearly a factor of 
two) than scenarios developed before 1991. 
Almost all scenarios agree that both energy and carbon 
intensities will decline. The projected decline in energy 
intensity ranges from 1%/yr to 2%/yr (Figure 6.8), 
although there are significant differences in assumed short-
term (up to 2000) and longer-term (2020 and beyond) 
trends. As indicated by results from the IEW poll, short-
term energy intensities in the region could increase. In fact, 
between 1990 and 1992 the energy intensity of the former 
USSR increased by 23% (ECE, 1993) as economic output 
fell more rapidly than energy consumption. Over the 
longer term, significant improvements in energy intensities 
could occur following economic restructuring and the 
replacement of inefficient capital stock and the removal of 
price distortions. Current estimates of energy conservation 
in the former USSR, for instance, indicate a potential of 
more than 50% of actual consumption (Bashmakov, 1992 
and Sinyak and Nagano, 1992). That economic 
restructuring results in significant uncertainty in future 
emissions is also confirmed by recent studies of other 
economies in transition, e.g., Hungary. 
The extent and timing of efficiency improvements in the 
region are of course uncertain, and this uncertainty is 

278 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
REGIONAL ENERGY INTENSITY SCENARIOS 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
120 
100 
§ 80 
n 
I 60 
40 
20 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
CHINA & 
"CENTRALLY PLANNED ASIA 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
IEW range 
EMF-12 range 
Range of non-IPCC 
reference scenarios 
IPCC range 
i Range of policy see; ios 
Figure 6.8: Range of regional energy intensities from IS92 and other published scenarios. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
279 
REGIONAL CARBON INTENSITY SCENARIOS 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
25 
20 
S
1 5 
CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE AND 
FORMER SOVIET UNION 
0 
2 10 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2100 
IEW range 
EMF-12 range 
Range of non-IPCC 
reference scenarios 
# 
IPCC range 
i Range of policy scenarios 
': Range of regional carbon intensities from IS92 and other published scenarios. 

240 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
reflected in the scenario ranges of the IEW poll. This range 
is wider than the range of assumptions used in the IS92 
Scenarios (Figure 6.8). Most scenarios also project 
declining carbon intensities of around 0.3%/yr (Figure 
6.9), although statistical data and base year calibration 
problems in some models/scenarios remain significant 
(illustrated by the wide range in 1990 carbon intensities). 
By 2020, the range spanned by the IS92 Scenarios is 
narrow, but continues to be representative of the "middle 
of the road" scenarios available in the literature. Over the 
long term (to 2100), the range of the IS92 Scenarios is 
much wider than, and at the low end of, published 
scenarios. The carbon intensities of the IS92c and d 
scenarios are close to the values of published policy 
scenarios (Figure 6.9). 
6.3.2.3 Africa 
The IS92 Scenarios account for half of all the available 
scenarios of long-term energy related emissions for Africa. 
The range of emission scenarios is among the widest in 
both absolute and relative terms for all regions covered in 
this review (Figure 6.7). By 2020 regional emissions range 
from 0.3 GtC/yr to 0.8 GtC/yr, and the range increases to 
0.5 GtC/yr to 5.2 GtC/yr (i.e., a factor of 10). However 
even for the highest scenario, per capita carbon emissions 
by 2100 would remain significantly below current OECD 
averages. Overall, the range of absolute emission 
projections trajectories spanned by the IS92 Scenarios is in 
agreement with the limited number of published scenarios. 
Up to 2020, population growth rates dominate over per 
capita GDP growth (Table 6.8), but afterwards they become 
less important than other driving forces (Griibler, 1994). 
Up to 2020, assumed per capita economic growth rates show 
a large range (0 to 3%/yr), with GDP growth rates ranging 
from 2.6 to 6% annually. IS92c assumes the lowest GDP 
growth rate of all the reference scenarios reviewed. 
Scenarios differ substantially in their assumptions about 
energy and carbon intensities up to 2020. Whereas the 
IS92 Scenarios all assume increasing energy intensities 
(Figure 6.8), all but one of the other scenarios project 
decreasing energy intensities. Conversely, the IS92 
Scenarios all project declining carbon intensities (Figure 
6.9), whereas all but one of the other scenarios anticipate 
increasing carbon intensities. The IS92 Scenarios also 
assume a much smaller range of energy intensities than is 
found in other scenarios (Figure 6.8). The overlap between 
reference and policy scenarios is another indication of 
disagreement over trends in Africa (Figures 6.7, 6.8 and 6.9). 
6.3.2.4 USA 
This region has the largest number of published scenarios 
available and this review covers over 50 of them. The IS92 
Scenarios only partly reflect the range of views in the 
published scenarios. 
The range spanned by scenarios of future emissions in the 
USA is large (Figure 6.7). For 2020, scenario results range 
from 1.2 GtC/yr (IS92c) to 2.3 GtC/yr (e.g., IPCC-EIS or 
NES, 1991). The IS92 Scenarios are skewed to the low side 
(Figure 6.7). By 2100, the range of the published scenarios 
widens from 0.6 GtC/yr (IS92c) to 4.5 GtC/yr (the highest 
scenario from the EMF-12 model runs). The 1S92 Scenarios 
range by a factor of five by 2100 and continue to cover the 
low side of the range of published scenarios. 
The upper range of the published scenarios implies a 
large increase in USA emissions by 2100 (up to 3.2 
GtC/yr). However, an increase of this magnitude may be 
unlikely in a developed, service-oriented economy such as 
that of the USA, which already has one of the highest per 
capita emission levels in the world. The lower emission 
estimates of the majority of other published scenarios 
supports this view. 
Assumptions about trends in energy intensity vary 
significantly between scenarios, although all scenarios 
assume a decline in intensity (Table 6.9 and Figure 6.8). 
The range of energy intensities spanned by the IS92 
Scenarios (and the IEW poll) appears narrow, especially 
up to 2020. Over the long term (2050 and beyond), there is 
a significant overlap between reference and policy 
scenarios. One interpretation of this overlap is that the 
distinction between climate policies targeted towards 
improving energy efficiency and efficiency improvements 
due to other reasons becomes increasingly blurred in the 
long term. 
Although all non-intervention scenarios assume that 
energy intensity declines, they do not make the same 
assumption for carbon intensity. Some scenarios show a 
decrease because of increased reliance on low- or no-
carbon fuels, whereas other scenarios increase carbon 
intensity due to assumptions, for example, about greater 
use of coal. Both IS92c and IS92d assume much lower 
carbon intensities than other reference scenarios (Table 6.9). 
Over longer time horizons, changes in energy intensify 
and carbon intensity become as important as determinants 
of uncertainty in future emissions as do changes in 
population and economic growth (Griibler, 1994). This 
situation implies that over the long run, differences in 
models and parameter assumptions may become more 
important than uncertainties about future population am! 
economic growth. This conclusion is supported by the 
results of the EMF-12 exercise (Gaskins and Weyan' 
1993; Weyant 1993). It also suggests that more scenario 
are needed to represent a wider range of views on chanw -
in the energy and carbon intensity of the future economy. 
Summary of the discussion of regional energy scenaric 
there are several instances where the emission estimate* 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
281 
the IS92 Scenarios are not representative of the range of 
other published scenarios. In the case of Eastern Europe 
and the former 
Soviet 
Union, IS92 estimates 
are 
considerably higher than other recently 
published 
scenarios that take into account the current economic 
situation in that region. For the USA, the IS92 Scenarios 
span a lower range of emission estimates than the range of 
other published scenarios. The input assumptions of the 
IS92 Scenarios (e.g. the economic growth and carbon 
intensity 
assumptions) 
are in many 
cases 
not 
representative of other published regional scenarios. 
6.3.3 Scenarios for CH4 and N20 
Although fossil fuel C0 2 is not the only radiatively 
important gas associated with human activities, far less 
attention has been paid to non-C02 greenhouse gases. In 
this section we compare the IS92 Scenarios with the few 
others available for energy-related CH4 and N20 emissions 
(Lashof and Tirpak, 1990; Messner and Strubegger, 1991; 
Edmonds, 1993; Matsuoka et al., 1993; Nakicenovic et al., 
1993 and Alcamo et al., 1994). The IS92 Scenarios 
provide a broad range of possible future trajectories for 
both CH4 and N 20 (Figure 6.10). By the year 2100 the 
difference between the high and low cases for CH4 and 
N20 is similar to that for C02 (that is, a factor of about 
seven or eight). Of particular importance to CH4 and N20 
scenarios is the significant uncertainty in base year (1990) 
emissions, which reflects gaps in data collection and gaps 
in our knowledge about the processes which lead to these 
emissions. 
METHANE 
6.3.4 Scenarios for Sulphur Emissions 
Scientific studies reported by Working Group I indicate 
that the cooling effects of the atmospheric sulphate 
particles associated with sulphur emissions may be highly 
significant. Consequently, the IS92 Scenarios include 
sulphur emissions in addition to greenhouse-related gases. 
Global sulphur emissions were included as part of a 
comprehensive set of scenarios for the first time in the 
IS92 Scenarios. 
The IS92 global scenarios of sulphur emissions range 
from 77 to 254 Tg/yr for the year 2100. These figures 
include natural sulphur emissions, which are estimated at 
74 Tg/yr for 1990. Natural emissions are expected to 
remain constant. Thus the IS92 Scenarios imply 
anthropogenic sulphur emissions ranging from 3 Tg/yr to 
180 Tg/yr. The main source of current and future 
anthropogenic emissions is estimated to be energy 
combustion, although there the estimation of current non-
energy sources is highly uncertain. 
Few global scenarios are available for comparison with 
the IS92 sulphur scenarios. The only global scenarios that 
600 
500 
400 
§ 
300 
200 
100 
0 
2.5 
_i 
i 
i 
i. 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
NITROUS OXIDE 
1.5 
0.5 
_i 
i 
i 
i _ 
1990 
2020 
Year 
1 
/ 
IPCC range 
2100 
Range of non-IPCC 
reference scenarios 
Figure 6.10: Range of CH4 and NOx energy-related global 
emissions from IS92 and other published scenarios. 
we have been able to identify are those of Matsuoka 
(1992) developed for the AIM (Asian-Pacific Integrated 
Model) Programme (Morita et al., 1993). Both the IS92 
and the AIM scenarios assume that emissions in OECD 
regions will decline because of a shift away from coal use, 
and international agreements on air pollution control. 
These scenarios also indicate that emissions from 
developing regions will greatly increase due to economic 
development. 
There has been considerable work on estimating current 
and near-term emissions of sulphur in some OECD 
regions. The near-term reference scenarios, under the 
assumption of no intervention, show a levelling of 
emissions in Europe (Alcamo et al., 1990), and a decline in 
the USA (NAPAP, 1991) because of a shift away from 
coal use. These results are consistent with the IS92 
assumptions. As an indication of the range of uncertainty, 
the 2030 reference estimate for the USA ranged from 10 
Tg/yr to 25 Tg/yr (NAPAP, 1991). If recent legislation is 
taken into account (e.g., Amendments to the Clean Air Act 

282 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
in the USA and the 1994 Sulphur Protocol of the Geneva 
Convention on Transboundary Air Pollution) sulphur 
emissions in all OECD regions are expected to decline 
drastically in coming decades. The IS92 Scenarios only 
reflect some of this legislation. 
The uncertainty surrounding baseline emissions in 
OECD regions is relatively small because of the 
development of detailed emission inventories in 
connection with air pollution control efforts. As an 
example, the uncertainty about current sulphur emissions 
in the USA is estimated to be only ±6% to 11% (NAPAP, 
1991). The baseline estimates for OECD in the IS92 
emissions are close to the latest official figures. Outside 
the OECD, baseline emissions are not well known because 
the first comprehensive emission inventories are only now 
becoming available. We note that for China the estimates 
from the AIM model (Matsuoka, 1992) and the IS92 
Scenarios differ by a factor of two for 1985 emissions. 
The baseline global sulphur emissions (1990) of the 
IS92 Scenarios are 73.5 Tg S/yr, which is within the wide 
range of 70 Tg S/yr to 80 Tg S/yr given by Leggett et al. 
(1992). 
The main sources of uncertainty in estimating sulphur 
emissions from worldwide energy use is the sulphur 
content of coal (if it is used) and the amount of sulphur 
remaining in an energy-generating device after 
combustion. As already noted, estimates of emissions from 
biomass burning and natural sources are also highly 
uncertain. 
6.3.5 Different Variables: their Relative Importance and 
the Sensitivity of Emissions to them 
A sensitivity analysis investigated the relative influence of 
three variables, GDP, energy intensity, and carbon 
intensity on energy-related C09 emissions. Population was 
not included in the analysis because information about 
population assumptions is not available for all the 
scenarios reviewed. In addition, the sensitivity of emission 
estimates to varying assumptions about population growth 
is clearly illustrated by the IS92 Scenarios, which have 
higher and lower population assumptions than any other 
scenario reviewed. Sensitivity is expressed as the change 
in emissions relative to IS92a emissions, resulting from 
changes in GDP, energy intensity and carbon intensity 
derived from the extremes of the non-intervention 
scenarios in the sample presented in Tables 6.4 to 6.8 
For the non-intervention scenarios over the medium 
term (up to 2020), assumptions about GDP growth are the 
most important, followed by energy intensity or carbon 
intensity (Figure 6.11). Over the longer term (to 2050 and 
2100) energy and carbon intensity become increasingly 
important globally and in some regions, although GDP 
growth continues to be the most important factor. If policy 
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF ENERGY-RELATED 
CARBON EMISSIONS COMPARED TO IS92a 
U 2 0 
-ffla- 4F=4 
%\ 
1990 
2020 
2050 
2100 
, 
, 
rUpB-i 
, OPM , , , , tF 
-nBi-
ffl 
y D 
O ' 
2020 
CEEU and FORMER USSR 
-XL- 
_. 
H 
uya 
L fn , , 
• 
i 
£ 
CHINA and CENTRALLY PLANNED ASIA 
flF 
Activity (GDP) 
intensity (PE GDP) 
Carbon 
Range o! relore 
scenariQB 
Expanded rarg 
policy scena-io; 
(if greater Ihnn i 
Year 
Figure 6.11: Uncertainty analysis of energy-related C02 
emission estimates relative to the IS92a scenario. 
scenarios are included in the analysis, assumptions about 
carbon intensity become as important as GDP growth 
assumptions (Figure 6.11). 
A comparison of the reference and policy scenarios 
suggests that uncertainties in the driving forces of 
emissions within reference cases are at least as significant 
as the uncertainties between reference and policy cases. 
This comparison implies that over a time horizon of 50 to 
100 years it is difficult to distinguish between the effect of 
climate policies and the effect of societal/technological 
changes irrespective of climate policies. 
The sensitivity analysis suggests that varying the critical 
input assumptions and model parameters for future 
emission scenarios can have large impacts on emissions. 
These sensitivities are so large over the time horizon to 
2100 that we recommend against the use of a single 
scenario as input to climate models. Rather a range "f 
scenarios should be used as input. Moreover, he 
distribution of sensitivities for the different emiss: m 
components of the non-IS92 Scenarios around IS92a is 
highly skewed and is particularly divergent at the regit al 
level. Therefore, the IS92a Scenario may not be suitahl s 
a "central" or "middle of the road" scenario, especial!;, r 
regional emission estimates (see also Figure 6.2). Even i 
scenario clearly represented a consensus view <l e 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
2&? 
evolution of most critical input assumptions and driving 
forces affecting future emissions, the scenario would not 
necessarily have a higher likelihood than an alternative 
case. This situation is an additional reason to refrain from 
using a single emission scenario as input to assess the 
climate consequences of no action to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions. Even if policies do not change, the future 
will be different from the present and is thus inherently 
uncertain. 
Published uncertainty analyses also provide information 
about the relative importance of different input 
assumptions. We have already discussed the emission 
results of four published uncertainty analyses (see Section 
6.3.1.2). In this section their findings regarding the 
importance of input assumptions are discussed. Nordhaus 
and Yohe (1983) identified ten key input parameters to 
which they assigned probability distributions. Their 
analysis singled out the elasticity of substitution between 
fossil and non-fossil energy use as the most important 
parameter in explaining the uncertainty in carbon 
emissions. They found that the rate of growth of total 
factor productivity, a measure which affects both labour 
and energy productivity, is the next most important 
parameter. Interestingly, population assumptions were low 
on the list of factors affecting baseline emissions. 
Edmonds et al. (1986) obtained a similar result. However, 
the range of population growth assumptions used in both 
of these uncertainty studies did not encompass the current 
range of population projections so their conclusions are 
limited. 
Edmonds et al. (1986) performed an uncertainty 
analysis that was similar to Nordhaus and Yohe (1983), 
but the model used by Edmonds et al. contained much 
more detail about energy-producing and energy-consuming 
sectors. The carbon emission forecasts from this study 
formed a biased distribution with median values 
significantly below the mean values. Edmonds et al. 
identified the four most important factors influencing 
carbon emission uncertainty as labour productivity in 
developing countries, labour productivity in developed 
countries, end-use energy efficiency improvements and the 
income elasticity of energy demand for the world. 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) also performed a sensitivity 
analysis of the ASF model, which was used to generate the 
IS92 Scenarios. This study showed that the most important 
factors were higher prices for coal and cost reductions for 
non-fossil energy technologies, both of which lead to 
emission reductions. Conversely, the impact of increasing 
the resource base for oil or gas was found to have 
comparatively small impact. 
Manne and Richels (1993) performed an uncertainty 
analysis which used a poll of experts to set the uncertainty 
distributions of key input parameters, such as GDP growth 
rates, elasticity of substitution between energy, labour and 
capital, rate of autonomous energy 
efficiency 
improvements (AEEI), commercial year for economically-
competitive carbon-free electricity, and the cost of the non-
electric backstop technology. They found that the most 
important parameter was the potential GDP growth rates, 
followed by the AEEI and (to a smaller extent) the two 
supply side technology parameters. At the same time, the 
elasticity of substitution between energy and capital and 
labour only had a minor influence in reference scenarios 
(assuming comparatively modest energy price increases), a 
situation that changes drastically in policy intervention 
cases. 
As noted earlier, de Vries et al. (1994) did not evaluate 
the uncertainty of model driving forces, but concentrated 
instead on the influence of uncertainty in model 
parameters on scenario results. They found that the most 
important parameters were the elasticities of energy 
demand, and the parameters that describe consumer 
responses to fuel price increases. 
Summary of the discussion 
of sensitivity 
analysis: 
variations in the rate of GDP growth across regions which 
reflect the combined population and per capita income 
growth are the most important sources of variation in CO-, 
emissions in the near to medium term. Over time, however, 
variations in the rates of change in energy and carbon 
intensity are equally important to GDP growth globally 
and in some regions. The sensitivity analysis did not 
suggest that the IS92a or any of the IS92 Scenarios is a 
"central" or "medium " case or has higher likelihood than 
alternative scenarios. In addition, uncertainty analyses 
demonstrate that emission estimates are sensitive to the 
structure and processes used in models to represent the 
real world. Consequently, to obtain a full range of views 
about future emissions, it is also important to use a wide 
range of models and methodologies. 
6.3.6 Discussion of Scenarios for Energy-Related 
Emissions 
The global C07 estimates of the IS92 Scenarios bracket the 
majority of other published non-intervention scenarios, and 
therefore can be said to reflect a reasonable range of fossil 
fuel scenarios. Although some plausible scenarios fall 
above or below the range spanned by the IS92 Scenarios, 
the number of such scenarios is comparatively small. 
Compared to the literature on C0 2 emissions, the 
literature on non-C02 greenhouse gases is limited. Few 
other studies consider the variety of gaseous emissions 
reported by the IS92 Scenarios. An important reason for 
the divergence of the emission estimates for non-C02 
gases is the lack of agreement on base year emissions, 
which reflects a lack of knowledge or agreement on how to 
represent emission-causing processes. 

2K4 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
Although the IS92 Scenarios were designed as non-
intervention reference cases, the emission estimates of the 
lowest scenario (IS92c) fall within the range of published 
policy scenarios. Nevertheless, as a whole, the IS92 
Scenarios do not reflect the range of policy scenarios and 
they should not be interpreted as policy scenarios. It is 
important to note that some sources of uncertainty are 
more subject to control by policy than others. 
At the regional level there are several instances where 
the IS92 Scenarios do not reflect the range of views 
represented by other scenarios. Notably, future emissions 
in Central and Eastern Europe and the Former USSR 
(EEFSU) are higher in the IS92 Scenarios than in more 
recent scenario studies that take the effects of the 
economic crisis in the region into account. In addition, the 
IS92 base year (1990) estimate of CO-, emissions is about 
30% higher than the latest estimate. For the USA, the IS92 
Scenarios span a lower range than the full spectrum of 
scenarios available in the literature. 
The analysis of energy scenarios does not provide any 
evidence that IS92a or any other individual IS92 Scenario 
is a "medium" or "central" case. IS92a sometimes covers 
the "middle of the road" alternative regional scenarios, but 
is often above or below the median of other scenarios. 
The IS92 Scenarios are within the range of most 
emission estimates and input assumptions for global energy 
scenarios. However, they are not always representative of 
the range of driving forces, such as population and 
economic development, energy intensity and carbon 
intensity, found in published regional scenarios. In some 
cases the IS92 Scenarios span a much narrower range than 
other scenarios. For example, the IS92 Scenarios assume a 
much narrower range of energy intensities in the USA and 
China plus Centrally Planned Asia than the range of 
published scenarios. In other cases, the IS92 Scenarios fall 
outside the range of other scenarios, for example the GDP 
growth rate assumed in lS92e, which is higher for the USA 
and China plus Centrally Planned Asia, than any other 
scenario. The trends for driving forces in the IS92 
Scenarios also deviate in some circumstances from the 
other published scenarios, as in the case of Africa, where 
the IS92 Scenarios assume increasing energy intensity up 
to year 2020, even though all but one other scenario 
assume a downward trend. Thus the IS92 Scenarios only 
partly reflect the range of regional views expressed in the 
published scenarios. Regional perspectives can be included 
in global scenarios through a decentralised approach to 
scenario-building which includes the participation of 
scientists and policymakers familiar with national and 
regional circumstances. Examples of the inclusion of 
regional perspectives are the scenario-building exercises 
sponsored by the World Energy Council, the Energy 
Modelling Forum, the International Energy Workshop, 
UNEP and the CHALLENGE project of IIASA. 
6.4 Comparison of Land-Use-Related Scenarios 
Few scenarios of emissions related to land-use and 
agricultural activities are available for comparison to the 
IS92 Scenarios. However, in contrast to the energy-related 
scenarios, most land-use-related scenarios include a range 
of greenhouse gas emissions rather than just C02. The 
scenarios reviewed in this section include: 
The previously described IS92 Scenarios plus two 
sensitivity scenarios included in the IS92 document: 
SI (high estimates of deforestation and the carbon 
content of vegetation) and S4 (low estimates of 
deforestation, high afforestation rate). 
• 
The following scenarios of the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990): 
"Slowly Changing World" (SCW), "Rapidly 
Changing World" (RCW) and two "Stabilising 
Policies" scenarios (SCWP and RCWP, where P 
stands for policy). These scenarios were developed 
from the Atmospheric Stabilisation Framework 
(ASF) of the EPA, which includes calculations from 
the global food system model entitled the "Basic 
Linked System" (BLS), which was developed at the 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
(IIASA). 
• 
The IMAGE 2.0 "Conventional Wisdom" (CW) 
scenario (Alcamo et al., 1994b). 
• 
The Asian Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) 
(Matsuoka and Morita, 1994). 
• 
The three scenarios (H1-H3) developed by Houghton 
(1991). 
Scenarios S4, SCWP and H3 assume policy intervention 
to reduce emissions, whereas the other scenarios can be 
considered "non-intervention" reference scenarios. 
Because of the time constraints under which this 
evaluation was performed, this section focuses on only a 
few categories of land-use emissions, namely, emissions of 
CO, from deforestation, CH4 from wetland rice fields and 
enteric fermentation, and N 20 from soils underlying 
fertilised agricultural areas and soils underlying natural 
vegetation. These categories were selected because they 
illustrate the sensitivity of emission estimates to 
differences in the input assumptions for agricultural 
variables. The scenario comparisons focus on both global 
scenarios and scenarios from Latin America, Africa and 
Asia. These regions are of particular interest because they 
are experiencing significant changes in the driving forces 
of land-use emissions (e.g., agricultural expansion, 
agricultural productivity, deforestation and population 
growth). The scenarios concerning emissions of CO-, from 
deforestation include the fluxes of carbon resulting from 
changes in the area of forests, but not climatic feedbacks to 
the terrestrial carbon cycle. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
Table 6.10: Major driving forces for land cover/use 
change. 
2&5 
Process 
IS92 (IPCC) 
SCW/RCW 
CW (IMAGE 2.0) 
Deforestation 
Proportional to 
population increase, 
with a lag time of 25 
years. 
Demand for 
agricultural 
products 
See SCW/RCW 
Crop 
production 
Rice acreage 
See SCW/RCW 
See SCW/RCW 
Animal 
production 
and numbers 
See SCW/RCW 
Fertiliser use 
Pre-specified. 
Scenario from 
Pepper et al. 
(1992). 
External scenario based on 
Terrestrial carbon model 
(Houghton et al., 1985) for 
tropics only. Deforestation is 
not a result of demand for 
agricultural products. 
Demand consists of human 
consumption, feed, seed, 
industrial usage and waste. 
Human consumption is based 
on past trends (reflecting 
income, habits, tastes). 
Income changes allow 
changes in consumption. 
The model allows changes in 
arable land and pastures. 
Technical progress is 
captured in yield functions for 
9 commodity classes. 
Crop yields are function of 
fertiliser application. BLS 
extrapolates the trend in land-
use per capita from 2025-2050 
to the period 2050-2100. 
Various methods, e.g. China: 
based on past trends; India, 
Indonesia, USA: based on 
relative profitability of rice 
compared to other crops. 
The production of animal 
products is function of 
feeding intensity. For most 
regions the number of 
animals is not calculated 
explicitly. 
Fertiliser use is explicit 
variable in most parts, except 
in regional models in BLS. In 
regional models agricultural 
production determines 
fertiliser use. 
Forest clearing results from 
change in demand for crop 
and animal products and 
industrial wood and 
fuelwood. Changes in land 
productivity take into 
account soil and changing 
climate. 
Demand is determined by 
population and income 
through elasticities. This 
affects the required areas of 
both arable land and 
grassland. Arable crops are 
divided into 9 classes of 
vegetable products 
including rice and 5 classes 
of animal products. 
Crop yields change as a 
consequence of the 
additions of agricultural 
inputs and technological 
development. 
Rice acreage is modelled 
from demand for rice, 
climate and soil. The 
increase in harvested area is 
the result of increases in 
irrigated rice only, with the 
1990 dryland area 
remaining constant. 
In period 1990 to 2025 the 
production per animal 
increases along with GNP 
per capita to 1990 OECD-
Europe productivity as 
GNP reaches 1990 OECD-
Europe level. For 
industrialised countries 
increase in productivity is 
10%. In 2025-2050 the 
increase in productivity is 
50% of that in 1990-2025, 
in 2050-2100 the increase is 
zero. 
Fertiliser use is pre-
specified, not a model 
result. Scenario for fertiliser 
use is from IS92a. 

286 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
' I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I I 
I 
I 
I I 
Year 
Figure 6.12: Comparison of global scenarios of C02 fluxes from 
deforestation. Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the 
Supplementary Table. 
For reference, Table 6.10 presents an overview of how 
each of the scenarios takes into account the driving forces 
of land-use emissions. Table 6.11 summarises other key 
assumptions of the scenarios. It should be noted that the 
IPCC methodology for national inventories may differ 
from the IPCC scenario assumptions for emission factors, 
the carbon contents of biomass, etc. 
6.4.1 Results from C02 Global Scenarios 
Before discussing scenarios for land-use-related C0 2 
emissions, it should be noted that the scenarios 
substantially disagree on base year (1990) emissions; 
° 
8 
> 
•a 1. 
-200 
Global terrestrial biomass 1980s 
HvWft 
- i — i — | — l — i — i — | — I — i — i — | — i — i — i — | — i — i — i — | — i — i — r -
1990 
2010 
2(130 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
Figure 6.13: Comparison of cumulative global CO-, fluxes from 
deforestation for different scenarios. Numbers correspond to list 
of scenarios in the Supplementary Table. 
estimates range from 0.7 GtC to 2.5 GtC/yr. This 
disagreement reflects the lack of knowledge or agreement 
on how to represent the processes leading to CO-, fluxes 
between the biosphere and atmosphere. It was noted in a 
previous section that a similar situation exists for regional-
scale energy-related emissions. 
Most "non-intervention" scenarios show an upward trend 
in emissions until about 2020, followed by a gradual decline 
(Figure 6.12). In comparison with energy-related scenarios 
which diverge up to 2100, land-use emissions show their 
greatest absolute differences just before the middle of the 
next century (with a maximum range of about 0.2 GtC to 4.8 
GtC/yr), and then converge towards zero at the end of the 
century. Emissions decrease because either the driving 
forces of deforestation equilibrate or forests are depleted. 
The lower scenarios are IS92 a,b,d and e, AIM, and CW. 
These scenarios all show decreasing global trends after 
2010. Both HI and SCW increase sharply until 2050, but 
their magnitude of emissions is different because they 
begin with different base year emissions. IS92 a,b and e 
show a net uptake in carbon from 2090 to 2100 because of 
their assumptions about forest plantations in Africa and 
Asia. In most of the scenarios, the release of carbon by 
forest biomass burning greatly exceeds the amount of 
carbon taken up in plantations. 
The range of cumulative emissions for the non-
intervention scenarios from 1990 to 2100 is 30 GtC to 320 
GtC, indicating that the biosphere could continue to be a 
significant source of C0 2 in the atmosphere in the next 
century (Figure 6.13). The cumulative emissions of 
intervention scenarios assume considerable afforestation 
and result in a significant net uptake of atmospheric CO-, 
(30 GtC to 150 GtC). 
The upper limit in cumulative emissions of C0 2 from 
deforestation is formed by the amount of carbon stored in 
the global terrestrial biosphere, which is about 600 Gt 
(Atjay et al., 1979; Olson et al. 1983) assuming no 
afforestation. According to the non-intervention scenarios 
reviewed in this chapter, deforestation in the next century 
may release between 5% and 53% of the carbon stored in 
the global terrestrial biosphere. 
Summary of the discussion of global C02 scenarios for 
land-use-related emissions: emission estimates considered 
show their greatest absolute differences just before the 
middle of the next century (a factor of six). Emission 
estimates then converge to zero towards the end of the 
century because the driving forces of 
deforestation 
equilibrate or forests are depleted. 
6.4.2 Results from C02 Regional Scenarios 
The available regional scenarios for land-use-related 
emissions of C0 2 (IS92, SCW and CW) show considerable 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
287 
" | 
" i — i 
'" l 
• (•' 
i 
l 
l 
| 
1 
l 
l 
| 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
Year 
2090 
1-1,1-2,1-5 
]—i—i—i—j—i—i—i—|—i—i—i—|—i—i—i—|—i—i—i—|—i—r-
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
Figure 6.14b: Deforestation rates for Africa for different 
Figure 6.14a: C0 2 fluxes from deforestation for Africa for 
different scenarios. Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the 
scenarios. Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the 
Supplementary Table. 
Supplementary Table. 
2.0 , 
15.0 
*-|—i—i—i—|—i—i—i—r~"1—' 
' 
| — ' — " — ' — I — I — I — I — I — I 
I 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
Figure 6.15b: Deforestation rates for Latin America for different 
Figure 6.15a: C0 2 fluxes from deforestation for Latin America 
for different scenarios. Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in 
scenarios. Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the 
the Supplementary Table. 
Supplementary Table. 
2.0 , 
20.0 i 
I ' ' • I 
1990 
2010 
I ' '—• i ' • • i 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
| I I I | T 
t 
tm"] 
I I I | I I 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
Figure 6.16a: C0 2 fluxes from deforestation for Asia for 
Figure 6.16b: Deforestation rates for Asia for different scenarios, 
different scenarios. Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the 
Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the Supplementary 
Supplementary Table. 
Table. 

288 
An Evaluation of the IPCC1S92 Emission 
Scenarios 
Table 6.11: Assumptions of land-use scenarios of emissions 
Source 
IS92a 
SCW/RCW 
CW 
C02 from 
deforestation 
and afforestation 
Low estimates of biomass 
based on OECD (1991) 
Based on clearing rates and on 
low biomass estimates in vegetation 
and soils from Houghton (1991). 
High and low biomass values are 
specified for 6 types of forest 
(disturbed and undisturbed moist, 
seasonal and dry forests) and for 
3 continents. The SCW scenario uses 
the low biomass estimates. 
Carbon contents are result of soil 
and climate using BIOME model 
and Klein-Goldewijk et al. (1993) 
CH4 from wet 
rice cultivation 
38 g2/yr 
75 g2/yr 
38 g2/yr 
CH4 from 
animals 
Crutzene(a/.(1986); 
Lerner era/. (1988). 
Emissions per unit of 
product decrease with 
productivity. 
Crutzen et al. (1986); 
Lerner et al. (1988). 
Emissions per unit of product 
decrease with productivity. 
Gibbs and Leng (1993); 
Crutzen et al. (1986). 
Emissions per unit of product 
decrease with productivity. 
CH4from 
animal waste 
Biomass 
burning 
emissions 
(CH4, CO, 
NOx, N20, 
VOC) 
N20 from 
fertiliser and 
animal excreta 
1990 emission of 26 
Tg/yr (source not 
specified) 
Crutzen and Andreae 
(1990) 
Fertiliser induced 
emission of 2.6% of 
applied mineral fertiliser-N 
Background and animal 
excreta not considered. 
Not included in calculations 
Various literature sources (Cicerone 
and Oremland, 1988; Seller and 
Crutzen, 1980 and other references) 
Fertiliser induced emission of 2.5% 
of applied mineral fertiliser-N. 
Background and animal excreta not 
considered. 
Based on Gibbs and Woodbury 
(1993), giving total of -13 Tg/yr 
for 1990 
Crutzen and Andreae (1990) 
Fertiliser induced emission of 1% 
of applied mineral N and 1% of N 
in animal excreta, based on 
Bouwman et al. (1994.). 
Background emission from arable 
lands and pastures are based on 
climate and NPP. 
N20 from 
natural 
ecosystems 
N20 from gain 
in agricultural 
land 
Other sources 
6.1 TgN/yr, constant in 
time. 
Luizao etal. (1989) for 
current flux of 0.8 TgN/yr. 
Calculated as complement 
to assumed global source 
6.0 TgN/yr, constant in time. 
Bolle et al. (1986) for current flux 
of0.4TgN/yr. 
Calculated as complement 
to assumed global source 
Depending on temperature, 
precipitation, NPP 
(Based on Bouwman et al. (1993). 
Modelled, based on Keller et al. 
(1993) and Bouwman et al. (1994). 
Calculated as complement to 
assumed global source 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
2#9 
differences (Figures 6.14a to 6.16a). For Africa, CW 
greatly exceeds the other scenarios until about 2060, when 
African forests are depleted according to the scenario 
(Figure 6.14). After 2050, IS92 a,b and e show a net 
uptake in Africa as a result of forest plantations. 
In Latin America, SCW is much higher than the others 
because it assumes a higher forest exploitation rate; CW is 
much lower than the others because it projects a 
stabilisation of the driving forces that have led to 
deforestation (Figure 6.15). 
For Asia, SCW and CW differ the most from the IS92 
Scenarios and AIM (Figure 6.16). Part of the difference may 
be caused by the definition of the region. For example, the 
deforestation estimates in IS92 and SCW do not include 
China, but CW does. For Asia, CW peaks around 2000, 
mainly because of high deforestation rates in India. Both 
the IS92 Scenarios and CW assume that wood from forest 
clearings is not burned in China and the Centrally-Planned 
Asian countries. Hence, deforestation in this part of Asia is 
assumed to result in a low, long-term flux of carbon from 
enhanced soil respiration rather than a higher short-term 
flux due to wood burning of cleared forests. Thus, even 
though the global results for CO-, fluxes are consistent, the 
regional results show some inconsistency. 
Summary of the discussion of regional C02 scenarios for 
deforestation: 
the differences in the various emission 
estimates of the regional scenarios are quite large. The 
most significant inconsistencies occur in Africa and Asia. 
However, some of these regional differences apparently 
offset each other so that differences in the global results of 
the scenarios are not as great as might be expected from 
the differences in the regional scenarios. 
6.4.3 Factors Affecting CO? Emissions from 
Deforestation and Afforestation 
The main factors used to estimate C0 2 emissions from 
deforestation are: 
(i) the rate of deforestation; 
(ii) the carbon content of vegetation; 
(iii) the allocation of the cleared biomass to different 
carbon pools on the deforested land. 
The last factor will influence the timing of the release of 
CO? but will have only a small effect on the cumulative 
emissions. Hence the following sections will only discuss 
the first two factors. 
6.4.3.1 Rate of deforestation 
The IS92 Scenarios and CW use similar global average 
deforestation rates, but incorporate different rates within 
regions (Figures 6.14b, 6.15b, 6.16b). The IS92 Scenarios 
for Africa increase up to 2020, and decline slowly 
afterwards (Figure 6.14b). CW increases deforestation 
rates more quickly than IS92, but also peaks around 2020. 
After 2020 the rate of deforestation for CW declines at a 
faster rate than in the IS92 Scenarios, reaching zero around 
2070, when all African forests are depleted. AIM peaks 
somewhat earlier than the other two scenarios and 
maintains a lower rate of deforestation throughout much of 
the period. 
For Latin America the deforestation rate of the 1S92 
Scenarios gradually decreases towards 2100 (Figure 
6.15b). Meanwhile, the net rate of CW decreases much 
more rapidly, reaching zero in 2005. Afterwards, the 
scenario assumes the net afforestation of abandoned 
agricultural and rangeland until 2050, when net 
afforestation also reaches zero. AIM parallels the trend of 
the IS92 Scenarios, but at a lower rate. 
Deforestation in Asia slowly decreases in the IS92 
Scenarios, reaching near zero in 2100 (Figure 6.16b). 
Again, AIM follows the trend of the IS92 Scenarios, but 
with a lower deforestation rate. CW, however, differs from 
these scenarios, peaking around the year 2000 in China 
and India, and then rapidly decreasing by 2045 as forests 
are depleted. 
Most scenarios base their deforestation rates on 
population estimates, under the assumption that population 
is related to demand for agricultural and forestry products 
which, in turn, leads to deforestation. The population 
scenarios used in the IS92 Scenarios and CW (World 
Bank, 1991), SCW and RCW (USBC, 1987) and AIM 
(UN, 1992) are only slightly different in their estimates of 
population trends to 2100. These small differences cannot 
explain the large differences in deforestation rates between 
some published scenarios. Houghton (1991) does not 
report the population estimates used for scenarios H1 and 
H2. 
The IS92 Scenarios and AIM set deforestation rates 
proportional to population increase, with a 25 year time 
lag. Hence, as population growth declines (which it 
ultimately does according to the assumed population 
scenarios), deforestation rates also decline. SCW and HI 
have similar emission trends, and it is presumed that their 
underlying deforestation assumptions are similar. 
Deforestation in SCW is a function of population growth, 
whereas in HI it is extrapolated from historical trends of 
tropica] deforestation in FAO/UNEP (1991). 
Compared to SCW and HI, the deforestation rates of 
RCW and H2 are based on higher rates of agricultural 
productivity, which leads to lower rates of agricultural 
expansion and deforestation. The CO, emissions estimated 
by the RCW and H2 differ because of different 
assumptions about the carbon content of vegetation rather 
than because they assume different deforestation rates. 
Deforestation rates are computed indirectly in CW: 

290 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
BOX 3. UNCERTAINTIES IN ESTIMATING CO, 
FROM DEFORESTATION - AN EXAMPLE 
FROM INDONESIA 
Country estimates help illuminate the uncertainties in 
estimating the driving forces behind the CO, emissions 
from deforestation. JEE(1993) estimates an Indonesian 
deforestation rate of 1.3 Mha/yr for 1982 to 1990. 
Deforestation was attributed to the expansion of 
agricultural land, infrastructure, and urban centres, as 
well as to shifting cultivation, forest fires and logging. 
The carbon content assumed for Indonesian forests was 
45-90 t C ha-1 (JEE, 1993). The integrated flux is 60 to 
124 TgC/yr (1989/90) for Indonesia. This is 
substantially different from Houghton's estimate of 192 
Tg(t|C/yr (Houghton, 1991) which is based on 
assumptions about the carbon content of different types 
of vegetation. 
JEE (1993) estimate that the carbon uptake of 
vegetation was around 103 TgC/yr to 224 TgC/yr based 
on an annual carbon uptake of 3.0-6.6 t C ha-l/yr for 17 
Mha of forest fallow and 4 Mha of forest plantations. 
This total area is equivalent to about 20% of the total 
forested area in Indonesia according to Myers (1991). 
These widely varying estimates illustrate the uncertainty 
involved with estimating CO^ from deforestation. 
specifically, population and GNP scenarios are used to 
compute regional agricultural demands, which are then 
used to estimate the expansion or abandonment of 
agricultural and rangeland on a geographically detailed 
basis for the whole world. The expansion of land for crops 
or livestock leads to a certain amount of forest clearing, 
from which a deforestation rate can be derived. 
Some non-intervention scenarios assume afforestation. 
For example, IS92a, h and e assume a constant rate of 
afforestation of 1.3 Mha/yr, and CW converts abandoned 
agricultural land to its natural ecosystem. 
6.4.3.2 Carbon content of vegetation 
Another major factor influencing the range of CO? 
emission estimates is uncertainty about the carbon content 
of vegetation. Pepper et al. (1992) and Lashof and Tirpak, 
(1990) point out the sensitivity of the IS92 Scenarios, 
SCW and RCW to this uncertainty (see also Box 3). 
Two different methods may be used to estimate the 
carbon content of vegetation. Higher estimates are 
obtained by destructive sampling of biomass, usually in 
small areas. Lower estimates of carbon content are 
obtained by estimating timber volumes and wood densities 
for forest stands; this information is usually derived from 
inventories covering large forest areas. The mean carbon 
content for all tropical forests is about 65% higher when 
using the destructive sampling method than when using the 
wood-volume-based method (Houghton, 1991). The 
scenarios reviewed above use different premises for their 
estimates of the carbon content of vegetation. The IS92 
Scenarios use OECD (1991) estimates, which are mid-
ranges of values based on the estimates of wood volumes 
used by Houghton (1991). HI to H3 are based on the mean 
of the two methods: destructive sampling and wood-
volume-based estimates. SCW, RCW, SCWP and RCWP 
are identical to the low estimates of Houghton (1991). The 
continental mean carbon content of vegetation in CW is 
similar to the low estimates in the IS92 Scenarios, RCW 
and SCW. However, unlike the other scenarios, the carbon 
content of vegetation in CW changes over time in 
accordance with changes in climate and atmospheric C02 
concentration. 
Summary of the discussion of factors influencing the 
estimation of C02 emissions from deforestation: there are 
relatively few studies to compare, and their assumptions 
about deforestation rates vary considerably. However, all 
scenarios agree that deforestation will diminish by the end 
of the 21st century because of the equilibration of the 
driving forces of deforestation or the depletion of the 
forests. The carbon content of vegetation is another 
important assumption in estimating CO? emissions, and 
the various scenarios use a wide range of estimates for this 
variable. 
6.4.4 Results from Global Scenarios ofCH4 and N20 
The IS92 Scenarios, SCW and CW include global and 
regional estimates of emissions other than C0 2. This 
section highlights global scenarios for some of the more 
important emission categories of these gases. 
For CH4 from rice fields, SCW assumes a base year 
(1985) emissions twice as large as those in the IS92 
Scenarios and CW (Table 6.12). However, the trend of 
SCW is close to that of the IS92 Scenarios in that it 
increases until around the middle of next century, and 
declines slowly thereafter. CW, by comparison, declines 
until around 2025, and then increases slightly to the end of 
the century. These trends reflect the harvested area of 
wetland rice assumed in the scenarios. This issue will be 
discussed later in this chapter. 
The scenarios for CH4 from enteric fermentation agree 
on base year (1985) emissions and trends to 2000. 
Subsequently, the emission estimates of the IS92 Scenarios 
and SCW increase up to the end of the century, although 
the SCW does so at a slower rate. By contrast, CW 
emissions peak in about 2050 and decline thereafter. The 
lower emissions of CW result from its assumptions about 
increases in meat productivity which lead to estimates of 
lower numbers of animals than the other scenarios. 
The various scenarios for N-,0 emissions from soils of 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
Table 6.12: Emissions ofCH4from 
wetland rice cultivation in Tg CHJyr 
291 
1985 
1990 
2000 
2010 
2020 
2025 
2050 
2075 
2100 
SCW 
Africa 
Asia 
LA 
World 
2.6 
96.0 
6.0 
09 
3.9 
110.0 
6.5 
125 
5.5 
131.6 
7.1 
149 
6.6 
148.5 
6.8 
165 
7.6 
155.3 
6.8 
176 
7.8 
148.1 
6.5 
169 
cw 
Africa 
Asia 
LA 
World 
1.2 
53.8 
2.5 
58 
1.4 
54.3 
2.4 
59 
1.8 
46.8 
2.6 
53 
2.4 
40.7 
2.6 
48 
3.5 
38.5 
2.5 
46 
4.2 
38.5 
2.4 
47 
8.2 
39.4 
2.5 
52 
11.9 
38.3 
2.7 
55 
15.7 
37.7 
3.0 
54 
IS92 a,b,e 
Africa 
Asia 
LA 
World 
1.4 
50.5 
3.1 
58 
1.6 
52.9 
3.1 
60 
2.0 
58.0 
3.4 
66 
2.5 
62.9 
3.7 
69 
2.8 
66.7 
3.7 
76 
2.9 
69.2 
3.7 
78 
3.4 
78.2 
3.4 
87 
3.9 
76.3 
3.3 
86 
4.1 
74.2 
3.2 
84 
natural vegetation (not shown) differ greatly. The IS92 
Scenarios, RCW and SCW assume constant global 
emissions, whereas CW assumes slow increases. Part of 
the difference in the scenarios arises because CW takes 
into account climatic feedback to N 2 0 emissions. By 
comparison, scenarios of N 2 0 emissions that consider the 
soils of fertilised agricultural areas do not vary as much 
because they are all based on the same global scenario of 
fertiliser use. In this case the difference between scenarios 
stems from differences in the assumed emission factors. 
6.4.5 Results from Regional Scenarios for CH4 
andN20 
This discussion of CH4 from rice production focuses on 
scenario results for Asia, which produces about 90% of the 
world's rice. The three available scenarios differ 
considerably. The base year (1985) emissions of SCW are 
nearly twice as high as base year emissions for CW and the 
IS92 Scenarios (Table 6.12). The IS92 Scenarios show a 
24 TgCH 4/yr increase by 2100, SCW a 52 TgCH 4/yr 
increase , and CW a 4 TgCH4/yr decrease. However, both 
SCW and the IS92 Scenarios project an increase of about 
50% in CH 4 emissions, because they make identical 
assumptions about the increase in harvested rice area 
(Table 6.12). The IS92 Scenarios indicate a nearly constant 
emissions level for China plus Centrally Planned Asian 
countries (not shown), whereas the CW estimates a 
reduction by a factor of 2 caused by a major increase in 
rice yields per hectare. Emissions from India (not shown) 
also decrease by 20% in CW by 2100 because rice yield 
per unit area increases faster than rice demand. 
There are large differences in the estimates of CH4 
emissions from enteric fermentation between the IS92 
Scenarios, SCW and CW for Asia, but smaller differences 
for Africa (Table 6.13). For example, in China plus 
Centrally Planned Asia, the IS92 Scenarios have low and 
nearly constant emissions whereas CW has a rapid 
increase in emissions between 1985 and 2025, followed by 
a decline of 30% between 2025 and 2100. 
The IS92 Scenarios for CH4 from enteric fermentation 
for Latin America show a large increase from 16 TgCH4/yr 
to 43 TgCH4/yr between 1985 and 2100, whereas CW 
gives a doubling in emissions between 1990 and 2025 and 
a decline thereafter (Table 6.13). 
Regional results for N^O from the soils underlying 
natural vegetation are only provided by CW, which 
estimates that increases will be most important in 
temperate climates because of the importance of climate 
feedbacks in those areas. 
Different regional assumptions about fertiliser use lead 
to different estimates of N 2 0 emissions from fertilised 
soils. For example, the growth in fertiliser use and 
associated N 20 loss for Africa is higher in IS92a,b and e 
than in CW. The increase in fertiliser-related N 2 0 is 
similar for Asia as a whole, but different for specific 
regions. For Latin America the growth of N 2 0 emission 
from ^-fertiliser is faster in CW than in IS92a,b or e. 

292 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
Table 6.13: Emissions ofCH. from enteric fermentation 
in TgCHJyr 
1985 
1990 
2000 
2010 
2020 
2025 
2050 
2075 
2100 
sew 
World 
75 
94 
125 
151 
172 
179 
CW 
Africa 
Asia 
CP Asia 
LA 
USA 
World 
8.1 
22.8 
6.7 
8.1 
5.8 
75 
8.5 
24.1 
7.2 
17.7 
5.6 
79 
11.2 
38.9 
16.1 
19.5 
4.3 
96 
14.9 
53.6 
24.2 
19.0 
3.2 
112 
21.5 
68.0 
31.4 
18.5 
3.0 
131 
25.4 
75.1 
34.8 
18.2 
2.9 
142 
40.5 
82.3 
31.1 
13.8 
2.8 
161 
43.5 
69.9 
27.5 
9.7 
2.8 
147 
47.5 
63.1 
24.8 
7.5 
2.2 
142 
IS92 a,b,e 
Africa 
Asia 
CP Asia 
LA 
USA 
World 
8.6 
22.0 
4.9 
16.0 
7.1 
77 
9.8 
23.8 
5.2 
18.0 
7.8 
84 
13.2 
28.6 
5.7 
22.0 
8.8 
99 
16.5 
34.1 
6.2 
26.0 
8.9 
114 
20.2 
40.3 
6.8 
30.0 
9.3 
129 
22.6 
43.7 
7.0 
32.0 
9.2 
138 
33.1 
61.1 
8.6 
40.0 
6.6 
173 
42.4 
66.5 
8.5 
42.0 
6.0 
188 
48.1 
69.9 
8.7 
43.0 
6.0 
198 
6.4.6 Factors Affecting 
CH4 andN20 
Emissions 
from 
Land-Use 
For reference, the main driving forces for the non-C0 2 
emissions resulting from land-use are reviewed in Table 
ft. 10 and key assumptions of the scenarios are reviewed in 
Table ft. 11. 
6.4.6.1 Factors affecting emission ofCH4from 
rice 
production 
This section discusses the assumptions of the different 
scenarios and how they lead to estimates of CH4 emissions 
from rice fields. The main factors influencing the 
estimation of emissions are the assumed rate of CH 4 
emissions per unit area of rice field and the total area of 
rice fields. The area of rice fields is in turn influenced by 
the assumed rice yield per hectare. The scenarios reviewed 
in this report all assume that the emission rate of CH4 does 
not change over time. 
RC'W and SCW give emission rates for wetland rice that 
are twice as high as the value used in the IS92 Scenarios. 
CW uses the same wetlands emission rate as in the IS92 
Scenarios, but unlike the 1S92 Scenarios, distinguishes 
between wetland and dryland rice areas. This distinction 
contributes to the difference between the IS92 Scenarios 
and CW. In addition, the IS92 Scenarios estimate the area 
of rice fields using a priori assumptions about per capita 
rice consumption and rice yield per hectare, whereas the 
estimate of rice area in CW is based on economic and 
technological development. The rice yields of the IS92 
Scenarios are similar to those of CW and SCW for South 
and Southeast Asia (Figure 6.17b), but are lower than 
those of CW for China and Centrally Planned Asia (Figure 
6.17a). The higher yields in CW lead to smaller areas of 
rice fields compared to the IS92 Scenarios, and hence to 
lower CH4 emission estimates. In India, CW shows that 
rice yield improvements exceed the increase in rice 
demand up to 2025, leading to a decrease in rice area and 
CH 4 emissions. After 2025 demand exceeds yield 
improvement, and both rice area and CH 4 emissions 
increase. Emissions in the IS92 Scenarios are relatively 
constant up to 2100. 
The global increase in rice yield is assumed to be about 
0.9%/yr in the IS92 Scenarios, SCW and RCW for the 
period 1990 to 2010. FAO (1993) assumes a global yield 
increase of 1.5%/yr and increase in harvested area of 
0.5%/yr for the period 1990 to 2010, leading to a rise in 
production of 2%/yr. The total yield increase over the 
period is about 35%. This increase is even more optimistic 
than the yield increase of 25% for Asia assumed by CW, 
and it is substantially different from the IS92 Scenarios. 
SCW and RCW. For the period beyond 2010, it is not 
certain whether high growth rates in rice yields of the 
order of 1.5% can be maintained, and it has been suggested 
that for continued growth a genetic breakthrough is 
needed. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
29.9 
1-1,1-2,1-3,1-1,1-5,1-6 
1990 
2010 
- | 
i 
i 
i
—
|
—
i
—
,
—
i
—
|
—
i
—
i
—
i
—
r 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
Figure 6.17a: Comparison of development of rice yields for 
China and Centrally Planned Asian countries for different 
scenarios. Numbers correspond to list of scenarios in the 
Supplementary Table. 
240 i 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
Year 
2070 
2090 
Figure 6.17b: Comparison of development of rice yields for 
South and Southeast Asia for different scenarios. Numbers 
correspond to list of scenarios in the Supplementary Table. 
National projections can be used to examine the 
assumptions for different regions. For example, in 
Indonesia a number of different scenarios were developed 
to analyse different combinations of development in rice 
yields and harvested and planted rice area (DOA1, 1993). 
The highest yield increase was 1.5%/yr, with an increase in 
harvested area of 0.6%/yr which resulted in a 2.2%/yr 
growth in rice production. The same 2.2%/yr rise in 
production could also be achieved with a yield increase of 
0.9%/yr combined with an increase of 1.2%/yr in 
harvested area. The latter scenario was based on historical 
increases in rice yield and is much less optimistic about 
rice yields than FAO (1993), the IS92 Scenarios, CW and 
RCW and SCW. This Indonesian example shows the 
important effect of assumptions about rice yields on the 
development of harvested area. 
6.4.6.2 Factors affecting emission ofCH4from 
enteric 
fermentation 
Estimates of CH 4 emissions from enteric fermentation 
depend on assumptions about the number of animals, and 
these assumptions in turn depend on the size of the 
demand for meat and dairy products and the amount of 
meat and dairy products produced by each animal (animal 
productivity). 
The major difference between the IS92 Scenarios and 
CW is the estimation of demand for meat and dairy 
products. This estimate is based on demographic, 
economic and technological factors in CW and on a priori 
assumptions in the IS92 Scenarios. 
Of the scenarios reviewed, only CW makes explicit 
assumptions about meat productivity. Over the period 
1990 to 2010, CW assumes a 0.2%/yr to 1.5%/yr increase 
in meat productivity in developing regions, whereas FAO 
(1993) assumes a much higher 0.9%/yr to 1.9%/yr for the 
same period. Scenarios for animal populations are linked 
to these productivity assumptions. For the period 1990 to 
2010 CW shows an increase in the number of cattle by a 
factor of 1.9 for Africa, 2.2 for the Middle East, 5.6 for 
China, 1.2 for India and 1.3 for Latin America. The 
corresponding estimates from FAO (1993) are much 
lower, namely, 1.3 for Africa, 1.4 for the Middle East, 2.3 
for East Asia (including China), 1.2 for South Asia 
(including India) and 1.1 for Latin America. 
6.4.6.3 Factors affecting emission of'N-,0 from 
fertilised 
agricultural 
soils 
The amount of N 2 0 from fertilised soils depends on the 
amount of fertiliser used and the N.,0 loss rate from soil. It 
was already pointed out that the scenarios reviewed in this 
report assume the same amount of future fertiliser use. 
Hence most differences between scenarios arise from 
different assumptions about N 2 0 loss rates from soils. 
The assumed growth of fertiliser up to 2010 is 
substantially lower than that given in FAO (1993). For the 
period 1990 to 2010, FAO assumes a 3.3%/yr to 4.8%/yr 
growth in fertiliser use in Africa, Latin America and Asia. 
Summary of the discussion of factors influencing the land-
use-related 
emissions 
of non-CO-, gases: the 
scenarios 
reviewed 
take a wide variety of different 
approaches 
in 
estimating 
future 
emissions. 
The variety of 
approaches 
reflects the lack of knowledge 
or agreement 
on how to 
represent emission-generating 
processes. 
In general, the 
IS92 Scenarios 
only partly 
cover the range of input 
assumptions found in other published 
scenarios. 
6.4.7 Discussion of Scenarios of Land-Use 
Emissions 
Different clusters of scenarios for CO ? emissions from 
deforestation are distinguishable. Starting with global 

294 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
scenarios, the IS92 Scenarios and AIM make similar 
assumptions about the relationship between population 
growth and emissions. Consequently, as population growth 
slows, they estimate similar downward trends in emissions. 
CW considers growth of population and GNP, 
technological development and other factors, and 
calculates a global emission trend close to the IS92 
Scenarios and AIM. These scenarios are also in the lower 
range of the non-intervention scenarios. The remaining 
non-intervention scenarios, SCW, RCW, HI, and H2, 
extrapolate past trends in deforestation and estimate much 
higher emission rates than the other scenarios. 
I or regional scenarios, CW differed greatly from the 
IS92 Scenarios and AIM because of its different methods 
for estimating future trends in deforestation. Although 
nearly all scenarios relate the deforestation rate only to 
population growth, it is known that deforestation is more 
precisely related to pressure on agricultural land, 
consumption of wood products, settlement policy and other 
socio-economic factors (Turner et al. 1993). Accounting for 
these factors would permit the construction of more diverse 
scenarios of CO, emissions. Moreover, including these 
socio-economic factors would tend to dampen the rapid 
rates of deforestation found in nearly all scenarios. 
Much of the variation between scenarios on both the 
global and the regional level can be attributed to different 
estimates of base year emissions. This difference indicates 
the lack of scientific agreement on the processes leading to 
CO, fluxes from deforestation. Another important source 
of variation is differing estimates of the carbon content of 
vegetation and soil. For example, SCW and HI differ only 
because of their different assumptions about the carbon 
content of forests. 
The scenarios for CH4 emissions from rice fields and 
enteric fermentation are sensitive to assumptions about 
future technological improvement in rice and animal 
productivity and herd composition. Estimates derived from 
the different scenarios disagree with FAO (1993) and 
perhaps should be re-evaluated. Another source of 
uncertainty for CH4 estimates from rice fields is the rate of 
emissions per unit area of rice field. Although the scenarios 
surveyed in this report assume a global, constant emission 
factor, the rate of emissions is known to depend on site 
conditions, rice variety and crop management. Some of this 
knowledge should be built into new scenarios. 
A drawback of the IS92 Scenarios and other scenarios is 
that they do not take into account important climatic and 
atmospheric feedbacks in land-use emissions (e.g., N-,0 
from soils and CO, from soil respiration). The only 
scenario to consider this feedback is CW (of course there 
is great uncertainty in its treatment of these feedbacks). 
Analysis shows that the 1S92 Scenarios are on the low 
side of the wide range of global scenarios for land-use-
related CO, emissions from deforestation and overlap with 
the few regional scenarios available. The IS92 Scenarios 
also partly overlap with the few scenarios available for 
N90 and CH4 emissions. In addition, the IS92 Scenarios 
cover most of the greenhouse gases originating from land-
use and agriculture as well as precursors of ozone and 
sulphate aerosol. Emissions are reported for four world 
regions and by source and sector. 
The documentation of certain land-use assumptions is 
not quite adequate to reproduce the land-use-related 
scenarios for IS92 Scenarios, SCW and RCW. For 
example, it would be helpful to have a more detailed 
description of the assumptions about afforestation, rice 
production and animal production. There are few 
published sensitivity analyses of land-use emissions. In 
one of the few studies available, Pepper et al. (1992) 
analysed the effect of the assumed carbon content of 
cleared vegetation and the rate of deforestation on CO., 
emissions. Although this report is not strictly a sensitivity 
analysis, it illustrates the simplicity of the assumptions. 
The calculated C02 emissions are directly related to the 
carbon content of cleared vegetation, population growth 
and deforestation rates in previous periods. The carbon 
content is specified for three forest types and for three 
continents. The deforestation rates in the IS92 Scenarios 
are calculated from human population growth and the 
deforestation rate, with a lag time of 25 years. 
No analysis of sensitivity to input assumptions is made 
for the deforestation rates presented in SCW and RCW in 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) and AIM (Matsuoka and Morita, 
1994). Zuidema et al. (1994) examined the sensitivity of 
changes in land cover in CW to changes in crop and 
animal productivity. The authors showed that deforestation 
rates are more sensitive to crop yields than to animal 
productivity. Table 6.10 indicates that deforestation in CW 
is based on the assumption that it is driven by demand for 
food and wood products. Hence, in that scenario, 
deforestation depends on human population, GNP (through 
income elasticities of food products) and the land's 
productivity. Land productivity is based on grid-based 
maps of land cover, climate, soils and region-specific 
management factors. Further sensitivity analysis should 
examine all these factors. 
In conclusion, it should be noted that one reason for the 
large differences in land-use scenarios for C02, CH4 and 
N,0 emissions is the lack of dependable geo-referenced 
information on land cover and land-use. Systematic land 
cover and land-use mapping is needed to decrease this 
uncertainty, to improve emission scenarios, and to develop 
cost-effective mitigation measures. 
6.5 Discussion and Recommendations 
In this section, the IS92 Scenarios are discussed in the light 
of the purposes for scenarios laid out in Section 6.1. It 

An Evaluation of the IPCC1S92 Emission 
Scenarios 
29.5 
should again be emphasised that time constraints led to a 
narrowing of the focus for the evaluation. Also, in fairness, 
it should be noted that other scenarios were not judged by 
the criteria that were used to judge the IS92 Scenarios. 
Therefore, the reader should be aware that any 
shortcomings of the IS92 Scenarios identified in this 
evaluation may or may not apply to other scenarios. 
As a method for judging whether the IS92 Scenarios 
comply with criteria in Section 6.1, they have been 
compared to other scenarios. This comparison does not 
answer all questions about the requirements of the 
scenarios, but it provides important information about the 
position of the IS92 Scenarios relative to other work in the 
scientific community. This section first examines the uses 
and limitations of the IS92 Scenarios, and then discusses 
the need for new scenarios and the procedure for 
developing them. 
Table 6.14: Suggested criteria for using emission scenarios for different 
purposes. 
Criteria 
Purpose of Scenario 
(See Box 2, Section 6.1) 
1 
2 
3 
Comprehensive. The scenarios take into account all important greenhouse gases, including 
precursors of ozone and sulphate aerosol. 
Documentation of output. Sufficient detail is provided for emissions by type, region 
(if available) and sector, to allow comparisons with other scenarios. 
Emission estimates and input assumptions of the scenario reflect a range of views. A single 
reference scenario is inadequate for this purpose. Instead, a range of scenario results are 
presented that take into account the uncertainties of the basic driving forces of the scenarios. 
Data on driving forces, as well as parameters in the case that a model is used, reflect the 
current range of views. In addition, derived variables, for example, carbon intensity of the 
economy, also reflect current understanding. 
Reproducible. Input data and methodology are documented adequately enough to allow other 
researchers to reproduce the scenarios. 
Sensitivity analysis. Information is provided on the sensitivity of scenario output to variation 
and uncertainty in input data and model parameters (if a model is used). 
Internal consistency. The various input assumptions and data of the scenarios are internally 
consistent. For example, assumptions about biomass in the energy sector are consistent with 
assumptions in the land-use sector. 
Documentation of assumptions about policy intervention. All assumptions about policy 
actions are documented adequately enough to allow policy interpretation of the scenario 
results. 
Disaggregation of data. Input and results of scenarios are sufficiently disaggregated into 
sectors and geographic regions to allow analysis of policies. The geographic breakdown 
is the country level, but the regional level may be adequate as a first step. 
Documentation of input data and methodology. Input data and methodology are sufficiently 
documented to allow analysis of feasibility and costs of reduction measures. 
Reference scenario. The set of emission scenarios includes a "reference scenario" for 
comparison with the policy scenarios in order to ensure consistency. 
Temporal calculations. The scenarios describe the time aspect of implementing mitigation 
measures. This is critical information for assessing the costs of control. 
Range of policy actions. The set of scenarios include a wide range of policy alternatives. 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
XXX 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xxx 
XX 
XX 
XX 
xxx 
XX 
XX 
xxx 
xxx 
NA 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
NA 
NA 
xxx 
xxx 
NA 
xxx 
xxx 
xxx 
NA 
x 
xxx 
xxx 
NA 
x 
Key to codes: 
xxx 
xx 
x 
NA 
Ver> Important 
Important 
Desirable 
Not Applicable 

2% 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
6.5.1 What are the Uses and Limitations 
of the IS92 
Scenarios? 
In our judgement, the IS92 Scenarios clearly fulfil the 
criteria for Purpose I listed as "very important" in Table 
ft. 14. Specifically, Sections ft.2 to ft.4 showed that the 
global results and many of the input assumptions of the 
IS92 Scenarios span the range of the results and 
assumptions of other scenarios; in this sense it can be said 
that the scenarios reflect the current range of views about 
future emissions, at least on the global level. (For 
particular regions, however, the IS92 Scenarios do not 
represent the range of views.) Moreover, the IS92 
Scenarios are among the most comprehensive scenarios 
available in their coverage of all important greenhouse 
gases and precursors of ozone and sulphate aerosol. Also, 
the IS92 Scenarios are sufficiently documented in reports 
and in digital form to allow their comparison with other 
scenarios and their use as input files for climate models. 
As a consequence, they are useful for Purpose 1, namely as 
input to atmosphere/climate models for examining the 
environmental/climatic consequences of not acting to 
reduce greenhouse emissions. 
It is noted that the IS92 Scenarios do not fulfil all the 
criteria listed as "important" and "desirable" requirements 
for Purpose I in Tabic ft. 14. The documentation of land-
use assumptions concerning afforestation, rice production 
and animal production may not be adequate to allow other 
researchers to reproduce the IS92 calculations. Also, the 
ASF model used to generate the scenarios is not readily 
available, which affects reproducibility. Only a limited 
amount of sensitivity analysis work is reported in Pepper 
(7 ul. (1992) for the 1S92 Scenarios. The criterion 
of the internal consistency of the IS92 Scenarios could 
not be evaluated because there was no access to the ASF 
model. 
Although these shortcomings should he addressed in 
new scenarios, it is not considered that they detract from 
the current usefulness of the IS92 Scenarios as input to 
atmospheric/climate models. 
Fven though the IS92 Scenarios were designed with 
Purpose 1 in mind, it is interesting to examine whether 
they are useful for the other three purposes for scenarios. 
Table ft. 14 ranks the importance of different criteria to 
fulfil these purposes. There follows a brief review of the 
suitability of the IS92 Scenarios to fulfil them. 
Purpose 
2. To evaluate 
the 
environmental/climatic 
consequences 
of intervention 
to reduce greenhouse 
gas 
emissions. 
For this purpose, an intervention scenario is 
devised, then used as input for a climate or similar model 
to evaluate the scenario's environmental/climatic 
consequences. 
This purpose is basically the same as Purpose 1 except 
that the intervention scenario takes into account climate 
policies lor reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For 
example, the intervention scenario might assume that a 
carbon tax is imposed to reduce CO., emissions, or that a 
programme to reduce CH4 leakage in natural gas pipelines 
is carried out. 
The IS92 Scenarios make assumptions about controlling 
local air pollution problems and these measures also have 
an effect on greenhouse gas emissions. Moreover, IS92b 
includes information available in 1992 about the emission 
commitments of OECD countries. This information, 
however, must be updated with the latest information on 
commitments in connection with the Climate Convention. 
In general, it was found that the emission estimates of the 
IS92 Scenarios are substantially higher than policy 
scenarios published in the literature. Hence, they should 
not be used as intervention scenarios. 
Purpose 
3. To examine 
the feasibility 
and costs of 
mitigating 
greenhouse 
gases from different 
regions 
and 
economic sectors, and over time. This purpose can include 
setting emission reduction targets and developing 
scenarios to reach these targets. It can also include 
examining the driving forces of emissions and sinks to 
identify which of these forces can be influenced by 
policies. 
This purpose requires more information about the 
scenarios than the first two purposes because its goal is a 
realistic assessment (technical and financial) of mitigation 
measures. This purpose also requires estimation of all 
important greenhouse gases from specific economic 
sectors and geographic regions. In addition, input 
assumptions must also be described with a similar level of 
detail. Under ideal circumstances, these data would be 
available by country, although for preliminary calculations 
data at the level of world regions may be adequate. 
Analysing the feasibility and costs of mitigation also 
requires that the scenarios have a high level of internal 
consistency, so that costs can be accurately assessed. In 
addition, since the evaluation of mitigation measures must 
take into account the time period over which measures are 
put into place, the scenarios must provide information 
about changing emissions over time rather than for a single 
point in the future (e.g. emissions in 2025). To enhance the 
usefulness of scenarios for Purpose 3, it is also 
recommended that a range of policy alternatives be 
explored. 
Scenarios that fulfil Purpose 3 also fulfil Purpose 2, but 
scenarios that fulfil Purpose 2 do not necessarily have 
enough detail to comply with Purpose 3. 
The IS92 Scenarios are inadequate for Purpose 3 
primarily because five out of six scenarios do not include 
climate policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (they 
were not intended for that purpose). In addition, the IS92 
Scenarios have somewhat limited use as reference 
scenarios for mitigation studies because their regional 
emission estimates and regional input assumptions are in 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 Emission Scenarios 
297 
many cases outside the range of views found in published 
scenarios. 
Purpose 4. As input for negotiating possible emission 
reductions for different countries and geographic regions. 
To achieve this purpose a scenario must gain broad 
international acceptance by being based on input 
assumptions and methodology 
that are 
widely 
acknowledged and accepted. Consequently, this scenario 
has the most stringent requirements. 
Purpose 4 is difficult to achieve at this time because of 
high uncertainty about current greenhouse emissions from 
many emission categories and in many countries 
(especially C 0 2 in non-energy sectors and other 
greenhouse gases from virtually all sectors). This 
uncertainty is one reason why the IS92 Scenarios are not 
appropriate for this purpose, although they can help set the 
context for negotiations by indicating the possible range of 
emissions if no mitigation takes place. 
It should be noted that scenarios for Purpose 4 will soon 
be needed for discussions related to the Climate 
Convention. 
6.5.2 The Question of New Scenarios 
At this time, it is recommended that researchers use the 
IS92 Scenarios as input to atmosphere/climate models for 
examining the consequences of not intervening to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions (Purpose 1). 
Should one IS92 Scenario be singled out for use over 
the others? In some ways IS92a is intermediate among the 
scenarios. Its global CO-, emissions fall near the middle of 
other scenarios at least to 2050, and some of its input 
assumptions are intermediate. For example, its population 
assumptions are equal or close to the medium projections 
recently published by three different international 
organisations. The sensitivity analysis showed, however, 
that there are no strong reasons for selecting it as the 
"medium case" scenario. 
An intermediate scenario is not the same as the most 
likely scenario. Indeed, at this time there is no objective 
basis for assessing that one scenario is more likely to occur 
than another. Considering the degree of uncertainty about 
future emissions, the use of the full range of IS92 
Scenarios as input to atmosphere/climate models is 
recommended, rather than the use of any single scenario. 
Users of the IS92 Scenarios are cautioned, however, that 
the lowest scenario (IS92c) has the emission levels and 
some input assumptions that are more characteristic of an 
intervention scenario than a reference scenario. 
Because the IS92 Scenarios were not designed and are 
not suitable for Purposes 2, 3 and 4, new scenarios may be 
needed to fulfil these purposes. It is worth repeating that 
this evaluation did not judge the suitability of non-IS92 
Scenarios to satisfy these purposes. 
New scenarios, if developed, should improve estimates 
of base year and future non-CO-, emissions, particularly 
from the land-use sector. 
Although the adequacy of all currently available 
scenarios was not judged in this study, it is likely that new 
reference scenarios will be needed for the following: 
• 
to take into account the latest information on 
economic restructuring, especially in the CIS, 
Eastern 
Europe, Asia and 
Latin 
America 
(restructuring in Eastern Europe and the CIS was 
partly taken into account in the IS92 Scenarios, but it 
would be worthwhile to include more recent 
information about this restructuring); 
to evaluate the possible consequences of the 
Uruguay Round amendments to the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; 
to explore a variety of economic development 
pathways, for example, a closing of the income gap 
between industrialised and developing regions; 
to examine different trends in technological change; 
to take into account the latest information about 
current emission commitments in connection with 
the Climate Convention. 
The current commitments to stabilise emissions under 
the Climate Convention (see Box 4) could result in large 
reductions of emissions in certain regions, but on a global 
basis a reduction of 10% or less (in annual emissions 
relative to the IS92a Scenario) is expected in CO, 
emissions. Current commitments will have no effect on the 
lowest IPCC Scenario (IS92c) because emissions in this 
scenario are lower than would he expected by current 
commitments. 
New scenarios are also needed that arc consistent with 
limits on atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases 
by a specified date. These scenarios should he related to 
the carbon stabilisation modelling exercises being 
performed by IPCC Working Group I. 
6.5.3 The Process of Developing Scenarios 
If new or updated scenarios are developed, it is 
recommended that efforts be guided by the following 
approach. The IPCC or other suitable organisation should 
act as an "umbrella" under which different groups can 
develop comparable, comprehensive emission scenarios. 
The process for developing scenarios should draw on 
current experience in harmonising scenarios and model 
calculations by emphasising the following: 
Openness. Scenario development should he open to 
wide participation by the research community, 
particularly from developing countries. Openness 

2% 
The current commitment scenarios are compared to 
the lowest, highest and intermediate IPCC reference 
scenarios. For each reference scenario, two cases of 
current commitments are shown: 
Case 1: All OECD countries comply with commitments 
noted in Climate Change Policy Initiatives, Volume 1. 
OECD Countries, 1994 Update (OECD, 1994) and 
freeze emissions at these levels after year 2005. 
Case 2: All OECD countries comply with their 
commitments as in Case 1, plus countries in Eastern 
Europe and the former USSR freeze their emissions in 
2000 at their 1990 levels. 
As a result of these assumptions, CO., emissions are 
reduced by about 8 to 12% (depending on the year 
considered) relative to the intermediate reference 
scenario of IPCC (lS92a). Percentage reductions are 
slightly larger for the highest IPCC scenario (IS92e). 
Current commitments have no effect on global 
emissions of the lowest IPCC scenario (IS92c) because 
emissions in this reference case are lower than they 
would be for either Case 1 or 2. 
requires extensive documentation of modelling 
assumptions and inputs. 
Pluralism. A diversity of groups, approaches and 
methodologies should be encouraged, although they 
should be harmonised as noted below. 
An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios 
Comparability. Reporting conventions for input and 
output should be standardised. 
• 
Harmonisation. 
Input 
assumptions 
and 
methodologies for the scenarios should be 
harmonised to provide a common benchmark for 
scenarios from different groups. 
6.5.4 Integrated Scenarios 
To accomplish Purpose 3 for emission scenarios 
(estimation of feasibility and costs of mitigation 
measures), it is important not only to analyse the costs of 
emission reductions but also to assess the costs and 
benefits of the impacts of emissions on the natural 
environment and society, Therefore, the next generation of 
emission scenarios should be coupled with their impact on 
the environment and society in the form of consistent, 
comprehensive and integrated scenarios for global change. 
These scenarios would cover not only the trend of 
emissions but also changes in the atmosphere and ocean 
and the impact of these changes on society, the terrestrial 
environment and the marine environment. It is 
recommended that the IPCC encourages the development 
of integrated scenarios. 
6.5.5 Dissemination of Scenarios 
Current and new scenarios should be widely disseminated 
to countries, international organisations, non-governmental 
organisations and the scientific community. As part of this 
effort, a central archive should be established to make 
available the results of new scenarios to any group. The 
archive should also make available some aspects of the 
models and the input assumptions used to derive the 
scenarios. In addition, special effort is needed to improve 
the capabilities of researchers to analyze and develop 
scenarios, especially in developing regions. The IPCC can 
play a role in these activities. 
Acknowledgements 
For assistance with this chapter, the authors are indebted to 
Y. Matsuoka, C. MacCracken, N. Nakicenovic, L. 
Schrattenholzer, S. Toet and M. Wise. We are particularly 
grateful to Mrs Judy Lakeman of the WGI Technical 
Support Unit for her careful and thorough work in 
preparing the text for final publication. 
BOX 4: SCENARIOS OF CURRENT 
COMMITMENTS 
IS92e with currant 
commitmants ot OECD 
IS92a with currant commitmants 
OECD. E Europa and former 
Sovtat Union 
1S92« scenario 
* — . IS92M with currant 
commitments of OECD 
IS92a with current commitmants 
OECD. E Europe and former 
Soviet Union 
IS92c scenario 
with and without current 
commitmants 
This graph depicts a set of optimistic scenarios for 
global CO-, emissions based on current commitments 
under Article 4 of the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change. These are optimistic scenarios because 
they assume that the countries making commitments 
under the Convention will freeze their emissions after 
2005 at their committed levels. 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
Supplementary Table: Scenarios Reviewed in this Report 
299 
Code 
Scenario Identification 
Type (*) 
Reference 
1-1 
IS92a IPCC 1992 
1-2 
IS92b IPCC 1992 
1-3 
IS92c IPCC 1992 
1-4 
IS92d IPCC 1992 
1-5 
IS92e IPCC 1992 
1-6 
IS92f IPCC 1992 
1-7 
IS92 SI: IPCC 1992 Sensitivity 1 (High Deforestation, High Biomass) 
1-8 
IS92 S4: IPCC 1992 Sensitivity 4 (Halt Deforestation, High Plantation) 
2-1 
Nordhaus 50th% (50th%ile) 
2-2 
Nordhaus 95th% (95th%ile) 
2-3 
Nordhaus 5th% (5th%ile) 
3-1 
Edmonds 50th% (Scenario B, 50th%ile) 
3-2 
Edmonds 95th% (Scenario B, 95th%ile) 
3-3 
Edmonds 5th% (Scenario B, 5th%ile) 
4 
Rogner 
5 
Mintzer 
6-1 
Methane Economy Efficiency Scenario 
6-2 
Methane Economy Long-wave Scenario 
7-1 
EPA Slowly Changing World (SCW) 
7-2 
EPA Rapidly Changing World (RCW) 
7-3 
EPA RCW with Accelerated Emissions (RCWA) 
7-4 
EPA High Reforestation (Halt Deforestation, High Plantation) 
7-5 
EPA SCW with Stabilisation Policies 
7-6 
EPA RCW with Stabilisation Policies 
8-1 
IPCC 1990 (SA:Scenario A) 
8-2 
IPCC 1990 (Scenario A, High) 
8-3 
IPCC 1990 (Scenario A, Low) 
8-4 
IPCC-EIS Energy Industry Sub-group 1990 (reference) 
9 
Ogawa (Institute of Energy Economics, Japan) 
10 
Bach 
11-1 
Edmonds-Reilly (Scenario 1) 
11-2 
Edmonds-Reilly (Scenario 2) 
12-1 
GREEN (1991) 
12-2 
GREEN (1992) 
12-3 
GREEN (1993) reference 
12-4 
GREEN (1993) 200 $/tc carbon tax 
13-1 
Global 2100 (Scenario 1) 
13-2 
Global 2100 (Scenario 2) 
13-3 
Global 2100 (1992 Scenario) 
14 
TEC 
15 
Anderson (World Bank) 
16-1 
CHALLENGE reference 
16-2 
CHALLENGE 200 $/tc carbon tax 
17 
CRTM 
18 
ECS ' 92 (Dynamics as usual) 
19-1 
IEA 1992 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G 
G 
G 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G 
G 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G R P 
G R P 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G R P 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G R P 
GR 
GR 
GR 
Leggett era/. (1992) 
Leggett etal. (1992) 
Leggett etal. (1992) 
Leggett etal. (1992) 
Leggett etal. (1992) 
Leggett etal. (1992) 
Leggett etal. (1992) 
Leggett etal. (1992) 
Nordhaus etal. (1983) 
Nordhaus etal. (1983) 
Nordhaus et al. (1983) 
Edmonds etal. (1986) 
Edmonds etal. (1986) 
Edmonds etal. (1986) 
Rogner (1986) 
Mintzer (1988) 
Ausubel etal. (1988) 
Ausube] etal. (1988) 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 
Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
IPCC (1990) 
Ogawa (1990) 
Bach and Jain (1991) 
Barns etal. (1991) 
Barns etal. (1991) 
Burineauxe/a/. (1992) 
Burineaux etal. (1992) 
Oliveira Martins et al. (1992) 
Oliveira Martins et al. (1992) 
Manne and Richels (1991) 
Manne and Richels (1991) 
Manne (1992) 
Anderson and Bird (1992) 
Schrattenholzer (1992) 
Schrattenholzer(1992) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Vouyoukas(1992) 

300 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
19-2 
IEA 1993 
20-1 
IEW 1991 
20-2 
IEW Poll 50th%ile 
20-3 
IEW Poll 84th%ile 
20-4 
IEW Poll 16th%ile 
21 
ITF-D4 
22 
AGE 
23-1 
AIM High Scenario 
23-2 
AIM Low Scenario 
23-3 
AIM land-use emission scenarios 
23-4 
AIM sulphur emission scenarios 
24 
CETA 
25 
DICE 
26 
FUG I 7.0 
27-1 
IMAGE 2.0 preliminary 
27-2 
IMAGE 2.0 CW (Conventional Wisdom Scenario) 
27-3 
IMAGE 2.0 No Biofuels (No Biofuels Scenario) 
28-1 
Manne-Richcls-50th%-(50th%ile) 
28-2 
Mannc-Richels-95th%-(95th%ile) 
28-3 
Manne-Richels-5th%-(5th%ile) 
28-4 
Global 2100, 1994 
(1994) 
29 
MERGE 
30-1 
12RT reference 
30-2 
12RT 200 $/tc carbon tax 
31-1 
W EC reference (Scenario B) 
31-2 
WEC A High Growth 
31 -3 
WEC C Ecologically Driven 
32 
NES current policies 
33-1 
ESCAPE 
33-2 
ESCAPE SI (Business as Usual) 
33-3 
ESCAPE S3 (Emission Control) 
34-1 
Bashmakov-Base (Russia) 
34-2 
Bashmakov-Efficiency 
35-1 
Sinyak DAU (Dynamics as Usual Scenario) 
35-2 
Sinyak Efficiency (Energy Efficiency Scenario) 
3d-l 
EMF-12 
36-2 
EMF-12 lowest/highest reference scenarios 
36-3 
EMF-12 20% 20% emission reduction case 
36-4 
EMF-12 20% -20% emission reduction case 
37 
He et al. (Gradual Changing Scenario) 
38-1 
UNEP-base (Baseline Scenario) 
38-2 
USEP-abate (Abatement Scenario) 
39-1 
Houghton-Population 
39-2 
Houghton-Exponential Extrapolation 
39-3 
Houghton-Reforestation 
40 
RIGES (Renewable Intensive Global Energy System) 
11 
I-T'ES (Fossil Free Energy System) 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
GR 
G R P 
GR 
GR 
G R P 
R 
GR 
R 
RP 
R 
RP 
R 
RP 
R 
R 
RP 
RP 
R 
R 
RP 
G 
G 
G 
G R P 
G R P 
Vouyoukas(1993) 
Manne et al. (1991) 
Manne et al. (1994) 
Manne et al. (1994) 
Manne et al. (1994) 
Shishido (1991) 
Manne et al. (1993) 
Morita et al. (1993) 
Morita et al. (1993) 
Matsuoka et al. (1994) 
Matsuoka (1992) 
Peck et al. (1993) 
Nordhaus (1993) 
Onishi (1993) 
Alcamo et al. (1994b) 
Alcamo et al. (1994b) 
Alcamo et al. (1994b) 
Manne and Richels (1994) 
Manne and Richels (1994) 
Manne and Richels (1994) 
Manne and Schhratenholzer 
Manne et al. (1993) 
Manne (1993) 
Manne (1993) 
WEC (1993) 
WEC (1993) 
WEC (1993) 
NES (1991) 
Rotmans et al. (1994) 
Rotmans et al. (1994) 
Rotmans et al. (1994) 
Bashmakov (1993) 
Bashmakov (1993) 
Sinyak and Nagano (1992) 
Sinyak and Nagano (1992) 
Gaskins and Weyant (1993) 
Weyant (1993) 
Gaskins and Weyant (1993) 
Weyant (1993) 
He etal. (1993) 
Christensen etal. (1994) 
Christensen etal. (1994) 
Houghton (1991) 
Houghton (1991) 
Houghton (1991) 
Johansson et al. (1993) 
Lazarus etal. (1993) 
' d = Global. R = Regional (National). P = Policy Scenarios 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
301 
References 
Alcamo, J., R. Shaw, and L. Hordijk (eds), 1990: The RAINS 
Model of Acidification: Science and Strategies in Europe. 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht/Boston/London. 
Alcamo, J., G.J.J. Kreileman, M.S. Krol and G. Zuidema, 1994a: 
Modeling the global society-biosphere-climate system: Part 1: 
Model description and testing. Water, Air, Soil Pollution, 76, 
1-35. 
Alcamo, J., G.J. van den Born, A.F. Bouwman, B.J. de Haan, K. 
Klein Goldewijk, O. Klepper, J. Krabrc, R. Leemans, J.G.J. 
Olivier, A.M.C. Toet, H.J.M. de Vries and H.J. van der Woerd, 
1994b: Modeling the global society-biosphere-climate system: 
Part 2: Computed scenarios. Water, Air, Soil Pollution, 76, 37-
78. 
Anderson, D. and CD. Bird, 1992: Carbon accumulations and 
technical progress - A Simulation study of costs. Oxford 
Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 54(1). 
Ajtay, G.L., P. Ketner and P. Duvigneaud, 1979: Terrestrial 
primary production and phytomass. In: The Global Carbon 
Cycle, B. Bolin, S. Kempe and P. Ketner (eds.), SCOPE Vol. 
13, Wiley and Sons, New York, ppl29-181. 
Ausubel, J.H. and WD. Nordhaus. 1983: Review of estimates of 
future carbon dioxide emissions. In: Changing Climate, Report 
of the Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee, 153-185, 
National Academy Press, Washington DC. 
Ausubel, J.H., A. Grubler and N. Nakicenovic, 1988: Carbon 
dioxide emissions in a methane economy. Climatic Change, 
12, 245-263. 
Bacastow, R. and C. Keeling, 1981: Hemispheric airborne 
fractions difference and the hemispheric exchange times. In: 
Carbon Cycle Modeling, B. Bolin (ed.), SCOPE 16, Wiley, 
New York. 
Bach, W. and A.K. Jain, 1991: The global warming challenge. 
CMDC, 65-124. 
Barns, D.W., J.E. Edmonds and J.M. Reilly, 1991: Use of the 
Edmonds-Reilly Model to model energy related greenhouse 
gas emissions for inclusion in an OECD survey volume. 
OECD Workshop on Cost of Reducing CO, Emissions: 
Evidence from Global Models, 10-11 September, 1991, Paris. 
Bashmakov, I., 1993: The System of Statistical Indexes for World 
Energy. Moscow Center for Energy Efficiency, Moscow (in 
Russian). 
Boden, T.A., R.J. Sepanski and F.W. Stoss, 1992: Trends '91: A 
Compendium of Data on Global Change. ORNL CDIAC-46, 
Carbon Dioxide Information Center, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN. 
Bolle, H.J., W. Seller and B. Bolin, 1986: Other greenhouse 
gases and aerosols: assessing their role in atmospheric 
radiative transfer. In The Greenhouse Effect, Climatic Change 
And Ecosystems, 
B. Bolin, BR. Ddos, J. Jager and R.A. 
Warrick (eds.), pp157-203, SCOPE Vol.29, Wiley and Sons. 
New York. 
Bouwman, A.F., I. Fung, E. Matthews and J. John. 1993: Global 
analysis of the potential for N70 production in natural soils. 
Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 557-597. 
Bouwman, A.F., K.W. van der Hock and J.G.J. Olivier. 1994: 
Uncertainty in the global source distribution of nitrous oxide. 
./. Geophys. Res. (in press) 
Burniaux, J.M., G. Nicoletti and JO. Martins, 1992: GREEN: A 
Global Model for Quantifying the Costs of Policies to Curb 
C02 Emissions. OECD Economic Studies No. 19 , OECD, 
Paris. 
Christensen, J.M., K. Halsnaes, G.A. Mackenzie, J. Swisher and 
A. Villavicencio, 1994: UNEP Greenhouse Gas Abatement 
Costing Studies. UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and 
Environment, Riso National Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark. 
Cicerone, R.J. and R.S. Oremland, 1988: Biogeochemical 
aspects of atmospheric methane. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 
2, 299-327. 
Cleland, J., 1994: Fertility trends in developing countries: 1960 
to 1990. In: Alternative Paths of Future World Population 
Growth, W.Lutz (ed.), International Institute for Applied 
Systems Analysis, Laxcnburg, Austria. 
Crutzen, P.J. and M.O. Andreae, 1990: Biomass burning in the 
tropics: impact on atmospheric chemistry and biogeochemical 
cycles. Science, 250, 1669-1678. 
Crutzen, P.J., I. Aselmann and W. Seller, 1986: Methane 
production by domestic animals, wild ruminants, other 
herbivorous fauna and humans. Tellus, 38B, 271-284. 
De Vries, H.J.M., J.G.J. Olivier, R.A. van den Wijngaart, G.J.J. 
Kreileman and A.M.C. Toet, 1994: Model for calculating 
regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas 
emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air, 
Soil Pollution, 76,79-131. 
DOAI (Department of Agriculture, Indonesia), 1993: The 
Projection of the Target Rice Productivity and Planted Area of 
Paddy Field in the Second Long Term Development Plan of 
Indonesia. Directorate of Food Crop Programme Development, 
Department of Agriculture, Indonesia. 
ECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe), 1993: 
Enhancing Energy Efficiency in the ECE Region: Recent 
Developments, 
Policies, 
International 
Trade and Co-
operation. ENERGY/R.88 12 November 1993, ECE, Geneva. 
Edmonds, J.A., 1993: Carbon coalitions: the cost and 
effectiveness of energy agreements to alter trajectories of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide emissions, Climate Treaties and 
Models: Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) Workshop 
April 23, 1993, OTA, Washington DC. 
Edmonds, J.A. and 0.W. Barns, 1992: Factors affecting the 
long-term cost of fossil fuel CO., emissions reductions. Int. 
Journal of Global Energy Issues, 4, No. 3, 140-166. 
Edmonds, J., J. Reilly, J.R. Trabalka, DE. Reichle, D. Rind, S. 
Lebedeff, J.P. Palutikof, T.M.L. Wigley, J.M. Lough, T.J. 
Biasing, A.M. Salomon, S. Seidel, D. Keyes and M. Steinberg, 
1986: Future Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Scenarios and 
Limitation Strategies. Noyes Publications, Park Ridge, NJ. 
ESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for 
Aisia and the Pacific), 1991: Climate Effects of Fossil Fuel 
Use in the Asia Pacific Region. ST/ESCAP/1007, ESCAP, 
Bangkok. 
FAO, 1993: Agriculture 
Towards 2010. Report C 93/24, 
November 1993, FAO, Rome, Italy. 
Gaskins, D.W. and J.P. Weyant, 1993: Model comparison of the 
costs of reducing CO, emissions. American Economic Review, 
83(2), 318-323. 
Gibbs, M.J. and R.A. Leng, 1993: Methane emissions from 
livestock. In: Proceedings of the International Workshop on 

.902 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
Methane and Nitrous Oxide. Methods for National Inventories 
and Options for Control, A. Van Amstel, (cd.), RIVM report 
481507003, National Institute of Public Health and 
Environmental Protection, Bilthoven, The Netherlands, pp73-79. 
Gibbs, M.J. and J.W. Woodbury, 1993: Methane emissions from 
livestock manure. In: Proceedings 
of the 
International 
Workshop on Methane and Nitrous Oxide. Methods for 
National Inventories and Options for Control, A. Van Amstel, 
(cd.), RIVM report 481507003, National Institute of Public 
Health and Environmental Protection, Bilthoven, The 
Netherlands, pp81-91. 
Griibler, A. 1994: A Comparison of Global and Regional 
Emission Scenarios. Working Paper, IIASA, Laxenburg, 
Austria. (In press.) 
Griibler, A., S. Messner, L. Schrattcnholzcr and A. Schafcr, 
1993: Emission reduction at the global level. Energy, 18(5), 
539-581. 
lie, J„ /. Wei and Z. Wu, 1993: Study of China's energy system for 
reducing C()2 emission. In: Costs, Impacts, and Benefits ofC07 
Mitigation, Y. Kaya, N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus and F.L. 
Toth (eds.), C'P-93-2, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria, pp485-506. 
Ik-ilig. Ci. 1994: How Many People Can Be Fed On Earth? In: 
Alternative Paths of Future World Population Growth, W. 
Lul/ (cd.), International Institute for Applied Systems 
Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Houghton, R.A., 1991: Tropical deforestation and atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. Climatic Change, 19, 99-118. 
Houghton, R.A., R.D. Boone, J.M. Mclillo, C.A. Palm, G.M. 
Woodwell, N. Myers, B. Moore III and D.L. Skole, 1985: Net 
flux of carbon dioxide from tropical forests in 1980. Nature, 
316,nl7-62(). 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change: The Scientific Assessment. J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds). Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC-EIS (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Energy 
and Industry Subgroup), 1990: Energy and Industry Subgroup 
Report May 31, 1990. IPCC, Geneva (21P-2001 US EPA, 
Washington DC). 
Jason, A. 1979: Long-term Impact of Atmospheric 
Carbon 
Dioxide on Climate, JSR-78-07, SRI International, Arlington, 
VA. 
JEE(Japan Environment Agency), 1993: The Study on the 
Response Actions against the Increasing Emission of Carbon 
Dioxide in Indonesia. 
Final report. Japan Environment 
Agency. Overseas Environment Cooperation Centre and 
Ministry of State for Population and Environment. 
Johansson. T.B., H. Kelly, A.K.N. Reddy and R.H. Williams, 
19U3: A renewables-intensive global energy scenario. In: 
Renewable Energy: Sources for Fuels and Electricity, T.B. 
Johansson. 11. Kelly. A.K.N. Reddy and R.H. Williams (eds.), 
Island Press. Washington DC, pp 1071-1142. 
Kaya. Y.. ltlcH): Impact of Carbon Dioxide Emission Control on 
(INI' Growth: Interpretation of Proposed Scenarios. Paper 
ptesenied to the IPCC Energy and Industry Subgroup. 
Response Sit.itegies Working Group. Paris. France (mimeo). 
Keller, M., E. Veldkamp, A.M. Weitz and W.A. Reiners, 1993: 
Pasture age effects on soil-atmosphere trace gas exchange in a 
deforested area of Costa Rica. Nature , 365, 244-246. 
Klein-Goldewijk, K., J.G. Van Minnen, G.J.J. Kreileman, M. 
Vlocdbeld and R. Leemans, 1994: Simulating the carbon flux 
between the terrestrial environment and the atmosphere, 
Water, Air and Soil Pollution 76, 199-230. 
Lashof, D.A., 1991: EPA's scenarios for future greenhouse gas 
emissions and global warming. Energy Journal, 12(1), 125-146. 
Lashof, D.A. and D.A. Tirpak, 1990: Policy Options for 
Stabilizing Global Climate. 21P-2003, US Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington DC. 
Lazarus, M., L. Greber, J. Hall., C. Bartels, S. Bernow, E. 
Hansen, P. Raskin and D. von Hippel, 1993: Towards a fossil 
free energy future in the next energy transition: A technical 
analysis for Greenpeace International. Stockholm Environment 
Institute - Boston Center, Boston. 
Leggett, J., W.J. Pepper and R.J. Swart, 1992: Emission 
Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update. In: Climate Change 1992: 
The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Lerner, E., E. Matthews and I. Fung, 1988: Methane emission 
from animals: a global high resolution database. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles , 2, 139-156. 
Luizao, F., P. Matson, G. Livingston, R. Luizao and P. Vitousek, 
1989: Nitrous oxide flux following tropical land clearing. 
Global Biogeochem.Cycles , 3, 281-285. 
Lutz, W., 1994: Future world population growth. Population 
Bulletin. (In press) 
Lutz, W., C. Prinz, J. Langgassner, 1994: The IIASA world 
population scenarios. In: Alternative Paths of Future World 
Population Growth, W. Lutz, (ed.), International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Manne, A., 1992: Global 2100: Alternative scenarios for 
reducing carbon emissions. Economics Department Working 
Papers, (111), OECD, Paris. 
Manne, A. 1993: International trade - the impact of unilateral 
carbon emission limits. The Economics of Climate Change. 
OECD/IEA, Paris. 
Manne, A. and R.G. Richels, 1991: Global C0 2 emission 
reductions - the impacts of rising energy costs. Energy 
Journal, 12,87-101. 
Manne, A. and T.F. Rutherford, 1993: International trade in oil, 
gas and carbon emission rights: An intertemporal general 
equilibrium model. In: Cost, impacts, and benefits of CO, 
mitigation,Y. Kaya et al. (eds.) Proceedings of a Workshop 
held on 28-30 September 1992 at IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria, 
pp315-340. 
Manne, A. and L. Schrattenholzer. 1993: Global scenarios for 
carbon disoxide emissions. Energy, 18(12), 1207-1222. 
Manne, A. and R. Richels, 1994: The Costs of Stabilizing Global 
CO, Emissions - a Probabilistic Analysis Based on Expert 
Judgements. Electric Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA. 
Manne, A. and L. Schrattenholzer. 1994: International Energy 
Workshop, Part 1: Overview of Poll Responses, Part 2: 
Frequency Distributions, Part 3: Individual Poll Responses. 
IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Manne, A.. L. Schrattenholzer and K. Merchant, 1991: The 1991 

An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
m? 
International Energy Workshop: the poll results and a review 
of papers. OPEC Review, XV(4), 389-411. 
Manne, A., R. Mendelsohn and R. Richels, 1993: MERGE - A 
model for evaluating regional and global effects of GHG 
reduction policies. Papers of International 
Workshop on 
Integrative Assessment of Mitigation, Impacts and Adaptation 
to Climate Change, 13-15 October, 1993, IIASA, Laxenburg, 
Austria. 
Marland, G., 1993: National, 
Regional and Global CO-, 
Emission Estimates 1950-1991. NDP-030/R5, Carbon Dioxide 
Information Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak 
Ridge, TN. 
Marland, G., T.A. Boden, R..C. Griffin, S.F. Huang, P. Kanciruk 
and T.R. Nelson, 1989: Estimates of CO-, emissions from fossil 
fuel burning and cement manufacturing. Based on the United 
Nations Energy Statistics and the U.S. Bureau of Mines 
Cement Manufacturing Data. ORNL/CDIAC-25 NDP-030, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN. 
Matsuoka, Y., 1992: Future projection of global anthropogenic 
sulphur emission and its environmental effect. Environmental 
Systems Research, 20, 142-151. 
Matsuoka, Y. and T. Morita, 1994: Estimation Of Carbon 
Dioxide Flux From Tropical Deforestation. Center for Global 
Environmental Research, National Institute for Environmental 
Studies, CGER-I013-'94. 
Matsuoka, Y., M. Kainuma and T. Morita, 1993: On the 
uncertainty of estimating global climate change. In: Costs, 
Impacts, and Benefits of CO-, Mitigation,. 
Y. Kaya, N. 
Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus and F.L. Toth (eds.), 371-384, 
CP-93-2, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Messner, S. and M. Strubegger, 1991: Potential effects of 
emission taxes on CO^ emissions in the OECD and LDCs. 
Energy, 16(11/12), 1379-1395. 
Mintzer, I., 1988: Projecting 
Future Energy Demand In 
Industrialized Countries: An End-Use Oriented Approach. 
World Resource Institute, Washington, DC. 
Morita, T., Y. Matsuoka, M. Kanuma, H. Harasawa and K. Kai, 
1993: AIM - Asian-Pacific integrated model for evaluating 
policy options to reduce GHG emissions and global warming 
impacts. Paper for Workshop on Global Warming Issues in 
Asia, 8-10 September 1993, Bangkok, Thailand. In: . 1994: 
Global Warming Issue In Asia, S.C. Bhattacharya et al. (eds.), 
Asian Institute of Technology, Bangkok, Thailand, pp254-273. 
Morita, T., Y. Matsuoka, I. Penna, M. Kainuma. 1994: Global 
Carbon Dioxide 
Emission 
Scenarios 
and Their Basic-
Assumptions: 1994 Survey. CGER-1011-94. Center For Global 
Environmental Research, National Institute for Environmental 
Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. 
Myers, N. 1991: Tropical forests: present status and future 
outlook. Climatic Change 19, 3-32. 
Nakicenovic, N., A. Grubler, A. Inaba, S. Messner, S. Nilsson, 
Y. Nishimura, H.-H. Rogner, A. Schafer, L. Schrattenholzer, 
M. Strubegger, J. Swisher, 0. Victor and 0. Wilson, 1993: 
Long-term strategies for mitigating global warming. Energy, 
18(5), 401-609. 
NAPAP (The U.S. National Acid Precipitation Assessment 
Program), 1991. Acid Deposition: 
State of Science and 
Technology, The NAPAP Office of the Director, 722 Jackson 
Place, NW, Washington, DC. 
NES (National Energy Strategy), 1991: National 
Energy 
Strategy: Powerful Ideas for America. US Department of 
Energy, Washington, DC. 
Nordhaus, W.D., G.W. Yohe, 1983: Future paths of energy and 
carbon dioxide emissions. In: Changing Climate: Report of the 
Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee, National Academy 
Press, Washington, DC. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1994: Rolling the DICE: An optimal transition 
path for controlling greenhouse gases. Quarterly Journal of 
Economics. 
OECD , 1991: Estimation of greenhouse gas emissions and 
sinks. OECD experts meeting, 18-21 February 1991, revised in 
August 1991. Prepared for the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. 
Ogawa, Y., 1990: Global warming issues and future response. 
Proceedings of symposium on Energy and Economics 6-7 
December 1990. Institute for Energy Economics, Tokyo (in 
Japanese). 
Ogawa, Y., 1991: Economic activity and the greenhouse effect. 
Energy Journal, 12(1), 23-34. 
Okada, K. and K. Yamaji, 1993: Simulation study on tradable 
CO, emission permits. In: Cost, impacts, and benefits of CO-, 
mitigation, Y. Kaya et al. (eds.), Proceedings of a Workshop 
held on 28-30 September 1992 at IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria, 
pp341-352. 
Oliveira Martins, J., J.M. Burniaux, J.P. Martin and G. 
Nicoletti, 1992: The cost of reducing CO, emissions: a 
comparison of carbon tax curves with GREEN. Economics 
Department Working Papers, (118), OECD, Paris. 
Olson, J.S., J.A. Watts and L.J. Allison, 1983: Carbon in live 
vegetation of major world ecosystems. ORNL 5862, 
Environmental Sciences Division, Publication No. 1997, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee. National 
Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of 
Commerce. 
Onishi, A., 1993: FUGI Global Model 7.0 - Economic financial 
computing. A Journal 
of the European 
Economic 
and 
Financial Centre, 3( 1), Spring, 1 -67. 
Parikh, J.K., 1992: IPCC strategies unfair to the South. Nature, 
360, 507-508. 
Peck, S.C. and T.J. Tiesberg. 1993: Global warming uncertainties 
and the value of information: An analysis using CETA. 
Resource and Energy Economics, 15(1), 71-97. 
Pepper, W., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds and I. 
Mintzer. 1992: Emission Scenarios for the IPCC, An Update, 
Assumptions, Methodology, and Results. Prepared for the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Working Group I. 
Rogner, H.H., 1986: Long-term energy protections and novel 
energy systems. In: The Changing Global Carbon Cycle: A 
Global Analysis, J.R. Trabalka and 0.E. Reichle (eds.), 
Springer-Verlag, NY. 
Rotmans, J., M. Hulme and T.E. Downey, 1994: Climate change 
implications for Europe: an application of the ESCAPE model. 
Global Environmental Change.(\n press) 
Rutherford, T.F., 1992: The welfare effects of fossil carbon 
reductions: Results from a recursively dynamic trade model. 
Economics 
Department 
Working 
Papers, 
(112), 
OECD/GD(92)89, Paris. 
Schrattenholzer, L., 1994: Guest editorial: Global carbon 

_?rw 
An Evaluation of the IPCCIS92 
Emission 
Scenarios 
emissions and energy scenarios based on the results of country 
studies. Int. Journal of Global Energy Issues, 6(1/2), 1-8. 
Shishido, S., 1991: Global impacts of carbon tax: A simulation 
analysis with a global econometric model, mimeo. 
Seller. W. and F.J. Crutzen, 1980: Estimates of gross and net 
fluxes of carbon between the biosphere and the atmosphere 
from biomass burning. Climatic Change 2: 207-247. 
Sie(>enthaler, U. and H. Oeschger, 1978: Predicting future 
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Science, 199, 388-395. 
Sinysik, Y. and K. Nagano, 1992: Global Energy Strategies to 
Control I'uture Carbon Dioxide Emissions. SR-92-04, IIASA, 
Laxcnburg, Austria. 
Turner, B.L., R.H. Moss and D.L. Skolc, 1993: Relating Land 
Use and Global Land Cover Change: A Proposal for an IGBP-
HDI'Core Project. IGBP Report No. 24. Stockholm. 
UN 1987: I'ertility Behavior in the Context of Development. 
Population Studies 100.ST/ESA/SER.A/100. Dept of 
International Economic and Social Affairs: New York. 
UN 1992: Long Range World Population Projections. United 
Nations Population Division, New York. 
USBQUnited States Bureau of Census),1987: World Population 
Profile: 1987. U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, 
DC. 
Vouyoukas, L., 1992: Carbon taxes and CG\ emission targets: 
result from the IEA model. OECD Economics Department 
Working Paper, (114). 
WEC (World Energy Council) (1993). Energy for Tomorrow's 
World. Kogan Page Ltd., London. 
Westoff, C.F., Reproductive preferences and future fertility in 
developing countries. In-Alternative Paths of Future World 
Population Growth, W. Lutz,(ed.), International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Weyant, J.P. 1993: Costs of reducing global carbon emissions. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(4), 7-46. 
World Bank, 1991: World Development Report 1991. Oxford 
University Press, New York. 
Zuidema, G., G.J. Van Den Born, J. Alcamo, and G.J.J. 
Kreileman, 1994: Simulation land cover changes as affected by 
economic factors and climate, Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 
76,163-198. 

Appendix 1 
ORGANISATION OF IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change 
Chairman 
B. Bolin (Sweden) 
Secretary 
N. Sundararaman 
Working Group I 
Scientific Assessment 
Co-chairmen 
J. T. Houghton (UK) 
L. G. Meira Filho (Brazil) 
Working Group II 
Impacts, Adaptation 
and Mitigation 
Co-chairmen 
R. T. Watson (USA) 
M. C. Zinyowera (Zimbabwe) 
Working Group III 
Socio-economic and 
Cross-cutting Issues 
Co-chairmen 
J. Bruce (Canada) 
Hoesung Lee (Rep of Korea) 


Appendix 2 
LIST OF MAJOR IPCC REPORTS (in English unless otherwise stated) 
Climate Change - The IPCC Scientific Assessment. The 1990 report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working 
Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish). 
Climate Change - The IPCC Impacts Assessment. The 1990 report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group 
(also in Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish) 
Climate Change - The IPCC Response Strategies. The 1990 report of the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group 
(also in Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish) 
Emissions Scenarios. Prepared for the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group, 1990. 
Assessment of the Vulnerability of Coastal Areas to Sea Level Rise - a Common Methodology, 1991 (also in Arabic 
and French). 
Climate Change 1992 - The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. The 1992 report of the IPCC 
Scientific Assessment Working Group. 
Climate Change 1992 - The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Impacts Assessment. The 1992 report of the IPCC 
Impacts Assessment Working Group. 
Climate Change: The IPCC 1990 and 1992 Assessments - IPCC First Assessment Report Overview and Policymaker 
Summaries, and 1992 IPCC Supplement. 
Global Climate Change and the Rising Challenge of the Sea. Coastal Zone Management Subgroup of the IPCC 
Response Strategies Working Group, 1992. 
Report of the IPCC Country Studies Workshop, 1992. 
Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of Climate Change, 1992. 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (3 volumes), 1994 (a/50 in French, Russian and Spanish). 
IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations, 1995 (also in Arabic, Chinese, 
French, Russian and Spanish). 
Enquiries: IPCC Secretariat, c/o World Meteorological Organisation, P O Box 2300, CH1211, Geneva 2, Switzerland. 


Appendix 3 
CONTRIBUTORS TO IPCC WG1 REPORT, 1994, ON THE RADIATIVE FORCING OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
CHAPTER 1: C0 2 AND THE CARBON CYCLE 
Convening Lead Author 
David Schimel 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Lead Authors 
D. Alves 
I.G. Enting 
M. Heimann 
D. Raynaud 
U. Siegenthaler 
T. Wigley 
Contributors 
S. Brown 
W. Emanuel 
M. Fasham 
C. Field 
P. Friedlingstein 
R. Gifford 
R. Houghton 
A. Janetos 
S. Kempe 
R. Leemans 
E. Maier-Reimer 
G. Marland 
R. McMurtrie 
J. Melillo 
J. F. Minster 
P. Monfray 
M. Mousseau 
D. Ojima 
D. Peel 
D. Skole 
E. Sulzman 
P. Tans 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE), Brazil 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
CNRS - Laboratoire de Glaciologie, France 
University of Bern, Switzerland 
Office for Interdisciplinary Earth Studies @ UCAR, USA 
University of Illinois, USA 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA 
James Rennell Centre (NERC), UK 
Carnegie Institute of Washington, USA 
EISA, Belgium 
CSIRO Division of Plant Industry, Australia 
Woods Hole Research Center, USA 
NASA Headquarters, USA 
University of Hamburg, Germany 
RIVM (Netherlands Institute for Public Health and Environment), Netherlands 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA 
University of New South Wales, Australia 
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, USA 
ORGS, France 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivites, France 
Universite de Paris Sud, France 
Colorado State University, USA 
British Antarctic Survey, UK 
University of New Hampshire, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
NOAA, Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 

310 
I. Totterdell 
P. Vitousek 
Chilworth Research Centre, UK 
Stanford University, USA 
Modellers 
J. Alcamo 
B.H. Braswell 
B.C. Cohen 
W.R. Emanuel 
I.G. Enting 
G.D. Farquhar 
R.A. Goldstein 
L.D.D. Harvey 
M. Heimann 
A. Jain 
F. Joos 
J. Kaduk 
A.A. Keller 
M. Krol 
K. Kurz 
K.R. Lassey 
C. Le Quere 
J. Lloyd 
E. Meier-Reimer 
B. Moore III 
J. Orr 
T.H. Peng 
J. Sarmiento 
U. Siegenthaler 
J. A. Taylor 
J. Viecelli 
T.M.L. Wigley 
D. Wuebbles 
RIVM (Netherlands Institute for Public Health and Environment), Netherlands 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
UNECE Committee on Energy, Switzerland 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Australian National University, Australia 
Electric Power Research Inst, USA 
University of Toronto, Canada 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
Lawrence Livermore University, USA 
University of Bern, Switzerland 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
Electric Power Research Inst, USA 
RIVM (Netherlands Institute for Public Health and Environment), Netherlands 
Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
National Inst for Water and Atmospheric Research, New Zealand 
Princeton University, USA 
Australian National University, Australia 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
University of New Hampshire, USA 
Laboratoire de Modelisation du Climate et de l'Environment, France 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
University of Bern, Switzerland 
Australian National University, Australia 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Office for Interdisciplinary Earth Studies @ UCAR, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
CHAPTER 2: OTHER TRACE GASES AND ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY 
Convening Lead Author 
Michael Prather 
University of California @ Irvine, USA 
Lead Authors 
R.Derwent 
D.Ehhalt 
P. Fraser 
E.Sanhueza 
X. Zhou 
Meteorological Office, UK 
Institut fur Chemie der KFA Jiilich GmbH, Germany 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
Institute Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas, Venezuela 
Academy of Meteorological Sciences, China 
Contributors 
F. Alyea 
J. Bradshaw 
J. Butler 
M.A. Carroll 
D. Cunnold 
E. Dlugokencky 
J. Elkins 
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 
NOAA, Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 
University of Michigan, USA 
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 
NOAA ERL @ Boulder, USA 
NOAA ERL @ Boulder, USA 

Appendix 3 
D. Etheridge 
D. Fisher 
P. Guthrie 
N. Harris 
I. Isaksen 
D.J. Jacob 
C.E. Johnson 
J. Kaye 
S.Liu 
C.T. McElroy 
P. Novelli 
J. Penner 
R. Prinn 
W. Reeburgh 
B. Ridley 
J. Rudolph 
P. Simmonds 
LP. Steele 
F. Stordal 
R. Weiss 
A. Volz-Thomas 
A. Wahner 
D. Wuebbles 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
DuPont, Wilmington, USA 
Systems Applications International, USA 
European Ozone Research Coordination Unit, UK 
University of Oslo (Geophysics), Norway 
Harvard University, USA 
Harwell Laboratory, UK 
NASA Headquarters, USA 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
Atmospheric Environment Service (ARQX), Canada 
NOAA, Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
University of California @ Irvine, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Institut fur Atmospharische Chemie, Germany 
Bristol University, UK 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
Norwegian Institute for Air Research, Norway 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
Institut fur Chemie der Belasteten, Germany 
Institut fur Chemie der KFA Julich GmbH, Germany 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
CHAPTER 3: AEROSOLS 
Convening Lead Author 
Peter R. Jonas 
UMIST, UK 
Lead Authors 
R.J. Charlson 
H. Rodhe 
University of Washington, USA 
University of Stockholm, Sweden 
Contributors 
T.L. Anderson 
M.O. Andreae 
E. Dutton 
H. Graf 
Y. Fouquart 
H. Grassl 
J. Heintzenberg 
P.V. Hobbs 
D. Hofmann 
B. Huebert 
R.Jaenicke 
M. Jietai 
J. Lelieveld 
M. Mazurek 
M.P. McCormick 
J. Ogren 
J. Penner 
F. Raes 
L. Schiitz 
University of Washington, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie, Germany 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 
Max Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
LOA/Universite des Science & Technologic de Lille, France 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
University of Stockholm, Sweden 
University of Washington, USA 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 
University of Hawaii, USA 
Johannes Gutenberg-Universitat, Mainz, Germany 
Peking University, China 
University of Wageningen, Netherlands 
Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA 
Langley Research Center, USA 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
CEC Joint Research Centre, Italy 
Johannes Gutenberg Universitat, Mainz, Germany 

9/2 
S. Schwartz 
G. Slinn 
H. ten Brink 
Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA 
Pacific Northwest Laboratories, USA 
Netherland Energy Research Foundation, Netherlands 
CHAPTER 4: RADIATIVE FORCING 
Convening Lead Author 
Keith P. Shine 
Lead Authors 
Y. Fouquart 
V. Ramaswamy 
S. Solomon 
J. Srinivasan 
Contributors 
M.O. Andreae 
J. Angell 
G. Brasseur 
C. Briihl 
R.J. Charlson 
M.D. Chou 
JR. Christy 
T. Dunkerton 
E. Button 
B.A. Fomin 
C. Granier 
H. Grass! 
J. Hansen 
Harshvardhan 
D. Hauglustaine 
P. Hobbs 
D. J . Hofman 
L. Hood 
N. Husson 
I. Kami 
Y.J. Kaufman 
J. Kiehl 
S. Kinne 
M.K. W. Ko 
K. Labitzke 
H. Le Treut 
A. McCulloch 
A.J. Miller 
M. Molina 
E. Nesme-Ribes 
AH. Oort 
J.E. Penner 
S. Pinnock 
V. Ramanathan 
A. Robock 
F. Roeckner 
M.E. Schlesinner 
University of Reading, United Kingdom 
LOA/Universite des Science & Technologic de Lille, France 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
Langley Research Center, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie, Germany 
NOAA ERL @ Silver Springs, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie, Germany 
University of Washington, USA 
NASA, Goddard Space Flight Centre, USA 
University of Alabama @ Huntsville, USA 
Northwest Research Associates, USA 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 
Institute of Molecular Physics, USA 
NCAR, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fiir Meteorologie, Germany 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
Purdue University, USA 
Service d'Aeronomie du CNRS, France 
University of Washington, USA 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory, USA 
University of Arizona, USA 
CNRS, Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique, France 
Main Geophysical Observatory, Russia 
NASA, Goddard Space Flight Centre, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
NASA Ames Research Center, USA 
Atmosphere & Environment Research Inc, USA 
Free University of Berlin, Germany 
CNRS, Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique, France 
AFEAS / ICI C&P, UK 
NOAA National Meteorological Center, USA 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
Observatoire de Paris, France 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
University of Reading, UK 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
University of Maryland, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fiir Meteorologie, Germany 
University of Illinois @ Urbana-Champaign, USA 

Appendix 3 
K. Sassen 
G. Y. Shi 
A.N. Trotsenko 
W.C. Wang 
University of Utah, USA 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics, China 
Institute of Molecular Physics, Russia 
State University of New York @ Albany, YSA 
CHAPTER 5: TRACE GAS RADIATIVE FORCING INDICES 
Convening Lead Author 
Daniel L. Albritton 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
Lead Authors 
R.G. Derwent 
I.S.A. Isaksen 
M.Lai 
D.J. Wuebbles 
Contributors 
C. Bruhl 
J.S. Daniel 
D. Fisher 
C. Granier 
S.C. Liu 
K. Patten 
V. Ramaswamy 
T.M.L. Wigley 
Meteorological Office, UK 
University of Oslo (Geophysics), Norway 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fiir Chemie, Germany 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
DuPont, Wilmington, USA 
NCAR, USA 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
Office for Interdisciplinary Earth Studies @ UCAR, USA 


Appendix 4 
REVIEWERS OF THE IPCC WGI REPORT 
The IPCC Working Group I Report went through a peer review process, the purpose of which was to involve the widest 
possible scrutiny of IPCC work and to ensure that the whole range of scientific opinion was taken into account. Conduct 
of the review followed guidelines in IPCC Procedures for Preparation, Review, Acceptance, Approval and Publication of 
its Reports. The persons named below all contributed to the peer review of the Report and its supporting scientific 
evidence. The list may not include some experts who contributed to the peer review only through their governments. 
AUSTRALIA 
G. Ayres 
R. Boers 
W. Bouma 
P. Cheng 
K. Colls 
M. Dix 
B. Dixon 
I. G. Enting 
D. Etheridge 
G. Farquhar 
B. Forgan 
R. Francy 
P.J. Eraser 
I. E. Galbally 
R. M. Gifford 
S. Godfrey 
J. Gras 
I. Noble 
B. Pittock 
T. Weir 
J. Zillman 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
Department of the Environment, Sport & Territories 
Bureau of Meteorology 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
Bureau of Meteorology 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
Australian National University 
Bureau of Meteorology 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
CSIRO (Division of Plant Industry) 
CSIRO (Division of Oceanography) 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
Australian National University 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
Department of Primary Industries & Energy 
Bureau of Meteorology 
BARBADOS 
C. A. Depradine 
Caribbean Meteorological Institute 
BELGIUM 
A. Berger 
D. Crommelynck 
D. De Muer 
Universite Catholique de Louvain 
Royal Belgium Meteorological Institute 
Royal Belgium Meteorological Institute 

376 
Appendix 4 
BENIN 
E. D. Ahlonsou 
Service Meteorologique 
BRAZIL 
P. Fearnside 
National Institute of Research on the Amazon 
CANADA 
H. Barker 
L. A. Barrie 
J. P. Blanche! 
I. J. Fung 
E. F. Haites 
L. D. Harvey 
H. Hengeveld 
M. Hewson 
K. Higuchi 
W.R. Leaitch 
G.A. McBean 
J. McConnell 
J.M.R. Stone 
D. Tarasick 
C.S. Wong 
Canadian Climate Centre 
Canadian Climate Centre 
Canadian Climate Centre 
University of Victoria 
IPCC WGIII Technical Support Unit 
University of Toronto 
Canadian Climate Centre 
Environment Canada 
Atmospheric Environment Service 
Canadian Climate Centre 
Atmospheric Environment Service 
York University 
Canadian Climate Centre 
Atmospheric Environment Service 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
CHINA 
G.-Y. Shi 
M.-X. Wang 
D. Yihui 
X. Zhou 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Academy of Meteorological Sciences 
Academy of Meteorological Sciences 
DENMARK 
J. Fenger 
E. Friis-Christensen 
J. Gundermann 
C. Hansen 
A.-M.K. J0rgensen 
P. Laut 
S. Struwe 
Ministry of the Environment (Research Inst) 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Energy Agency 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Engineering Academy of Denmark 
University of Copenhagen 
EL SALVADOR 
L. Merlos 
Servicio de Meteorologia e Hidrologia 
FINLAND 
E. Holopainen 
E. Jatila 
I. Savolainen 
University of Helsinki 
Finnish Meteorological Institute 
Technical Research Centre of Finland 
FRANCE 
G. Bergametti 
B. Bonsang 
H. Cachier 
M.-L. Chanin 
G. Dedieu 
R. Delmas 
F. Dulac 
LPCA-Universite' Paris VII 
CFR 
CNRS/CEA 
CNRS, Service d'Aeronomie 
LERTS/CNES/CNRS 
LGGE 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivites 

Appendix 4 
317 
J. C. Duplessy 
D. Hauglustaine 
J. Jouzel 
M. Kanakidou 
G. Lambert 
H. Le Treut 
P. Monfray 
E. Nesme-Ribes 
D. Raynaud 
R. Sadourny 
B. Saugier 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivites 
CNRS, Service d'Aeronomie 
CEA/DSM 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivites 
CNRS/CFR 
CNRS, Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivites 
Observatoire de Paris 
CNRS-Laboratoire de Glaciologie 
CNRS, Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique 
Universite Paris Sud 
GERMANY 
C.H. Bruhl 
D.H. Ehhalt 
G. Esser 
H. Grass! 
V. Hesshaimer 
K. Labitzke 
I. Levin 
Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie 
Institut fur Chemie der KFA Jiilich GmbH 
Justus-Liebig University 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie 
Institute of Heidleberg 
Free University of Berlin 
Institute of Heidleberg 
GHANA 
PC. Acquah 
Environmental Protection Council 
HUNGARY 
T. Farago 
T. Palvolgyi 
Ministry for Environment & Regional Policy 
Ministry for Environment & Regional Policy 
INDIA 
A.P. Mitra 
P.C. Pandey 
S. Sadasivan 
National Physical Laboratory 
ISRO 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
ITALY 
F. Raes 
G. Vialetto 
G. Visconti 
CEC Joint Research Centre 
ENEA-Environmental Evaluations Project 
Universita Degli Studi delFAquilla 
JAPAN 
H. Akimoto 
K. Fushimi 
M. Hirota 
H.Y. Inoue 
Y. Iwasaka 
K. Minami 
Y. Nozaki 
T. Okita 
S. Tsunogai 
M. Yoshino 
University of Tokyo 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Nagoya University 
National Institute of Agro-Environmental Sciences 
University of Tokyo 
Obirin University 
University of Hokkaido 
Aichi University 
KENYA 
J.K. Njihia 
Kenya Meteorological Department 

j / a 
Appendix 4 
KIRIBATI 
N. Teuatabo 
Ministry of Environment & Natural Resource Development 
NETHERLANDS 
A.P.M. Baede 
P. Builtjes 
W. Fransen 
R. Guicherit 
M. Krol 
L.A. Meyer 
M.G.M. Roemer 
S. Slanina 
H.M. ten Brink 
R. van Borland 
B. Weenink 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute(KNMI) 
University of Utrecht 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute(KNMI) 
TNO/IMW 
RIVM/MTV 
Ministry of the Environment 
TNO/IMW 
Netherlands Energy Research Foundation 
Netherlands Energy Research Foundation 
KNMI 
Ministry of the Environment 
NEW ZEALAND 
M. Manning 
R. McKenzie 
National Inst of Water & Atmospheric Research 
National Inst of Water & Atmospheric Research 
NORWAY 
J. S. Fuglestvedt 
F. Stordal 
University of Oslo (CICERO) 
Norwegian Institute for Air Research 
RUSSIA 
B.A. Fomin 
I.L. Kami 
V. Meleshko 
A.N. Trotsenko 
Institute of Molecular Physics 
Main Geophysical Observatory 
Main Geophysical Observatory 
Institute of Molecular Physics 
SAUDI ARABIA 
A. Al-Gain 
Meteorological & Environ Protection Admin 
SPAIN 
J.M. Cisneros 
J.L.-G. Merayo 
M.A. Pastor 
National Meteorological Institute 
National Meteorological Institute 
National Meteorological Institute 
SWEDEN 
B. Bolin 
S. Craig 
T. Hedlund 
J. Heintzenberg 
W. Josefsson 
C. Prentice 
H. Rodhe 
L. Zetterberg 
University of Stockholm, IPCC Chairman 
University of Stockhom 
Swedish National Committee on Climate Change 
University of Stockholm 
Swedish Meteorological & Hydrological Institute 
Lund University 
University of Stockholm 
Swedish Environmental Research Institute(IVL) 
SWITZERLAND 
A. Ohmura 
B. Sevruk 
J. Staehelin 
T. Stockcr 
Dept of Geography 
ETH Institute of Geography 
ETH Atmospheric Physics Laboratory 
University of Bern 

Appendix 4 
319 
TUNISIA 
Y. Labane 
Institut National de la Meteorologie 
UNITED KINGDOM 
D. Bennetts 
M. Beran 
D. Burdekin 
B.A. Callander 
I. Colbeck 
C.K. Folland 
J. Haigh 
J.T. Houghton 
P.G. Jarvis 
C. Johnson 
S.P. Long 
P. Mallaburn 
K. Maskell 
D.E. Parker 
D. Peel 
C. Reeves 
D.L. Roberts 
P. Rowntree 
N. Shackleton 
K. Shine 
R. Toumi 
A. Watson 
D. Webb 
I. Woodward 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research, Meteorological Office 
Institute of Hydrology 
Forestry Commission 
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit 
University of Essex 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research, Meteorological Office 
Imperial College 
IPCC WGI 
University of Edinburgh 
Harwell Laboratory 
University of Essex 
Dept of the Environment 
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research, Meteorological Office 
British Antartic Survey 
University of East Anglia 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research,'. 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research,'. 
University of Cambridge 
University of Reading 
University of Cambridge 
Plymouth Marine Laboratory 
Institute of Oceanographic Sciences 
University of Sheffield 
, Meteorological Office 
, Meteorological Office. 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
J.K. Angell 
A. Arking 
L. Bishop 
J. Butler 
M.A. Carroll 
T. Charlock 
JR. Christy 
E. Button 
C. Field 
J.E. Hansen 
P.V. Hobbs 
L. Hood 
Y. Kaufman 
J. Kaye 
R. Keeling 
M. Ko 
J. Lean 
S.Liu 
J. Logan 
J. Mahlman 
M. Mazurek 
G. Meehl 
P.J. Michaels 
NOAA ERL @ Silver Springs 
Johns Hopkins University, USA (WCRP) 
Center for Applied Mathematics 
NOAA, Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory 
University of Michigan 
NASA 
University of Alabama @ Huntsville 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory 
Carnegie Institute of Washington 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
University of Washington 
University of Arizona 
NASA/GSFG 
NASA Headquarters 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography 
Atmospheric & Environment Research Inc 
Naval Research Laboratory 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory 
Harvard University 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
University of Virginia 

320 
Appendix 4 
A.J. Miller 
P. Novell! 
J. Ogren 
J. Penner 
M. Prather 
R.G. Prinn 
V. Ramaswamy 
D. Rind 
A. Robock 
J.L. Sarmiento 
J. Seinfeld 
J. Shlaes 
K.R. Smith 
J. Srinivasan 
W.-C. Wang 
R. Weiss 
L.V. Zawyalova 
NOAA National Meteorological Center 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory 
NOAA Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Laboratory 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
University of California @ Irvine 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
Goddard Institute of Space Studies 
University of Maryland 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
California Institute of Technology 
Global Climate Coalition 
Environmental Risk 
Langley Research Center 
State University of New York @ Albany 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography 
Main Adminsistration of Hydrometeorology 
NONGOVERNMENTAL 
J.G. Owens 
E.A. Reiner 
A. McCulloch 
G. Fynes 
R.S. Whitney 
V.R. Gray 
W. Hennessey 
E. P. Olaguer 
M. Stroben 
R. A. Beck 
J. Kinsman 
J. Shiller 
W. Hare 
P. Womeldorf 
B. Flannery 
K. Tate 
L. Coleman 
J. Karaganis 
C. Holmes 
D. Lashof 
D.H. Pearlman 
R. Gehri 
K. Gregory 
I.S.C. Hughes 
P. Sage 
M. Jefferson 
ORGANIZATIONS 
3M Company 
3M Environmental Engineering & Pollution Control 
AFEAS/ICI Chemicals & Polymers Limited, UK 
British Coal (World Coal Institute) 
Coal Research Association, New Zealand 
Coal Research Association, New Zealand 
Coal Research Association, New Zealand 
Dow Chemical Co 
Duke Power Company 
Edison Electric Institute, USA 
Edison Electric Institute, USA 
Ford Motor Company 
Greenpeace International, Amsterdam 
Illinois Power 
IPIECA & Exxon, USA 
Landcare Research NZ Ltd 
Mobil Oil 
National Coal Association, USA 
National Coal Association, USA 
Natural Resources Defense Council, USA 
The Climate Council, USA 
The Southern Company 
World Coal Inst & Coal Research Est, UK 
World Coal Inst & Coal Research Est, UK 
World Coal Inst & Coal Research Est, UK 
World Energy Council 

Appendix 5 
REVIEWERS OF THE IPCC WGIII REPORT 
The persons named below all contributed to the peer review of the IPCC Working Group III Report and its supporting 
scientific evidence. Whilst every attempt was made by the Lead Authors to incorporate their comments, in some cases 
these formed a minority opinion which could not be reconciled with the larger consensus. Therefore, there may be 
persons below who still have points of disagreement with areas of the Report. 
ALBANIA 
E. Demiraj 
Hydrometeorological Institute, Academy of Sciences 
AUSTRALIA 
J. Daley 
T. Weir 
Business Council of Australia 
Australian Government (Department of Primary Industries and Energy) 
AUSTRIA 
T. Balabanov 
P. Gilli 
I. Ismail 
B. Okogu 
Y. Sinyak 
J. van de Vate 
D. Victor 
Institute for Advanced Studies 
Institut fur Warmetechnik 
OPEC 
OPEC 
IIASA 
IAEA (Division of Nuclear Power) 
IIASA 
BANGLADESH 
M. Asaduzzaman 
Bangladesh Institute of Developmental Studies 
BELGIUM 
J. Delbeke 
J. Dreze 
G. Koopman 
M. Mors 
C. Pimenta 
Commission of the European Communities 
Center for Operations Research & Econometrics 
European Commission 
European Commission 
Globe E.G. 
BRAZIL 
J. Moreira 
L. Rosa 
R. Schaeffer 
Biomass Users Network 
COPPE/UFRJ 
COPPE/UFRJ 

322 
BULGARIA 
A. Yotova 
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 
CANADA 
N. Beaudoin 
J. Bruce 
K. Hare 
M. Jaccard 
J. Last 
R. Poddington 
J. Robinson 
G. Wall 
Environment Canada (Economic Analysis Branch) 
IPCC, WG III 
BC Utilities Commission 
University of Ottawa, Faculty of Medicine 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography(Marine Chemistry Division) 
University of British Columbia (Sustainable Development Research Institute) 
University of Waterloo, Faculty of Environmental Studies 
CHILE 
E. Fogueroa 
Univeristy of Chile 
CHINA 
D. Yihui 
Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences 
DENMARK 
K. Halsnaes 
B. Sorensen 
UNEP Center (Riso National Laboratory) 
Roskilde University (Physics Department) 
FRANCE 
G. Bernier 
C. Blondin 
J. Caneill 
S. Faucheux 
J.C. Hourcade 
P. Sturm 
OECD 
METEO FRANCE 
EDF/DER 
C3E - University of Paris 
CIRED/CNRS 
OECD 
GERMANY 
J. Blank 
H. Gottinger 
P. Henncike 
E. Jochem 
M. Leimbach 
R. Pethig 
W. Strobele 
Universitat Oldenburg 
IIEEM 
Wuppertal Institut 
Fraunhoffer-Institute fur Systemtechnik und Innovationsforschung 
Potsdam-Institut for Climate Impact Research 
Universitat - Gesamthochschule Siegen 
Universitat Oldenburg 
GREECE 
D. Katochianou 
HUNGARY 
T. Palvolgyi 
T. Farago 
Center of Planning and Economic Research 
Ministry for Environment and Regional Policy 
Ministry for Environment and Regional Policy 
INDONESIA 
K. Abdullah 
Institut Pertanian Bogor 
ITALY 
R. Brinkman 
M. Contaldi 
M. Farrell 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
ENEA 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 

Appendix 5 
323 
D. Siniscalco 
A. Tudini 
G. Tosato 
KENYA 
Y. Adebayo 
JAPAN 
N. Goto 
Y. Matshoka 
S. Mori 
Y. Tanaka 
I. Tsuzaka 
LATVIA 
I. Shteinbuka 
MALAYSIA 
H. Chan 
MALDIVES 
A. Majeed 
MALI 
M. Diallo lam 
NETHERLANDS 
K. Blok 
G. Gelauff 
E. van Imhoff 
W. Lenstra 
C.W. Lee 
E. Tellegen 
R.Tol 
H. Vollebergh 
D. Wolfson 
E. Worst 
NEW ZEALAND 
P. Maclaren 
P. Read 
NORWAY 
A. Aaheim 
0. Benestad 
L. Lorentsen 
POLAND 
B. Greinert 
W. Kamrat 
M. Lissowska 
PORTUGAL 
T. Moreira 
Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattei 
Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattei 
ENEA 
United Nations Environment Programme 
Kanazawa University 
Faculty of Engineering, Kyoto University 
Science University of Tokyo 
Environment Agency 
GISPRI/TSU, WGIII 
Ministry of Finance 
Malaysian Institute of Economic Research 
Department, of Meteorology 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique et Techno 
Utrecht University 
Central Planning Bureau 
NIDI 
Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment 
University of Groningen, Faculty of Economics 
University of Amsterdam 
Vrje Universiteit 
Erasmus University 
Scientific Council for Government Policy 
Utrecht University 
New Zealand Forest Research Institute 
Massey University 
CICERO 
University of Oslo 
Royal Ministry of Finance 
Technical University of Gdansk 
Technical University of Gdansk 
Central School of Economics 
University of Evora 

324 
RUSSIA 
K. Kondratyev 
SPAIN 
V. Alcantara 
S. Lopez 
J. Pacqual 
SWEDEN 
B. Bolin 
P. Soderbaum 
SWITZERLAND 
M. Beniston 
S. Kypreos 
G. Fritz 
N. Sundararaman 
W. Seifritz 
R. Slooff 
UGANDA 
J. Mubazi 
UNITED KINGDOM 
N. Adger 
A. Atkinson 
R. Booth 
S. Boehmer-Christiansen 
N. Collins 
T. Cooper 
G. Dupont 
P. Ekins 
K. Gregory 
M. Grubb 
J.T. Houghton 
M. Jefferson 
I. Hughes 
H. Merkus 
S. Mansoob Murshed 
A. McCulloch 
J. Penman 
F. Yamin 
USA 
J. Ausubel 
A. Baker 
W. Barron 
R. Beck 
R. Borgwardt 
J. Byrne 
R. Engelman 
B. Flannery 
R. Ford 
D. Hall 
Russian Academy of Sciences 
Autonomous University of Barcelona 
Autonomous University of Barcelona 
Autonomous University of Barcelona 
IPCC 
Swedish University of Economics 
IPCC WGII, 
Paul Scherrer Institute 
Paul Scherrer Institute 
IPCC 
University of Stuttgart 
World Health Organization 
Makerere University 
CSERGE 
University of Cambridge 
Shell International Petroleum Company Limited 
University of Sussex 
World Conservation Monitoring Center 
Global Commons Institute 
Shell International Petroleum Company 
Birkbeck College, University of London 
CGS Centre for Business and the Environment 
RIIA 
IPCC WGI 
World Energy Council 
Coal Research Establishment (World Coal Institute) 
Ministry of Housing, Physical Planning and Environment 
Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre 
ICI Chemicals & Polymers Limited 
UK Department, of Environment (Global Atmosphere Division) 
University of London 
Rockefeller University 
ARCO 
University of Hong Kong 
Edison Electric Institute 
Environmental Protection Agency 
University of Delaware 
Population Action International 
Exxon Research and Engineering Company 
Westminister College 
California State University 

Appendix 5 
W. Harrison 
D. Hill 
C. Holmes 
R.Jones 
W. Kempton 
L. Kozak 
N. Leary 
G. Marland 
R. Mendelsohn 
A. Miller 
A. Olende 
D. Pearlman 
R. Promboin 
R. Schmalensee 
D. Shelor 
J. Shlaes 
T. Siddiqi 
D. Spencer 
J. de Steiguer 
M. Steinberg 
T. Teisberg 
S. Vavrik 
G. Yohe 
ETSAP, International Energy Agency 
National Coal Association 
American Petroleum Institute 
University of Delaware 
Southern Company Services Inc. 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Yale University 
University of Maryland 
United Nations (DPCSD) 
The Climate Council 
Amoco Corporation 
MIT (Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research) 
Department of Energy 
Global Climate Coalition 
East-West Centre 
Simteche 
Southern Global Change Progam, US Forest Service 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
Tesiberg Associates 
Yale Law School 
Wesleyan University 
VENEZUELA 
L. Perez 
Ministerio de Energia y Minas 
VIETNAM 
N. Van Hai 
N. Thi Loc 
HMS Vietnam 
Hydrometeorological Service 
YUGOSLAVIA 
R. Pesic 
University of Belgrade 


Appendix 6 
ACRONYMS 
AASE 
ABLE 
ACHEX 
ACRIM 
AEEI 
AER 
AFEAS 
AGU 
AGWP 
AIM 
ALE/GAGE 
ASF 
ASI 
Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition 
Atmospheric Boundary Layer Experiment 
Aerosol Characterisation Experiment 
Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor 
Autonomous Energy Efficiency Improvements 
Atmospheric and Environmental Research, Inc 
Alternative Fluorocarbons Environmental Acceptability Study 
American Geophysical Union 
Absolute Global Warming Potential 
Asian-Pacific Integrated Model 
Atmospheric Lifetime Experiment/Global Atmospheric Gases Experiment 
Atmospheric Stabilisation Framework 
Agenzia Spaziale Italiana 
BLS 
"Basic Linked System" Scenario 
CETA 
CCC 
CCN 
CDIAC 
CFC 
CIS 
CITE 
CLIMAP 
CMDL 
CN 
CNRS 
CRC 
CSIRO 
CTM 
CW 
Carbon Emissions Trajectory Assessment 
Canadian Climate Centre 
Cloud Condensation Nuclei 
Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center 
Chlorofluorocarbon 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Chemical Instrumentation Test and Evaluation 
Climatic Applications Project (WMO) 
Climate Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory (NOAA) 
Condensation Nuclei 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France 
Cyclic Redundancy Check 
Commonwealth Scientific & Industrial Research Organisation, Australia 
Chemistry /Transport Models 
"Conventional Wisdom" scenario, World Bank, 1990 
DICE 
DOAI 
Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy 
Department of Agriculture, Indonesia 
ECE 
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 

328 
Appendix 6 
BCHAM 
BCMWF 
ECS 
BBFSU 
BMEP-CCC 
EMF 
BOSDIS 
BPA 
BRBB 
BSCAP 
BUV 
European Centre/Hamburg Model (BCMWF/MPI) 
Buropean Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts 
BOSDIS Core System 
Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union 
European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme - Chemical Coordination 
Centre 
Energy Modelling Forum 
Earth Observing System Data and Information System 
Environmental Protection Agency, USA 
Earth Radiation Budget Experiment 
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific 
Extreme Ultra Violet 
FAO 
FDH 
FFBS 
FIRE IFO 
Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN) 
Fixed Dynamical Heating 
Fossil Free Energy System 
First ISCCP Regional Experiment 
GAGE 
GCM 
GDP 
GEIA 
GEISA 
GFDL 
GISS 
GNP 
GRIP 
GWP 
Global Atmospheric Gases Experiment 
General Circulation Model 
Gross Domestic Product 
Global Emissions Inventory Activity 
Gestion et Etude des Information Spectroscopiques Atmospheriques 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, (NOAA) 
Goddard Institute of Space Sciences (NASA) 
Gross National Product 
Greenland Icecore Project 
Global Warming Potential 
HAMOCC 
HILDA 
HITRAN 
Hamburg Ocean Carbon Cycle Model 
High Latitude Diffusive/Advective 
High Resolution Transmission Molecular Absorption Database 
IAMAP 
IEA 
1EW 
IGAC 
IAHS 
11 AS A 
IMAGE 
INPE 
IPCC 
IPCC-EIS 
IS92 
IUPAC 
JEE 
JPL 
International Association for Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics 
International Energy Agency 
International Energy Workshop 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
International Association of Hydrological Science 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais, Brazil 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Energy and Industry Subgroup 
IPCC Scenarios, 1992 
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry 
Japan Environment Agency 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory (NASA) 
KNMI 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute 
LaRC 
LGM 
L1MS 
Langley Research Center (NASA) 
Last Glacial Maximum 
Limb Infrared Monitor of the Stratosphere 

Appendix 6 
329 
LLNL 
LMD 
LODYC 
LWC 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique du CNRS 
Laboratoire d'Oceanographie Dynamique et de Climatologie 
Liquid Water Content 
MERGE 
MIT 
MLOPEX 
MOGUNTIA 
MPI 
MSU 
Model for Evaluating Regional and Global Effects of GHG reduction policies 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
Mauna Loa Observatory Photochemistry Experiment 
Model of the General Universal Tracer transport In the Atmosphere 
Max-Planck Institut fur Meteorologie 
Microwave Sounder Unit 
NACNEMS 
NAPAP 
NASA 
NATO 
NCAR 
NCSU 
NES 
NILU 
NMHC 
NOAA 
NPP 
North American Cooperative Network of Enhanced Measurement Sites 
National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program, (USA) 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, USA 
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
North Carolina State University, USA 
National Energy Strategy 
Norwegian Institute For Air Research 
Non-Methane Hydrocarbons 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, USA 
Net Primary Production 
OOP 
OECD 
OGCMs 
ORNL/CDIAC 
Ozone Depleting Potential 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
Oceanic General Circulation Models 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
PEM 
POC 
PSC 
Particle Modulator Radiometer 
Particulate Organic Carbon 
Polar Stratospheric Clouds 
QBO 
Quasi-Biennial Oscillation 
RCW 
RCWP 
RH 
RIGES 
RIVM 
"Rapidly Changing World" Scenario (EPA) 
"Rapidly Changing World" Policy Scenario (EPA) 
Relative Humidity 
Renewable Intensive Global Energy System 
Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection, Netherlands 
SA90 
SAGA 
SAGE 
SAMS 
SBUV 
SCOPE 
SCW 
SCWP 
SMIC 
SOS/SONIA 
STRATOZ 
IPCC Scenario A, 1990 
The Soviet-American Gas and Aerosol Experiment 
Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment 
Stratospheric and Mesospheric Sounder 
Solar Backscattered Ultra Violet Instrument 
Scientific Committee On Problems of the Environment 
"Slowly Changing World" Scenario (EPA) 
"Slowly Changing World" Policy Scenario (EPA) 
Study of Man's Impact on Climate 
Southern Oxidants Study/Southeast Oxidant and Nitrogen Intensive Analysis 
Stratospheric Ozone (Campaign) 
TOMCAT 
Toulouse Off-Line Model of Chemistry and Transport 

330 
Appendix 6 
TOR 
TRACE A 
TROPOZ 
Tropospheric Ozone Research Project 
Transport and Atmospheric Chemistry near the Equator - Atlantic 
Tropospheric Ozone (Campaign) 
UN 
UCI 
UCRL 
UGAMP 
UKMO 
UEA 
UNEP 
UNFCC 
UV 
United Nations 
University of California at Irvine, USA 
University of California Radiation Laboratory 
United Kingdom Global Atmospheric Modelling Project 
United Kingdom Meteorological Office 
University of East Anglia, UK 
United Nations Environment Programme 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Ultraviolet 
VOC 
Volatile Organic Compounds 
WCRP 
WEC 
WMO 
WOCE 
World Climate Research Programme 
World Energy Council 
World Meteorological Organisation 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment 

Appendix 7 
UNITS 
5/ (Systeme Internationale) Units: 
Physical Quantity 
length 
mass 
time 
thermodynamic temperature 
amount of substance 
Name of Unit 
meter 
kilogram 
second 
kelvin 
mole 
Symbol 
m 
kg 
s 
K 
mol 
Fraction 
Prefix 
Symbol 
Multiple 
Prefix 
Symbol 
IQi 
10-2 
10-3 
10"6 
io-9 
10-12 
10-15 
10-18 
deci 
centi 
milli 
micro 
nano 
pico 
femto 
atto 
d 
c 
m 
H 
n 
P 
f 
a 
10 
102 
103 
106 
109 
IQiz 
1015 
deka 
heck) 
kilo 
mega 
giga 
tera 
peta 
da 
h 
k 
M 
G 
T 
P 

# 2 
Appendix 7 
Special Names and Symbols for Certain Si-Derived 
Units: 
Physical Quantity 
force 
pressure 
energy 
power 
frequency 
Name of SI Unit 
newton 
pascal 
joule 
watt 
hertz 
syi 
N 
Pa 
J 
W 
Hz 
Symbol for SI Unit 
Definition of Unit 
kg m s-2 
kg m-V2(=N nr2) 
kg m2s"2 
kg mV3(=J s"1) 
s"1 (cycle per second) 
Decimal Fractions and Multiples of SI Units Having Special Names: 
Physical Quantity 
length 
length 
area 
force 
pressure 
pressure 
weight 
Name of Unit 
angstrom 
micrometre 
hectare 
dyne 
bar 
millibar 
tonne 
Symbol for Unit 
A 
pm 
ha 
dyn 
bar 
mb 
t 
Definition of Unit 
10-10 m = 10* cm 
10-6m 
104m2 
10"5N 
105 N m"2 = 105 Pa 
102 N m"2 = 1 hPa 
# 
kg 
Non-SI Units: 
ppmv 
ppbv 
pptv 
degrees Celsius (0 °C = 273 K approximately) 
Temperature differences are also given in °C (=K) rather than the more correct form of "Celsius degrees". 
parts per million (106) by volume 
parts per billion (109) by volume 
parts per trillion (1012) by volume 
bp 
kpb 
mbp 
(years) before present 
thousands of years before present 
millions of years before present 
The units of mass adopted in this report are generally those which have come 
into common usage, and have deliberately not been harmonised, e.g., 
kt 
GtC 
PgC 
MtN 
TgC 
TgN 
TgS 
kilotonnes 
gigatonnes of carbon (1 GtC = 3.7 Gt carbon dioxide) 
petagrams of carbon (lPgC = 1 GtC) 
megatonnes of nitrogen 
teragrams of carbon 
teragrams of nitrogen 
teragrams of sulphur 

Appendix 8 
SOME CHEMICAL SYMBOLS USED IN THIS REPORT 
o 
0(*D) 
o2 
O3 
N2 
N 20 
N2Os 
NO 
N0 2 
N0 3 
NOx 
HNO3 
PAN: CH 3C0 3N0 2 
HONO 
H0 2N0 2 
NOy 
NH3 
NH+ 
H 
« 2 
H 20 
H 20 2 
OH 
H 0 2 
HOx 
C 
CO 
co2 
CFC 
CFC-11 
CFC-12 
CFC-13 
CFC-113 
atomic oxygen 
an energetic form of atomic oxygen 
molecular oxygen 
ozone 
molecular nitrogen 
nitrous oxide 
dinitrogen pentoxide 
nitric oxide 
nitrogen dioxide 
nitrate radical 
the sum of NO and N0 2 
nitric acid 
peroxyacetylnitrate 
nitrous acid 
pernitric acid 
total reactive nitrogen 
ammonia 
ammonium ion 
atomic hydrogen 
molecular hydrogen 
water 
hydrogen peroxide 
hydroxyl 
hydroperoxyl 
the sum of OH and H0 2 
carbon: there are 3 isotopes: 12C, 13C, 14C 
carbon monoxide 
carbon dioxide 
chlorofluorocarbon 
CFCI3, or equivalent^ CC13F 
(trichlorofluoromethane) 
CF2C12, or equivalent^ CC12F2 
(dichlorodifluoromethane) 
CF3CI, or equivalent^ CCIF3 
(chlorotrifluoromethane) 
C2F3C13, CCI2FCC1F2 

JJ4 
(trichlorotrifluoroethane) 
CFC-113a 
CFC-114 
CFC-115 
HFC 
HFC-23 
HFC-32 
HFC-43-100 mee 
HFC-125 
HFC-134 
HFC-134a 
HFC-143 
HFC-143a 
HFC-152a 
HFC 227ea 
HFC-236fa 
HFC-245ca 
HCFC 
HCFC-22 
HCFC-123 
HCFC-124 
HCFC-141b 
HCFC-142b 
HCFC 225ca 
HCFC 225cb 
HALON 1211 
HALON 1301 
CH, 
^ H 6 
C,H» 
C;H, 
C2H2 
CH,0 2 
CH3OOH 
NMHC 
VOC 
S 
so2 
SQ2-
SF6 
H2S04 
" 2Rn 
CI 
CHCICCI2 
CCI4 
CCI2CCI, 
CH,C1 
CH,CCI, 
CCl^CFj isomer of CC12FCC1F2 
C2F4C12,CC1F2CCIF2 
(dichlorotetrafluoroethane) 
qFgCi 
(chloropentafluoroethane) 
hydrofluorocarbon 
CHF3 
CH2F2 
C5H2F10 
C2HF5 
CHF2CHF2 
CH2FCF3 
CHF2CH2F 
CF3CH3 
C2H4F2 
C3HF7 
C3H2F6 
C3H3F5 
hydrochlorofluorocarbon 
CF2HCI 
(chlorodifluoromethane) 
C2F,HC12 
C2F4HC1 
C2FH3C12 
C2F2H3C1 
qFgHCI, 
C3F,HCI2 
CF2BrCl (CBrClF2) 
(bromodichloromethane) 
CF3Br (CBrF3) 
(bromotrifluoromethane) 
methane 
ethane 
propane 
ethylene (ethene) 
acetylene (ethyne) 
methyl peroxy radical 
methyl peroxide 
non-methane hydrocarbon 
volatile organic compound 
atomic sulphur 
sulphur dioxide 
sulphate ion 
sulphur hexafluoride 
sulphuric acid 
radon (1 isotope of) 
atomic chlorine 
trichloroethylene 
carbon tetrachloride 
perchloroethylene(tetrachloroethene] 
methylchloride 
methylchloroform 

Appendix 8 
CH2C12 
CHCI3 
CH2Br2 
CHBr2Cl 
CHBr3 
CH3Br 
CF3I 
CF4 
% 
C3F8 
C4F10 
c-C4F8 
C5F12 
% 
dichloromethane/ methylene chloride 
chloroform, trichloromethane 
dibromomethane 
dibromochloromethane 
tribromomethane 
methylbromide 
trifluoroiodomethane 
perfluoromethane 
hexafluoroethane/perfluoroethane 
perfluoropropane 
perfluorobutane 
perfluorocyclobutane 
perfluoropentane 
perfluorohexane 
335 


Index 
Absolute Global Warming Potential (AGWP), definition, 
216 
absorption coefficient (of aerosols), 145 
accumulation mode (of aerosols), 139 
adjustment lifetime, 82-3,115 
aerosols, 7 
budgets, 140-1 
carbonaceous, 137, 181 
see also soot 
direct effect on radiative forcing, 30, 181 
effect on clouds, 150,152,153^ 
formation, 133 
from biomass burning, 137,182-3 
from combustion, 136 
from oxidation of precursor gases, 136-7 
indirect effect on radiative forcing, 30, 183^ 
lifetimes, 133,140, 143 
measurements, 140, 142-3,156 
modelling, 148,157 
optical depth, 146,148-9 
organic, 136,152 
properties, 138, 139, 140,143-6 
radiative forcing by, 12, 31, 133^, 144,147 
sea-salt, 135-6,152 
scenarios, 154 
sinks, 139,143 
size distribution, 133, 138-9,139, 143 
soil dust, 134-5, 152 
sources, 134, 136 
stratospheric, 98, 142 
transformation of, 137 
trends, 137, 141-2 
volcanic, 136,140, 142-3,186 
AGWP, see Absolute Global Warming Potential 
aircraft 
as sources of aerosols, 143,144,153 
as sources of gaseous pollutants, 99, 103,112 
Atmospheric Stabilization Framework, ASF, 260 
biomass burning, 137 
biosphere 
marine, 49, 58 
terrestrial, 51, 52, 56 
brominated species 
measurements of, 93 
ozone depletion by, 96 
sinks, 95 
sources, 94, 95 
stabilisation, 117 
carbon 
budget, 17-19, 46, 55 
cycle, 20, 41 
isotopes, 42, 46-7 
carbon dioxide, C0 2 
concentrations, 11-12,13, 16-17,19-20, 25, 42, 43 
emission scenarios related to energy, 265-84 
emission scenarios related to land-use, 286-9 
emissions, 48-9, 52-3, 60 
fertilisation, 18, 52, 54, 56, 57, 59, 65 
oceanic uptake, 47-8, 51 
radiative forcing by, 12, 16,172, 194 
recent anomalies, 42 
spatial distributions, inferred from concentration 
measurements, 48 
stabilisation of concentration, 11, 13, 21, 22, 60-1 
stabilisation of emissions, 13, 21 
terrestrial uptake, 53-5 
carbon intensity (in emission scenarios), 268 
carbon monoxide, CO 
used to infer OH concentrations, 83, 103 
measurements of, 103, 104 
sources and sinks, 103 
carbon tetrachloride, CC14, 92 
CCN, see Cloud Condensation Nuclei 
CFCs 
Global Warming Potentials, 221-2 
industrial production, 94 
measurements, 25, 92 
ozone depletion, 96 
radiative forcing, 194 
sinks, 95 
stabilisation, 117 
substitutes, 12, 29 
see also HFCs, HCFCs 
chemical transport models, 105-16 
climate feedbacks, 24-5, 27, 55-8 
climate sensitivity, 169-71, 211 
Cloud Condensation Nuclei, 138, 139, 142, 150, 151, 153 
C0 2 fertilisation, see carbon dioxide fertilisation 
deforestation, 51, 52-3, 56-7 

j.?a 
Index 
DMS, dimethyl sulphide, 136-7 
dust, see aerosols 
ElChichon, 136 
emission scenarios, 60, 65 
criteria lor evaluation, 258 
developing new scenarios, 297 
IS92 scenarios, overview, 260 
IS92 scenarios, uses and limitations, 254-5, 296-7 
terminology, 258 
emissions profile(s), 62 
energy intensity (in emission scenarios), 270 
energy-related emission scenarios 
comparisons, 252-3, 265-84 
components and sensitivities, 253, 268-70, 282-3 
regional, 270-81 
enteric fermentation, 87, 293 
FCCC, 
feedbacks 
chemical, 83, 85 
marine, 57-8 
terrestrial, 56-7 
forcing/response relationships, 197 
forest regrowth, 51-2, 52, 53, 59 
GDP, see Gross Domestic Product 
Global Warming Potential 
and natural sources of greenhouse gas, 229 
definition, 32, 215 
indirect effects in, 82, 223 
product with emissions, 226 
reference molecule, 217, 221 
sensitivity to background atmosphere, 214, 218 
sensitivity to clouds and water vapour, 219 
sensitivity to time horizon, 229 
uncertainties, 221,226, 229 
uses and limitations, 211, 227 
values, 223 
Gross Domestic Product, GDP, 262-3 
relationship to population, 264—5 
GWP, sec Global Warming Potential, also radiative 
forcing index 
halocarbons, 92 
measurements of, 25, 28 
ozone depletion, 96-8 
radiative forcing by, 12, 28 
stabilisation (of concentrations), 117 
halons, 93-1, 117 
HCTCs 
stabilisation of, 117 
Global Warming Potentials, 221, 222 
industrial production, 94-5 
measurements, 93 
radiative forcing by, 172-3,194 
sinks, 95 
MFCs, 117,172-3, 194 
HITRAN database, 171 
hydroxyl (OH) in the troposphere, 79, 81, 82, 83,103 
index of radiative forcing, see Global Warming Potential 
Krakatoa, 143 
land-use changes, 51, 52-3, 53, 56-7 
land-use emission scenarios 
base year estimates, 286 
comparisons, 254, 284-94 
components and sensitivities, 254, 289-90, 292-3 
regional, 291 
lifetime, atmospheric 
definition, 82-3 
of trace gases, 82-3, 84, 84-5, 220 
Mauna Loa, 43 
methane, CH4 
adjustment time, 109,113-6 
atmospheric chemistry, 82, 85 
emission scenarios related to energy, 281 
emission scenarios related to land-use, 290-3 
from enteric fermentation, 87, 293 
from rice production, 87, 292-3 
global budget, 25, 86 
Global Warming Potential, 11,34, 222, 225 
indirect effect on radiative forcing, 25-6 
measurements, 24, 25, 87-9 
pre-industrial level, 88-9 
radiative forcing, 12, 25, 172, 194 
seasonal cycle, 87 
sinks, 25, 87 
sources, 25, 85 
stabilisation (of concentrations), 14, 116-7 
methyl chloroform, 
used to infer OH concentrations, 83-4 
measurements of, 12,13, 93 
sinks, 95 
sources, 94 
stabilisation (of concentrations), 117 
Montreal Protocol, 98,117 
Mount Pinatubo, 12,13, 32, 98, 136,143,186 
nitrogen fertilisation, 19, 52, 54-5 
nitrogen oxides, NOx 
measurements, 30, 100-3 
ozone formation, 80-2, 109-10, 112-13 
sinks, 100 
sources, 99, 112-13 

Index 
# 9 
nitrous oxide, N20, 281 
emission scenarios related to energy, 290-3 
emission scenarios related to land-use, 13, 25, 27-8, 
91-2 
measurements, 13, 25, 27-8, 91-2 
radiative forcing by, 12, 28,194 
sinks, 27-8, 91-2 
sources, 27-8, 89-90, 92, 293 
stabilisation (of concentrations), 14, 28,117 
non-methane hydrocarbons, NMHCs, 104-5, 131 
ocean, circulation, 57-8 
Ozone Depleting Potential (ODP), 227 
ozone, 03, stratospheric 
ozone depletion, 97-8, 117 
radiative forcing by, 29-30,175-7, 193, 194 
WMO/UNEP assessments, 211 
ozone, 03, tropospheric 
chemical processes, 80-2 
formation, 109-10, 111-16 
measurements, 98-9, 114 
modelling, 109-10, 111-16 
radiative forcing by, 30, 193 
stabilisation (of concentrations), 117 
perflourocarbons, 25 
measurements of, 94, 171 
radiative forcing by, 173 
sinks, 95 
sources, 95 
stabilisation (of concentrations), 117 
photochemistry, processes, 80-2 
POC, particulate organic carbon, 136 
population, 263-5, 268-70 
precursors of aerosols, 136-7 
radiative forcing 
adjusted forcing, 169-70 
as a measure of induced climate change, 211 
definition, 15, 169-70 
instantaneous forcing, 169-70 
radiative forcing index(see also Global Warming Potential) 
definition, 212 
indirect effects, 214 
limitations, 216 
various formulations, 215 
reference molecule, see Global Warming Potential 
respiration (in the soil), 57 
rice production (factors affecting methane emissions), 
292-3 
scattering coefficient of aerosols, 145 
ship tracks, 150 
soils, factors affecting nitrous oxide emissions, 293 
solar output, 13 
solar variability, 32, 189, 194-5 
soot, 136, 142, 152,183 
spectroscopy, 171 
stabilisation of concentrations, see entries under individual 
gases and aerosols 
stratosphere, see also Ozone 
temperatures, 81-2, 98, 177-8 
water vapour, 173, 180, 194 
sulphur, emission scenarios, 281-2 
sulphur dioxide, S02, 136-7,155 
sulphur fluxes, 140 
sulphur hexafluoride, SF6 
measurements of, 94 
sinks, 95 
source, 95 
stabilisation (of concentrations), 117 
temperature, glacial-interglacial link with carbon dioxide, 
45 
ultraviolet light, UV, 80,100 
unidentified sink, 55 
volatile organic compounds, VOCs 
definition, 104 
sinks, 105 
sources, 104-5 
volcanic aerosols, see aerosols 
volcanoes, 13, 32,143,186 
WEC scenarios, 60 
