20 
Decision IPCC/XLIV-5. Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) Products, Outline of the Methodology 
Report(s) to refine the 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change decides, 
 
1. To prepare a Methodology Report to refine the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Inventories” with the following format and title: 
 
The format should be one single Methodology Report comprising an Overview Chapter and 
five volumes following the format of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines). 
 
The title of the Methodology Report should be “2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories”. 
2. To adopt the terms of reference for the production of a Methodology Report to refine the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories as contained in Annex 1 to this 
Decision. 
3. To adopt the table of contents of the Methodology Report as contained in Annex 2 to this 
Decision. 
4. To take note of document IPCC-XLIV/INF.7. 
5. That the budget for the production of this Methodology Report is as contained in Decision 
(IPCC/XLIV-1) on the IPCC Trust Fund Programme and Budget. 
 
 
 
 

 
21 
ANNEX 1  
 
Terms of Reference for the production of a Methodology Report to refine the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
 
Background 
 
1. The 26th Meeting of Task Force Bureau (TFB) (28 - 29 August 2014, Ottawa) concluded that: 
- 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC 
Guidelines) provide a technically sound methodological basis of national greenhouse gas 
inventories, and therefore fundamental revision is unnecessary. 
- 
To maintain the scientific validity of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, certain refinements may 
be required, taking into account scientific and other technical advances that have 
matured sufficiently since 2006. 
2. Following these conclusions by the TFB and approval by the IPCC at its 40th Session, the 
Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) started a technical assessment of 
IPCC Inventory Guidelines through an on-line questionnaire survey and four expert meetings 
in 2015 and 2016. The technical assessment revealed that there has been abundant new 
scientific and empirical knowledge published since 2006 which the IPCC should take into 
account, particularly with respect to data for emission factor development for some 
categories and gases. Consequently, the necessity and usefulness of refining the current 
methodological guidance (e.g. updating default emission factors) has been recognized by 
TFB. 
3. A refinement of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines is required as early as possible in order to 
address the issues that were identified through the technical assessment referred to in 
paragraph 2 above. The refinement will help all UNFCCC Parties use good practice 
inventory methodologies based on up-to-date scientific knowledge. 
 
Scope 
 
4. The IPCC at its 43rd Session (11-13 April 2016, Nairobi) approved the proposal on 
“Refinement of 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, including 
production of a Methodology Report(s)” as contained in the Decision IPCC/XLIII-8 “Update of 
methodologies on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories”, and decided to consider the draft 
Methodology Report(s) at a Plenary session of the IPCC in May 2019 as contained in the 
Decision IPCC/XLIII-7 “Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) Products. Strategic Planning”. 
5. The overall aim of the refinement of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines is to provide an updated and 
sound scientific basis for supporting the preparation and continuous improvement of national 
greenhouse gas inventories.  
6. In order to achieve the overall aim, the Methodology Report will: 
- 
Provide supplementary methodologies for sources or sinks of greenhouse gases only 
where currently there are gaps or where new technologies and production processes 
have emerged requiring elaborated methodologies or for sources or sinks that are not 
well covered by the 2006 IPCC Guidelines; 
- 
Provide updated default values of emission factors and other parameters based on the 
latest available science only where significant differences from currently adopted factors 
are identified; 
- 
Provide additional or alternative up-to-date information and guidance, where possible, as 
clarification or elaboration of existing guidance in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
 

22 
7. In line with paragraph 6 above, the Methodology Report will clearly indicate what type of 
refinement is provided in each section. The types of refinement are defined in Appendix 1. 
These terms should be used consistently throughout the Methodology Report. 
8. For the purpose of elaborating on and clarifying the existing IPCC guidance, the 
Methodology Report should aim to address any important needs for clarification arising from 
GHG inventory reviews or the technical analysis of inventories as part of biennial update 
reports under the UNFCCC if such needs are identified in time during the elaboration of the 
report. 
9. The refinement work will not revise the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, but will update, supplement 
and/or elaborate the 2006 IPCC Guidelines where gaps or out-of-date science have been 
identified. The Methodology Report will not replace the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, but will be 
used in conjunction with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
 
Approach 
 
10. The result of this work will be an IPCC Methodology Report “2019 Refinement to the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories”. 
11. The authors will follow Appendix 2 “Instructions to Experts and Authors” to ensure a 
consistent and coherent approach across all the volumes or chapters, including the use of 
common terminology.  
12. Literature will be considered up to a cut-off date at the start of the Government/Expert 
Review. 
13. Table 1 provides the time table for this task. 
 
 
 
 

 
23 
Table 1: Work Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date 
Action 
Comments 
October 2016 
IPCC-44 
IPCC Plenary approves ToR, chapter outline, work plan and guidance to authors 
November 2016 
Call for Nomination of Authors and Review 
Editors 
IPCC invites nominations from governments and international organizations 
February 2017 
TFB select Authors and Review Editors 
Selection by TFB considering expertise and geographical coverage 
June 2017 
1st Lead Author Meetings  
LAM1a (non-AFOLU) and LAM1b (AFOLU) and LAM1c (General Guidance and 
Reporting). To develop zero order draft 
September 2017 
2nd Lead Author Meeting 
To develop first order draft for review 
December 2017– January 2018 
Expert Review 
8 weeks review by experts 
March 2018 
Science Meeting 
A small meeting of CLAs and some LAs to discuss specific issues that require 
intensive discussion to reinforce the writing process. 
April 2018 
3rd Lead Author Meeting 
To consider comments and produce second order draft for review 
xxx 2018 
Literature cut-off date 
Only papers published before this date will be considered 
July-August 2018 
Government & Expert Review 
8 weeks review by governments and experts 
October 2018 
4th Lead Author Meeting 
To consider comments and produce final draft 
January 2019 
Government Review  
Distribute to governments for their consideration prior to approval (at least 4 weeks 
prior to the Panel) 
May 2019 
Adoption/acceptance by IPCC-49  
Final draft submitted to IPCC Panel for adoption/acceptance 
xxx 2019 
Distribute Report 
Distribute to governments and international organizations 

 
24 
Appendix 1: Types of refinement 
 
The following three refinement types should be indicated in the refined sections of the 
Methodology Report. 
 
1. Update 
This is to update existing guidance (table, section, or an entire chapter) to 
address the needs explained in the first or second bullet under paragraph 6 
in this TOR. New elements that do not change default approaches in the 
existing guidance is considered “update”. A typical example is to provide new 
default values for EFs contained in a table in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, and 
in this case it is considered “Update of Table X.X (on default EFs)”. 
Update of section or entire chapter is to rewrite an existing section or chapter 
including existing information and new information in the case it is difficult to 
provide only the new information without overlap with existing guidance. 
From the inventory compiler’s view point, “update” of existing guidance 
means that they are encouraged to use the table/section/chapter in the new 
Methodology Report instead of the corresponding table/section/chapter in 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
2. Elaboration 
This is to elaborate existing guidance to address the needs explained in the 
first or third bullet under paragraph 6 in this TOR. 
New elements that may be added to default approaches in the existing 
guidance is considered “elaboration”. Also, additional or alternative up-to-
date information and guidance provided to clarify existing guidance is 
considered “elaboration”. A typical example is to include the contents in 
FAQs in TFI website in the new Methodology Report(s). 
Elaboration of section or entire chapter is NOT to rewrite an existing section 
or chapter, but to provide a sub-section or section which contains additional 
or alternative up-to-date information without overlap with existing guidance. 
From the inventory compiler’s view point, “elaboration” of existing guidance 
means that they are encouraged to use the table/section/chapter in the new 
Methodology Report in conjunction with the corresponding 
table/section/chapter in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
3. New guidance 
This is to add completely new guidance on issues for which there is 
essentially no guidance in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines to address the needs 
explained in the first bullet under paragraph 6 in this TOR. 
Creation of default approaches to issues that are not well covered in the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines is considered “new guidance”. 
From the inventory compiler’s view point, “new guidance” means that they 
are encouraged to use the section/chapter in the new Methodology Report 
without reference to specific sections/chapters in the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines, recognizing that there is essentially no corresponding guidance 
in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
 
Besides, “No refinement” should indicate that no refinement has been made in that section. 
 

 
25 
Appendix: Instructions to Experts and Authors 
 
 
Instructions to Experts and Authors  
 
 
1. Work on a Methodology Report to refine the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines) will be guided by the IPCC procedures for the 
Preparation, Review, Acceptance, Adoption, Approval and Publication of the IPCC Reports 
(Appendix A to the Principles Governing the IPCC Work1). This document is consistent with 
the IPCC procedures, and applies to all experts engaged in the production of a new 
Methodology Report.  
2. In this document the term “experts” covers Co-Chairs, members of the TFI Bureau (TFB), 
TSU Staff, Coordinating Lead Authors (CLAs), Lead Authors (LAs), and Review Editors 
(REs) as well as Contributing Authors (CAs) and Expert Reviewers. 
3. These notes are intended as guidance to experts contributing to a new Methodology Report. 
They are intended to ensure a consistent and coherent approach across all the volumes or 
chapters and to promote common terms used. 
 
Confidentiality 
 
4. Authors meetings are closed meetings. Any discussions are confidential except for any 
published report of the meeting. This is to ensure that experts participating in the meetings 
can express themselves and discuss issues freely and openly. 
5. The IPCC considers the drafts of a new Methodology Report, prior to acceptance, to be pre-
decisional, provided in confidence to reviewers, and not for public distribution, quotation or 
citation. 
6. The TSU will keep drafts of a new Methodology Report sent for the IPCC review, any 
comments received on them and the responses by authors. All written expert and 
government review comments will be made available to reviewers on request. These will be 
made available on the IPCC website as soon as possible after the acceptance by the Panel 
and the finalisation of the report.  
 
Conflict of Interest 
 
7. It is important that all experts involved in the IPCC activities avoid any conflict of interest or 
the direct and substantial appearance of a conflict of interest. It is recognised that many 
experts in Emission Inventories are employed by, or funded by, parties with some interest in 
the outcome (e.g. most inventory compilers are funded by national governments or 
industry). It is therefore important to be open and transparent about financial and other 
interests. 
8. The IPCC implements a Conflict of Interest (COI) Policy2 3 that applies to all individuals 
directly involved in the preparation of IPCC reports, including senior IPCC leadership (IPCC 
Chair and Vice-Chairs), other Bureau and Task Force Bureau members, authors with 
responsibilities for report content (CLAs, LAs), Review Editors and staff of the Technical 
                                                        
1 http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/ipcc-principles/ipcc-principles-appendix-a-final.pdf 
2 http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/ipcc-principles/ipcc-conflict-of-interest.pdf 
3 The IPCC COI Policy including the COI Form is currently being reviewed and may be revised at the 44th Session of the IPCC in Bangkok, 
Thailand, on 17-20 October 2016. If it is revised at that session of the IPCC, paragraphs 8-11 of this document will be revised accordingly. 

 
26 
Support Units. The overall purpose of this policy is to protect the legitimacy, integrity, trust, 
and credibility of the IPCC and of those directly involved in the preparation of reports, and its 
activities.  
9. Before an individual is appointed as a CLA, LA and RE for a new Methodology Report, the 
TFB will request the individual to complete a Conflict of Interest Disclosure Form (“the COI 
Form”) contained in Annex B to the COI Policy which will be submitted to the TFI TSU. The 
TFB will then evaluate the form to determine whether the individual has a conflict of interest 
that cannot be resolved. 
10. All CLAs, LAs and REs will inform the TFI TSU annually of any changes in the information 
provided in their previously submitted COI Form. The TFB will evaluate the revised 
information. 
11. All COI Forms and any records of the deliberations of the COI Expert Advisory Group, 
deliberations and/or decisions of the COI Committee in relation to conflict of interest issues 
in respect of specific individuals and any information disclosed by individuals for the 
purposes of the COI Policy will be transferred to the Secretariat after they have been 
reviewed and will be securely archived by the Secretariat and retained for a period of five 
years after the end of the assessment cycle during which the relevant individual contributed, 
after which the information will be destroyed. Subject to requirement to notify the existence 
of a conflict of interest to others, the information referred to above will be considered 
confidential and will not be used for any purpose other than consideration of conflict of 
interest issues under these Implementation Procedures without the express consent of the 
individual providing the information. 
 
Responsibilities of authors and other experts 
 
12. The role of authors is to impartially assess ALL the available literature and to describe the 
best methodologies available. Experts should be impartial. Authors should review all 
literature available up to a cut-off date to be decided by the TFB as part of the agreed work 
plan. 
13. After drafting the report authors will be asked to consider all comments received on the 
drafts and to adjust and revise the text accordingly. They should document their responses. 
If they do not accept a comment this should be explained. Review Editors should check 
whether the accepted changes were fully incorporated in the revised text. 
14. Responsibilities and duties of authors and other experts are currently explained in more 
detail in the IPCC procedures for the Preparation, Review, Acceptance, Adoption, Approval 
and Publication of the IPCC Reports (Appendix A to the Principles Governing the IPCC 
Work). 

 
27 
 
Literature 
 
15. The use of literature should be open and transparent. In the drafting process, emphasis is to 
be placed on the assurance of the quality of all cited literature. Priority should be given to 
peer-reviewed scientific, technical and socio-economic literature if available. 
16. It is recognized that other sources provide crucial information for IPCC Reports. These 
sources may include reports from governments, industry, and research institutions, 
international and other organizations, or conference proceedings. Use of this literature 
brings with it an extra responsibility for the author teams to ensure the quality and validity of 
cited sources and information. In general, newspapers and magazines are not valid sources 
of scientific information. Blogs, social networking sites, and broadcast media are not 
acceptable sources of information for IPCC Reports. Personal communications of scientific 
results are also not acceptable sources. 
17. For any sources written in a language other than English, an executive summary or abstract 
in English is required. 
18. All sources will be integrated into a reference section of an IPCC Report. 
19. For more details of the procedure on the use of literature in IPCC Reports, see Annex 2 to 
the IPCC procedures for the Preparation, Review, Acceptance, Adoption, Approval and 
Publication of the IPCC Reports (Appendix A to the Principles Governing the IPCC Work). 
Principles of the new Methodology Report 
 
20. Guidance in the new Methodology Report should be understandable and easy to 
implement. Lead authors should make efforts to balance the need to produce a 
comprehensive self-contained report with reasonable limits to the length and detail of the 
guidance. In particular: 
a. The guidance should follow a cookbook approach by providing clear step by step 
instructions. It should not try to be a textbook. Detailed background information on 
emission processes, scientific studies, etc. is generally referenced rather than 
included.  
b. Lead authors must consider all recent scientific developments and national methods 
used by countries in their inventories. 
c. Significant changes from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines will have significant implications 
for all countries. Parties to the UNFCCC use the IPCC Guidelines to prepare national 
inventories and national communications. Substantial changes should only be 
introduced if they can be justified on sound scientific and technical grounds. 
d. Authors should bear in mind that the target audience is a diverse group of readers 
who are primarily concerned with the elaboration of national inventories.  For this 
reason, the emphasis should be on ensuring clear communication of practical and 
understandable guidance. 
21. This work aims to cover all IPCC inventory sectors but only those categories where the 
science is considered to have sufficiently advanced since the 2006 or where new or 
additional guidance is required, namely the categories that were selected through technical 
assessment carried out in 2015 and 2016 and the Scoping Meeting held in August 2016 
using the significance and prioritization criteria as shown below. However, authors should 
also develop modifications for other parts of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines if deemed necessary 
to achieve consistency with the refinements mandated by the IPCC Plenary. On the other 
hand, authors may conclude no refinement should be made even for the categories that 

 
28 
were selected through the process mentioned above, after comprehensive review of 
available literature. 
 
Significance and prioritization criteria 
 
Significance of the source/sink and the gas within the sector on a global scale. 
Sources significant only for a limited number of particular countries, currently or in 
the foreseeable future, may not meet this criterion. The adequacy of the existing 
guidance for a particular category should be considered, as should the likelihood 
that new information would lead to a definite improvement in the IPCC Guidelines. 
 
Availability of relevant new scientific results. 
 
Sufficient data availability and maturity of scientific advances since 2006 to provide 
a basis for methodological development or refinement, including: 
o Ability to develop new or updated default emission/removal factors 
o Feasibility of obtaining the necessary data to implement the methods 
 
Emergence of new sources or gases meeting these criteria 
 
22. The new Methodology Report will cover the same greenhouse gases and precursors as 
included in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.  
23. The general structure, approach and definitions used in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, such as 
tiered approach and decision trees will be followed. Annexes may be used where necessary 
to contain additional data to support the methodologies, although large numbers of annexes 
will probably not be necessary. Appendices are not ruled out where scientific knowledge is 
insufficient for countries to agree full methodologies, but please avoid as far as possible 
work on areas that have to be relegated to an appendix. Appendices should be sub-titled by 
“Basis for future methodological development”.  
Reporting Tables and worksheets 
 
24. Refinement of worksheets and reporting tables may be required. Worksheets reflect the 
application of tier 1 methods only, due to the varied implementation of higher tier methods 
by countries. Lead authors should stress the importance of documentation and archiving of 
particular types of information of relevance to each category, although advice may be given 
of what needs to be reported for transparency at higher Tiers. 
 
Emission factors and methods 
 
25. Authors should provide default emission factors. In doing this work, they should draw on the 
widest possible range of available literature, including the IPCC Emission Factor Database 
(EFDB), scientific articles and country reports. 
26. All new default data should be evaluated for scientific and technical appropriateness, and 
their development should be clearly described and referenced. The attached form (Appendix 
3) should be used as the means for documenting data and the derivation procedure which 
will also facilitate future integration of the EFDB and the archiving of the derivation.  Lead 
authors should be familiar with the draft cross-cutting guidance on data collection in Volume 
1 and the guidance on cross-cutting issues in this note on terms, data types, data demands 
of methods and stratification requirements.  Default data should also meet the EFDB 
evaluation criteria – robustness, documentation, and applicability.   

 
29 
27. Authors should develop guidance to provide additional information on rationale, references 
and background information on parameters used for estimating of default values where such 
information is available (similar to Annex 3A.3 of Wetland Supplement), with a view to 
enhancing the transparency and applicability of default values presented in the new 
Methodology Report. 
28. IPCC default factors should in principle be presented as regional factors. In case regional 
factors are unavailable, single IPCC default factors might be provided, ensuring that the 
default are representative of typical conditions as far as can be determined. It may be 
necessary or appropriate to provide a range of default factors along with clear guidance 
about how countries should select from within the range. Lead authors may also provide 
multiple default emission factors, disaggregated by region, technology, or another 
classification scheme (e.g., livestock type),  
29. It is important to provide more default emission factors that reflect the unique conditions of 
developing countries. Default emission factors for Tier 1 should represent emissions without 
category-specific mitigation measures. 
30. Users of the guidelines should be encouraged to develop and use country specific data. 
Emission factors for higher tiers need not be specified in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. Default 
information is included primarily to provide users with a starting point from which they can 
develop their own national assumptions and data. Indeed, national assumptions and data 
are always preferred because the default assumptions and data may not always be 
appropriate for specific national contexts. 
31. The basic principle concerning national methods will continue to apply – countries are 
encouraged to use national data or methods so long as they are consistent with the IPCC 
Guidelines. 
 
Decision trees 
 
32. Consistent with the format and structure the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, the new Methodology 
Report may contain a decision tree for some sub-categories to assist countries in selecting 
from the IPCC methods. These decision trees link the choice of IPCC methods to national 
circumstances via specific questions about data availability and status as a key source 
category4.  
33. To ensure consistency in decision tree logic and format across categories, lead authors 
should adhere to the following requirements: 
a. The decision trees should be based on a series of questions with clear yes/no 
answers, and two subsequent branches along yes/no paths.   
 
b. The decision trees should start with assessing data availability for the highest tier 
method, and then direct countries step-wise towards lower tier methods if activity 
data, emission factors or other parameters are not available.   
 
c. The decision tree should indicate the lowest tier method that is judged to be 
appropriate for estimating emissions/removals from a key category. 
 
d. If data are not available for the method referred to in 3, the ‘No’ response should 
direct the reader to the question “Is this a key category?”  If the answer to this is 
‘Yes’, the decision tree should recommend that the country collect the necessary 
                                                        
4 The most appropriate choice of estimation method (or tier) may also depend on national circumstances, including the availability of resources 
and advice on this will be given in the cross-cutting volume. 

 
30 
data to implement a higher tier method.  If the answer is ‘No’, then the decision tree 
can recommend a lower tier method. There is no need to deal with the case for a key 
source where a country does not have the resources to gather additional data 
needed to implement higher Tier methods. This is dealt with in Volume 1 of the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines.  
 
e. The branches of the decision trees should end in ‘out-boxes’ that correspond to 
specific tiers identified in the guidance for that category and are labelled by Tier.  
Lead authors may also recommend out-boxes for hybrid tiers. 
 
f. 
Lead authors may develop separate decision trees for different sub-categories.  
Alternatively, they may include decision tree options for selecting different tiers for 
different sub-categories.  This second option is appropriate if it is advantageous to 
recommend a higher tier method only for significant sub-categories rather than for 
the entire category. Decision trees that use the ‘significance’ criterion must 
include the “25-30% rule” (i.e., a significant sub-category is one that makes up 
more than 25-30% of emissions/removals from a category). 

 
31 
34. Additional Formatting Guidelines (see example): 
a. Decision trees should be drafted in separate Microsoft Word files. The TSU will 
integrate these files into the main text at a later date. 
b. Decision trees should NOT ask the question: “Does this source occur in the 
country?” This is because decision trees will only be used for sources which occur.  
c. There should be a “START” box. 
d. “Diamonds” should be used for questions/decisions. 
e. “Squares” should be used for all other information. 
f. The out-boxes should be individually numbered. 
g. The text font should be Times New Roman 10pt. 
h. Text should be centred within the boxes. 
 
Decision tree to estimate CO2–C and N2O emissions from Peatlands Remaining 
Peatlands 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Start
Are
managed peatlands
a key category1?
Are
historical
and current data
available on the area of managed 
peatlands and on peat
production?
Estimate emissions using
country-specific
methodology and
emission factors (Tier 3).
Collect or compile historical
and current data from the national 
peat industry, government 
agency, or from the International 
Peat Society
Estimate emissions 
using default method 
and country-specific 
data (Tier2).
No
Yes
Yes
Note:
1: See Volume 1 Chapter 4, "Methodological Choice and Identification of Key Categories" (noting Section 4.1.2 on limited resources), for 
discussion of key categories and use of decision trees.
Were
domestic studies
done on GHG emissions/ 
removals on industrial
peatlands?
Is detailed
information available on
land conversion for peat extraction, 
extraction methods, peat use, fertility, 
and on-site
emissions?
No
No
Yes
Yes
Estimate emissions
using default emission
factors and activity data
(Tier 1).
Estimate emissions 
using default method 
and emission factors 
and national activity 
data (Tier1).
No
Box 1: Tier 1
Box 2: Tier 1
Box 3: Tier 2
Box 4: Tier 3

 
32 
IPCC Emission Factor Database (EFDB) 
 
35. The EFDB is an important resource for this work, both as a source of emission factors for 
consideration by the LAs and as a repository of emission factors once agreed for use in the 
guidelines.  
36. The new Methodology Report may contain Tier 1 methods and the corresponding default 
emission factors (once the guidelines are approved by the IPCC, the default emission 
factors cannot change). These defaults need to be recorded in to the EFDB, either because 
they are already there, or they will have to be entered as a result of the process of 
developing the Methodology Report. Preferably the EFDB should be populated with new 
emission factors as the Methodology Reports are drafted, but if this proves impossible the 
guideline emission factors should be entered in the EFDB with the underlying 
documentation information in the property fields as soon as possible, after guidelines 
completion.  
37. The evolving information on peer reviewed emission factors in the EFDB will also be a 
useful source of information for countries to refer to in applying Tier 2 and 3 methods. In 
applying these methods (Tier 2 and/or 3) it will remain the country’s responsibility to ensure 
that the choice of emission factors properly reflects national circumstances and is consistent 
with the requirements of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, and to document that this is the case. 
38. It should be noted that Methodology Reports go through IPCC reviews, but the EFDB does 
not. The EFDB is a long(er)-term exercise. The TSU will provide technical advice/information 
to authors for their consideration. 
Definitions 
 
39. The following terms will be used throughout the new Methodology Report, and it is essential 
that all Lead Authors have a common understanding of their meaning and relevance: 
40. Tier A Tier refers to a description of the overall complexity of a methodology and its data 
requirements. Higher tier methods are generally more complex and data-intensive than 
lower tier methods. The guidance for each category should contain at least a Tier 1 method, 
and in many cases there will be a Tier 2 and Tier 3. The general expectation is that Tier 2 
and Tier 3 methods will both be consistent with good practice guidance for key sources, 
although in some cases Tier 3 will be preferred, for example with methane from coal mines 
where Tier 1 is a global default value, Tier 2 basin specific and Tier 3 mine specific. 
41. Tier 1 approaches are simple methods that can be applied by all countries in all 
circumstances. Default values for the emission factors and any other parameters needed 
must be supplied (see below for documentation needed).  
42. Tier 2 methods should in principle follow the same methodological approach as Tier 1, but 
allow for higher resolution country specific emissions factors and activity data. In some 
categories, this may not be the case. These methods should better replicate the parameters 
affecting the emissions. Country specific emission factors are needed and possibly more 
parameters will also be needed.  
43. Tier 3 methods give flexibility either for country specific methods including modelling or 
direct measurement approaches, or for a higher level of disaggregation, or both. This is a 
more complex method, often involving a model. This will replicate many features of nation 
emissions and require specific parameters for each country. 
44. Default information is data that is appropriate for use where there is no better detailed, 
country specific information. If appropriate, authors may specify regional default data. Users 
of the guidelines should be encouraged to try to find better country specific data. Default 

 
33 
data are appropriate for Tier 1 methods and the guidelines should contain all the default 
values needed. Emission factors for higher tiers need not be specified because it is a 
function of higher tier methods to find data reflecting national circumstances. Volume 1 of 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines suggests that the EFDB may help identify data reflecting national 
circumstances, but reference to the EFDB should in no case be used as a device for 
evading the necessity of finding data for default methods. Default information is included 
primarily to provide users with a starting point from which they can develop their own 
national assumptions and data. Indeed, national assumptions and data are always preferred 
because the default assumptions and data may not always be appropriate for specific 
national contexts. In general, therefore, default assumptions and data should be used only 
when national assumptions and data are not available. 
45. Decision Trees. A decision tree is a graphical tool to assist countries in selecting from the 
IPCC methods.   
46. Sector refers to the four sectors of the guidelines (Energy; Industrial Process and Product 
Use (IPPU); Agriculture, Forests and Other Land Use (AFOLU) and Waste) these are 
divided into source/sink categories and sub categories. 
a. Sector  1 
b. Category 1.A 
c. Sub-category 1st order 1.A.1 
d. Sub-category 2nd order 1.A.1.a 
e. Sub-category 3rd order, 1.A.1.a.i, 
47. Worksheets. These will be printed versions of spreadsheet tables, that, when filled in, 
enable the user to perform the emission estimation. They should contain all the calculations 
and written text with any formulae. Additional worksheets may be required to compile the 
results of the worksheets into the reporting tables.  
48. Reporting Tables are tables that present the calculated emission inventory and sufficient 
detail of other data used to prepare the inventories for others to understand the emission 
estimates. 
49. Usage:  
a. Good Practice, is defined as a set of procedures intended to ensure that 
greenhouse gas inventories are accurate in the sense that they are systematically 
neither over nor underestimates so far as can be judged, and that uncertainties are 
reduced so far as possible. Inventories consistent with good practice are those which 
contain neither over- nor under-estimates so far as can be judged, and in which 
uncertainties are reduced as far as is practicable. To say that “It is Good Practice to 
do x” implies x is part of the good practice procedures. 
b. “Shall” should not be used. Either say “Good Practice is…” or say what needs to be 
done or what should be done. These all indicate what needs to be done to comply 
with Good Practice. 
c. "Be encouraged to" indicates a step or activity that will lead to higher quality 
inventory, but are not required for ensuring consistency with the IPCC Guidelines.  
d. “Recommend” should not be used. In the GPG2000, the word “recommend” was 
avoided and “Suggested” was used instead. 
e. “Inventory agency” is the body responsible for actually compiling the inventory, 
perhaps from contributions from a number of other bodies while “inventory 
compiler” is the person actually compiling the inventory, 

 
34 
Units 
 
50. SI units shall be used throughout: in text, equations, worksheets and tables.  Emissions 
have to be expressed in mass units and units have to be used consistently within the each 
sector. When similar activity data is used for different sectors same units need to be used 
(CLAs have to take care about such harmonisation). Conversion factors have to be provided 
(for example to estimate N2O from N). Where input data available may not be in SI units 
conversions should be provided. 
51. Standard abbreviations for units and chemical compounds are given in Appendix 4. (See 
also a complete discussion available at http://www.bipm.org/en/publications/si-brochure/) 
52. For the purpose of reporting, the sign convention is positive (+) for emissions, and negative 
(-) for removals (uptake). Where needed, for estimation of removals and carbon stock 
increases are counted positive, and the sign reversed for reporting purposes. This is 
consistent with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and other Methodology Reports on national GHG 
inventories in the past. 
 

 
35 
Appendix 3. Data Documentation 
 
This form should be used to document all data used in the new Methodology Report. This gives 
the minimum information that should be considered by the authors. 
 
Author1 
  
IPCC Source/Sink Category 
  
Fuel2 (applicable only in the 
Energy Sector): 
  
Gas3: 
CO2 
CH4 
N2O 
 
 
Value: 
 
 
 
 
 
Unit: 
 
 
 
 
 
Uncertainty (as +/% or 2.5 and 
97.5 percentiles )4 
 
 
 
 
 
Applicability5 – fill in as 
necessary if data not generally 
applicable. Describe appropriate  
Technologies, Practices, 
Abatement  Technologies, Region, 
and/or Regional Conditions 
  
Source of data (chose one) 
Measurement - Scientific Literature 
Other Measurement 
National Inventory Report 
Calculated 
Based on fuel quality 
Expert Judgement 
Method of derivation of the value 
(e.g., arithmetic mean, weighted 
mean, adjustment of a literature 
data by expert judgment etc. 
 
Reference6 
  
 
Note: 
The author is the LA/CA/CLA who writes the relevant section and proposes the data. 
Fuels as defined in the Energy volume 
Add additional gases as required 
As defined by cross-cutting volume 
Only to be completed where it is necessary to specify the applicability of the data 
As reference to document, report, calculation or if expert judgement to those involved (Names or group e.g. 
“Waste BOG on Solid Waste Disposal Sites”) 
 
 

 
36 
Appendix 4 Units and Abbreviations 
Abbreviations of, and how to Spell, Chemical Compounds  
CH4 
 
Methane 
N2O 
 
Nitrous oxide5  
CO2 
 
Carbon dioxide 
CO 
 
Carbon monoxide 
NOX 
 
Nitrogen oxides 
NMVOCs 
 
Non-methane volatile organic compounds 
NH3 
 
Ammonia 
CFCs 
 
Chlorofluorocarbons 
HFCs 
 
Hydrofluorocarbons 
PFCs 
 
Perfluorocarbons 
SF6 
 
Sulphur hexafluoride 
CCl4 
 
Carbon tetrachloride 
C2F6 
 
Hexafluoroethane 
CF4 
 
Tetrafluoromethane 
S 
 
Sulphur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Units and abbreviations  
cubic metre 
 
m3 
hectare 
 
Ha 
gram 
 
g 
gigagram 
 
Gg 
tonne 
 
T 
gigatonne 
 
Gt 
joule 
 
J 
degree Celsius 
 
℃ 
calorie 
 
Cal 
year 
 
Yr 
capita 
 
Cap 
gallon 
 
Gal 
dry matter 
 
Dm 
 
                                                        
5 In the IUPCA N2O is officially named “Dinitrogen Oxide”. However, “nitrous oxide” is widely used and understood in the 
emission inventory community and by the UNFCCC and so, to avoid confusion, will be used.   

 
37 
 
Prefixes and multiplication factors  
Multiplication Factor 
Abbreviation 
Prefix 
Symbol 
1 000 000 000 000 000 
1015 
peta 
P 
1 000 000 000 000 
1012 
tera 
T 
1 000 000 000 
109 
giga 
G 
1 000 000 
106 
mega 
M 
1 000 
103 
kilo 
k 
100 
102 
hecto 
h 
10 
101 
deca 
da 
0.1 
10-1 
deci 
d 
0.01 
10-2 
centi 
c 
0.001 
10-3 
milli 
m 
0.000 001 
10-6 
micro 
 
 
 
Standard equivalents  
1 tonne of oil equivalent (toe) 
 
1 x 1010 calories 
103 toe 
 
41.868 TJ 
1 short ton 
 
0.9072 tonne 
1 tonne 
 
1.1023 short tons 
1 tonne 
 
1 megagram 
1 kilotonne 
 
1 gigagram 
1 megatonne 
 
1 teragram 
1 gigatonne 
 
1 petagram 
1 kilogram 
 
2.2046 lbs 
1 hectare 
 
104 m2 
1 calorieIT 
 
4.1868 joule 
1 atmosphere 
 
101.325 kPa 
 
 
 

 
38 
ANNEX 2  
Draft Table of Contents 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories 
 
Draft Table of Contents  
 
Introductory Note 
 
The 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2019 
Refinement) will be a single Methodology Report comprising an Overview Chapter and five volumes following 
the format of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines).  
Overview Chapter 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
Volume 2: Energy 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
Volume 4: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use 
Volume 5: Waste 
The draft table of contents is presented below for each volume. Its structure is the same as that of the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines so as to make it easier for inventory compilers to use this Methodology Report with the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines. For those Chapters/Sections/Subsections where refinement is expected, the following three 
elements are explained. 
- Issue (which needs to be addressed) 
- Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines (location of relevant guidance in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines) 
- Type of refinement (Update, Elaboration or New guidance, as explained in the draft Terms of 
Reference) 
On the other hand, for those Chapters/Sections/Subsections where refinement is NOT expected, “No 
refinement” is indicated. 
However, the following two principles need to be noted. 
 
Authors should develop modifications even for those Chapters/Sections/Subsections where “No 
refinement” is indicated in this draft table of contents, if deemed necessary to ensure consistency with 
the refinements made in the other Chapters/Sections/Subsections.  
 
Authors may conclude no refinement should be made even for the Chapters/Sections/Subsections where 
refinement is expected in this draft table of contents, after comprehensive review of available literature. 
In addition, authors should develop modifications for Annexes (e.g. Worksheets) at the end of each volume as 
well, if deemed necessary to ensure consistency with the refinements made in Chapters/Sections/Subsections 
in the same volume, even though those Annexes are not explicitly included in this draft table of contents. 
 
 
 
Overview Chapter 
 
Background – Technical Assessment of IPCC Inventory Guidelines 
 
Fundamental principle (not revising, but refining) 
 
Relationship with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
 
Policy Relevance 
 
 

 
39 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
Chapter 1 
Introduction to the 2006 Guidelines 
Issue 1: Provide a better description on how to implement a national inventory management system that 
manages all parts of Volume 1, implements continuous improvement and leads to the development of 
mature inventories. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Section in Chapter 1 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
Issue 2:  Clarify the concept of “anthropogenic emissions and removals”. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 1.1 Concepts, with Guidance contained in the IPCC KP 
Supplement Chapter 2.3.4 and 2.3.5 and the IPCC Wetlands Supplement 
Type of refinement: Update 
Chapter 2 
Approaches to Data Collection 
Issue 1:  Add guidance for the development of country-specific emission factors, focusing on developing 
countries. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Chapter 2 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
Issue 2:  Add guidance for activity data collection; technical survey indicated there is a capacity problem to 
gather and manage national data which can be addressed by an additional guidance. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Chapter 2 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
Issue 3:  Add guidance on the integration of GHG emissions reported from facilities into national GHG 
inventories 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Chapter 2 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
Chapter 3 
Uncertainties 
Issue:  Refine guidance on uncertainty based on the latest scientific knowledge and simplification of guidance 
by providing more default values, calculation examples and best practices. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Chapter 3 
Type of refinement: Update 
Chapter 4 
Methodological Choice and Identification of Key Categories 
Issue: 
Add guidance on key category analysis to address treatment of disaggregation of categories, trend 
analysis, equations for trend analysis and the need for consistent definition of significant 
subcategories across the different volumes of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Chapter 4 (and relevant guidance in the other Volumes) 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
Chapter 5 
Time Series Consistency 
Issue: 
Provide practical guidance on how to apply existing guidance on time series consistency because this 
proved to be a problem for many countries. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Chapter 5 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 

 
40 
Chapter 6 
Quality Assurance / Quality Control and Verification 
Issue 1: Add guidance on the use and reporting of models 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Section in Chapter 6 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
Issue 2:  Elaborate user-friendly description of verification, validation, audit and QA/QC because users are 
unclear on their IPCC meanings compared to outer definitions, such as ISO as used by CDM. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.1, Box 6.1 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
Issue 3: Update/elaborate verification guidance because the existing guidance is outdated (especially the 
guidance on comparisons with atmospheric measurements and new datasets). 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.10 
Type of refinement: Update/Elaboration 
Chapter 7 
Precursors and Indirect Emissions 
Issue: 
Elaborate clearer guidance for the calculation of indirect CO2 emissions. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 7.2.1.5 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
Chapter 8 
Reporting Guidance and Tables 
No refinement 
 
 
Volume 2: Energy 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
No refinement 
Chapter 2 
Stationary Combustion 
2.1 Overview 
No refinement 
2.2 Description of sources 
No refinement 
2.3 Methodological issues 
Issue: Link to issue related to biomass combustion and methodologies for Harvested Wood Products 
(HWP) 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 2.3.3.4  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
2.4 Uncertainty assessment 
No refinement 
2.5 Inventory Quality Assurance/Quality Control QA/QC 
No refinement 
2.6 Worksheets 
No refinement 

 
41 
Chapter 3 
Mobile Combustion 
No refinement 
Chapter 4 
Fugitive Emissions 
4.1 Fugitive emissions from mining, processing, storage and transportation of coal 
Issue1: Elaborate chapter to include guidance on emissions from exploration and CO2 emissions 
(Underground coal mines, Surface coal mining) 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Sections 4.1.3 and 4.1.4 (Sections 4.1.1, 4.1.2 and 4.1.6 are 
relevant)  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
Issue2: Include new section on abandoned surface coal mines 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Not applicable. (Next to Section 4.1.5. Sections 4.1.1, 4.1.2 
and 4.1.6 are relevant)  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
4.2 Fugitive emissions from oil and natural gas systems 
Issue:  Update chapter including update/inclusion of EFs representative for current practice. Additional 
guidance for unconventional oil and gas production and abandoned wells. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Sections 4.2  
Type of refinement:  Update 
4.3 Fuel transformation [New] 
Issue: Include new section on fuel transformation 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Section in Chapter 4 (Next to Section 4.2) 
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
Chapter 5 
Carbon Dioxide Transport, Injection and Geological Storage 
No refinement 
Chapter 6 
Reference Approach 
No refinement 
 
 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
Chapter 1  
Introduction 
No refinement  
Chapter 2  
Mineral Industry Emission 
No refinement 
Chapter 3  
Chemical Industry Emissions 
3.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
3.2 Ammonia production 
No refinement 

 
42 
3.3 Nitric acid production 
Issue:  Update guidance on appropriate emission factors to use for dual pressure technologies for Nitric 
Acid Production 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 3.3.2.2 and Table 3.3 
Type of refinement:  Update 
3.4 Adipic acid production  
No refinement 
3.5 Caprolactam, glyoxal and glyoxylic acid production  
No refinement 
3.6 Carbide production 
No refinement 
3.7 Titanium dioxide production  
No refinement 
3.8 Soda ash production 
No refinement 
3.9 Petrochemical and carbon black production 
No refinement 
3.10 Fluorochemical production 
Issue:  Update guidance and default Tier 1 emission factors for production of fluorinated compounds other 
than HCFC-22 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 3.10.2.2 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
3.11 Hydrogen production [New] 
Issue:  Develop guidance for estimating GHG emissions from hydrogen production 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Section in Chapter 3 (Next to Section 3.10) 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
Chapter 4 
Metal Industry Emissions 
4.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
4.2 Iron & steel and metallurgical coke production 
Issue:  Update emission factors for Iron and Steel Production and elaborate methodological guidance.  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 4.2.2 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
4.3 Ferroalloy production 
No refinement 
 
 

 
43 
4.4 Primary aluminium production 
Issue:  Elaborate guidance and emissions factors to incorporate “low-voltage anode effect” PFC emissions 
and integrate this guidance into the existing methodology on “high-voltage anode effect” PFC 
emissions. Update of the Tier 1 and Tier 2 defaults. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 4.4 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
Issue: Develop a new methodology for the CO2 emissions from the alumina production. Ensuring 
completeness and avoiding double counting 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 4.4 
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
4.5 Magnesium production 
No refinement 
4.6 Lead production 
No refinement 
4.7 Zinc production 
No refinement 
4.8 Rare Earth elements [New] 
Issue: Develop a new guidance on GHG emissions (PFCs and CO2) from production of Rare Earth 
elements 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Section in Chapter 4 (Next to Section 4.7) 
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
Chapter 5 
Non-Energy Products from Fuels and Solvent use 
No refinement 
Chapter 6 
Electronics Industry Emissions 
Issue: 
Update guidance and default Tier 1 and Tier 2 emission factors for Semiconductor Industry, 
improvement of the Tier 3 guidance and elaboration of guidance on generation of by-products from 
abatement technologies (CF4 from NF3) 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.1 and 6.2.2, and 6.3.1 (uncertainty, to the extent 
necessary) 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration/New guidance 
Chapter 7  
Emissions of Fluorinated Substitutes for Ozone Depleting Substances 
7.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
7.2 Solvents (non-aerosol) 
No refinement 
7.3 Aerosols (propellants and solvents) 
No refinement 
7.4 Foam blowing agents 
No refinement 

 
44 
7.5 Refrigeration and air conditioning 
Issue:  Add examples (collection of activity data, distribution of ODS substitutes by application within 
countries). Elaborate by adding a box with “recipe-style” guidance on how to launch the ODS 
substitutes inventory. Elaborate the reference to Montreal Protocol. Update emission factors by 
further segregating equipment types, regions, and time periods where possible. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Sections 7.5.2.1 - for the recipe, 7.5.2.2 - for emission 
factors, 7.5.2.3 - for activity data 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
7.6 Fire protection 
No refinement 
7.7 Other applications 
No refinement 
Chapter 8  
Other Product Manufacture and Use 
8.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
8.2 Emissions of SF6 and PFCs from electrical equipment 
No refinement 
8.3 Use of SF6 and PFCs in other products  
Issue 1: Develop guidance for PFCs (GHG) emissions from Textile Industry. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 8.3  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
Issue 2: Develop guidance for PFCs (GHG) emissions from water-proofing electronic circuit boards 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 8.3  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
8.4 N2O from product uses 
No refinement 
 
 
Volume 4: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use 
Chapter 1 
Introduction  
No refinement 
Chapter 2 
Generic Methodologies Applicable to Multiple Land-use Categories  
2.1 Introduction  
No refinement 
2.2 Inventory framework 
No refinement 
 
 

 
45 
2.3 Generic methods for CO2 emissions and removals 
2.3.1 
Change in biomass carbon stocks (above-ground biomass and below-ground biomass) 
Issue 1: Develop guidance on the use of allometric equations for biomass estimation  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Subsection in Section 2.3.1 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
Issue 2:  Develop guidance on how to use biomass density (amount per unit area) maps generated 
from remote sensing data for biomass estimation 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Subsection in Section 2.3.1 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
2.3.2 
Change in carbon stocks in dead organic matter 
Issue 1:  Update default values for litter stocks and develop default values for deadwood stocks 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 2.3.2.1, IPCC default values for litter and dead 
wood (Table 2.2), 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
Issue 2:  Develop equation 2.18 for estimating DOMout and associated default values 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 2.3.2.1, IPCC default values for litter and dead 
wood (Table 2.2) 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
2.3.3 
Change in carbon stocks in soils 
Issue 1:  Update reference carbon stocks. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 2.3.3.1, Table 2.3 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2:  Develop new Tier 2 method for mineral soils that requires less activity data than the current 
default method  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 2.3.3.1  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
Issue 3: Elaborate Tier 3 Methodologies with case study examples for soils. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Tier 3 methods, Section 2.3.3.1,  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
2.4 Non-CO2 emissions 
Issue: Replace defaults for cropland mass of fuel with crop residue estimation method in Chapter 11 
for soil N2O method to ensure consistency in the calculation of residues between the two 
categories, and provide a basis to estimate mass of fuel for all crops instead of just the 4 
crops listed in Table 2.4. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 2.4, Table 2.4 
Type of refinement:  Update 
2.5 Additional generic guidance for Tier 3 methods 
Issue 1: Provide guidance on how to address inter-annual variability  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Chapter 2.5 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
 

 
46 
Issue 2:  Elaborate guidance on the use of Tier 3 methods  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Sections 2.5.1 and 2.5.2 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
Chapter 3 
Consistent Representation of Lands 
3.1 Introduction  
No refinement 
3.2 Land-use categories  
No refinement 
3.3 Representing land-use areas 
Issue: Develop guidance on how remotely sensed data, ground based data, and ancillary data can be 
integrated and used to derive consistent time series estimates of land use and land-use change 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 3.3 and Annex 3A.1 and 3A.2  
Type of refinement: Update/Elaboration/New guidance 
3.4 Matching land areas with factors for estimating greenhouse gas emissions and removals 
Issue:  Provide guidance on how to use methodologies within different methodological tiers in combination 
with different approaches for land representation 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Subsection in Section 3.4 
Type of refinement: New guidance 
3.5 Uncertainties associated with the Approaches 
No refinement 
Annex 3A.1   Examples of International land cover datasets 
(See the above issue under Section 3.3) 
Annex 3A.2   Development of land-use databases 
(See the above issue under Section 3.3) 
Chapter 4 
Forest Land 
4.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
4.2 Forest Land Remaining Forest Land 
4.2.1 
Biomass  
No refinement 
4.2.2 
Dead organic matter 
No refinement 
4.2.3 
Soil carbon 
Issue:  Provide guidance and develop new Tier 2 method for mineral soils that requires less activity 
data than the current default method 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 4.2.3 
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
 

 
47 
4.2.4 
Non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions from biomass burning 
No refinement 
4.3 Land Converted to Forest Land  
(All issues for Section 4.2 above apply to this Section similarly.) 
4.4 Completeness, time series, QA/QC, and reporting and documentation 
Issue: Develop guidance on how to ensure methodological consistency of time series, such as through 
the use of age class structure data  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 4.4.2 on time series consistency 
Type of refinement: Elaboration  
4.5 Tables 
Issue: Update values for BEF/BCEF and root/shoot ratio, average biomass stocks, and average biomass 
increments 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Tables 4.4, 4.5, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11A and 4.11B, 4.12 
Type of refinement: Update/Elaboration 
Chapter 5 
Cropland 
5.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
5.2 Cropland Remaining Cropland 
5.2.1 
Biomass 
Issue: Update default biomass carbon parameters.  
Location in 2006 IPCC GL: Section 5.2.1.2, Tables 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 
Type of refinement:  Update 
5.2.2 
Dead organic matter 
No refinement 
5.2.3 
Soil carbon 
 
Issue 1: Update carbon stock change factors. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 5.2.3.2, Table 5.5 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2:  Develop new Tier 2 method for mineral soils that requires less activity data than the   current 
default method 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 5.2.3  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
5.2.4 
Non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions from biomass burning 
No refinement 
5.3 Land Converted to Cropland  
(All issues for Section 5.2 above apply to this Section similarly.) 
5.4 Completeness, time series, QA/QC, and reporting 
No refinement 

 
48 
5.5 Methane emissions from rice cultivation 
Issue: - Develop regionally specific default EFs 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 5.5.2, Tables 5.11 to 5.14, 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Annex 5A.1 Estimation of default stock change factors for mineral soil C emissions/removals for 
cropland 
(See the above issues under Section 5.2.3.) 
Chapter 6 
Grassland 
6.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
6.2 Grassland Remaining Grassland  
6.2.1 
Biomass 
Issue:  Update default biomass carbon parameters.  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.1.2, Table 6.1 
Type of refinement:  Update 
6.2.2 
Dead organic matter 
No refinement 
6.2.3 
Soil carbon 
Issue 1:  Update carbon stock change factors. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.3.2, Table 6.2 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2:  Develop new Tier 2 method for mineral soils that requires less activity data than the current 
default method 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 6.2.3 
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
6.2.4 
Non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions from biomass burning 
No refinement 
6.3 Land Converted to Grassland 
(All Issues for section 6.2 above apply to this Section similarly.) 
6.4 Completeness, time series, QA/QC, and reporting 
No refinement 
Annex 6A.1 Estimation of default stock change factors for mineral soil C emissions/removals for 
grassland 
(See the above issues under Section 6.2.3.) 
Chapter 7 
Wetlands 
7.1 Introduction 
No refinement 

 
49 
7.2 Managed peatlands 
No refinement 
7.3 Flooded Land  
Issue:  Update CO2 emission factors for land converted to flooded land (Wetlands) and to develop, on the 
basis of comprehensive review of available literature, consistent methodologies that take into 
account factoring out of emissions and removals that would otherwise occur in the absence of the 
flooded area for estimating CO2 and CH4 emissions from flooded lands (both land converted to 
flooded land and flooded land remaining flooded land). 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 7.3 and associated good practice guidance in 
Section 7.4, and Appendices 2 and 3; also relevant to Chapter 2, Section 2.3 (Generic 
Methodologies for CO2 emissions and removals). 
Type of refinement: New guidance/Update  
7.4 Completeness, time series consistency, and QA/QC 
No refinement 
7.5 Future methodological development 
Issue: Clarify that this section of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines is no longer relevant 
Location in the 2006 Guidelines: Section 7.5 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
7.X. Additional guidance on Tier 2 method for mineral soils [New] 
Issue: Develop guidance to implement new Tier 2 method for mineral soils that requires less activity data 
than the current default method, taking into consideration Chapter 5 of the 2013 Supplement to 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New Section in Chapter 7 (Between Sections 7.3 and 7.4) 
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
Chapter 8 
Settlements 
8.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
8.2 Settlements Remaining Settlements  
8.2.1 
Biomass 
Issue: Update default biomass carbon parameters.  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 8.2.1.2,  
Type of refinement:  Update 
8.2.2 
Dead organic matter 
No refinement 
8.2.3 
Soil carbon 
Issue: Develop new Tier 2 method for mineral soils that requires less activity data than the current 
default method 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 8.2.3 
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
 

 
50 
8.3 Land Converted to Settlements 
(All Issues for section 8.2 above apply to this Section similarly.) 
8.4 Completeness, time series consistency, QA/QC and reporting 
No refinement 
8.5 Basis for future methodological development 
Issue: Clarify the elements in this section of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines that are no longer relevant 
Location in the 2006 Guidelines: Section 8.5 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
Chapter 9 
Other Land 
9.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
9.2 Other Land Remaining Other Land  
No refinement 
9.3 Land Converted to Other Land  
9.3.1 
Biomass  
No refinement 
9.3.2 
Dead organic matter  
No refinement 
9.3.3 
Soil carbon 
Issue: Develop new Tier 2 method for mineral soils that requires less activity data than the current 
default method 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 9.3.3  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
9.4 Completeness, time series, QA/QC and reporting 
No refinement 
Chapter 10 
Emissions from Livestock and Manure Management 
10.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
10.2 Livestock population and feed characterisation 
Issue 1: Update Section 10.2.2 to include guidance on improved description of feeding systems  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.2.2 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2: Develop consistent system descriptions for manure management between source categories 
(regionally/climatically stratified) for basic and enhanced characterisation for livestock populations 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.2.2  
Type of refinement:  Update 
 

 
51 
10.3 Methane emissions from enteric fermentation 
Issue:  Improve parameters based on different feeding strategies for cattle and sheep. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.3.2, Table 10.11 and Table 10.12 
Type of refinement: Update 
10.4 Methane emissions from manure management 
Issue 1: Update methodology, temperature relationships, Tier 1 Emission Factors and Tier 2 parameters for 
different manure management systems 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.4.2  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2: Update guidance on how to deal with non-CO2 emissions due to biogas production. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.4.2, Table 10.17 
Type of refinement: Update 
10.5 N2O emissions from manure management 
Issue 1: Update N excretion parameters for all livestock categories considering updated livestock 
characterization in Section 10.2. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.5.2 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2: Update emission factors for N2O for manure management system descriptions. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.5.2, Table 10.21 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 3: Update manure management volatilization and leaching factors with manure management systems 
identified in Section 10.2. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.5.4, Tables 10.22 and 10.23,  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 4: Provide text on quality control procedures that use a mass balance approach to evaluate C and N 
flows through animal management systems. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 10.5.6 
Type of refinement: Elaboration 
Chapter 11 
N2O Emissions from Managed Soils, and CO2 Emissions from Lime and Urea 
Application 
11.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
11.2 N2O emissions from managed soils 
11.2.1 
Direct N2O emissions 
Issue 1: Update N2O EF1, stratification by climate  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 11.2.1.2, Table 11.1 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2: Update crop parameters for calculating residue quantity and N. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 11.2.1.4, Table 11.2 
Type of refinement:  Update 

 
52 
Issue 3: Update the EF3 for N applied to soils, pasture, range and paddock by grazing animals. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 11.2.1, Table 11.1  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 4: Update emission factor for rice production (N2O)  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 11.2, Table 11.1 
Type of refinement:  Update 
11.2.2 
Indirect N2O emissions 
Issue: Evaluate emissions factors for indirect N2O, both the amount of leaching/runoff and 
volatilization, as well as the indirect emission factor. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 11.2.2, Table 11.3 
Type of refinement:  Update 
11.2.3 
Completeness, Time series, QA/QC 
No refinement 
11.3 CO2 emissions from liming  
No refinement 
11.4 CO2 emissions from urea fertilization  
No refinement 
Annex 11A.1 
References for crop residue data in Table 11.2 
No refinement 
Chapter 12 
Harvested Wood Products (HWP) 
Issue 1: Update the relevant technical parameters, maintaining the existing approaches in the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Chapter 12 
Type of refinement: Update 
 
 
Volume 5: Waste  
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
No refinement  
Chapter 2 
Waste Generation, Composition and Management Data 
2.1 Introduction 
No refinement 
2.2 Waste generation and management data 
Issue: Update default data on Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) generation and management 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 2.2.1, Table 2.1 
Type of refinement:  Update  
2.3 Waste composition  
Issue 1: Update default data on MSW composition data  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 2.3.1, Table 2.3  

 
53 
Type of refinement:  Update  
Issue 2: Add information on nitrogen (N) content, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) or Chemical Oxygen 
Demand (COD) of sludge 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 2.3.2  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
Annex 2A.1 Waste Generation and Management Data - by country and regional averages 
Issue: Update default data on MSW generation and management 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Table 2A.1 
Type of refinement:  Update  
Chapter 3 
Solid Waste Disposal 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Methodological issues   
Issue 1: Elaborate on the First Order Decay (FOD) method taking into account active aeration of landfills  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 3.2.1.1 
Type of refinement:  New guidance  
Issue 2: Elaborate on default DOC which decomposes (DOCf) values for different waste components  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 3.2.3 (Fraction of degradable organic carbon which 
decomposes (DOCf)) 
Type of refinement:  Elaboration  
 
3.3 Use of measurement in the estimation of CH4 emissions from solid waste disposal site 
(SWDS) 
No refinement  
3.4 Carbon stored in SWDS  
No refeinement 
3.5 Completeness  
No refeinement 
3.6 Developing a consistent time series  
No refeinement 
3.7 Uncertainty assessment 
Issue:  Update uncertainty for DOCf values  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 3.7.2  
Type of refinement: Update 
3.8 QA/QC, reporting and documentation  
No refinement 
Annex 3A.1  
First Order Decay Model 
No refinement 
 

 
54 
Chapter 4 
Biological Treatment of Solid Waste 
No refinement 
Chapter 5 
Incineration and Open Burning of Waste 
5.1 Introduction  
No refinement 
5.2 Methodological issues 
No refinement  
5.3 Choice of activity data 
No refinement 
5.4 Choice of emission factors 
Issue 1: Update oxidation factors for open burning of MSW  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 5.4.1, Table 5.2 (Oxidation factor for open burning of 
MSW) 
Type of refinement: Update/Elaboration  
Issue 2: Elaborate on EF for CH4 from incineration related to new technologies gasification, pyrolysis, and 
plasma technology) 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 5.4.2, Table 5.3 
Type of refinement:  Elaboration  
Issue 3: Elaborate on EF for N2O from incineration related to new technologies (e.g. gasification, pyrolysis, 
and plasma technology) 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section, 5.4.3, Table 5.4  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration  
5.5 Completeness  
No refinement 
 
5.6 Developing a consistent time series 
No refinement  
5.7 Uncertainty assessment  
No refinement 
5.8 QA/QC, reporting and documentation  
No refinement 
Chapter 6 
Wastewater Treatment and Discharge 
6.1 Introduction  
Issue 1: Update introduction language to reflect current understanding of CH4 and N2O emissions from 
wastewater treatment. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.1  
Type of refinement: Elaboration 

 
55 
Issue 2: Update Figure 6.1 and Table 6.1 to reflect additional types of treatment and disposal systems, such 
as 
aerobic/anaerobic 
treatment 
systems 
(e.g., 
anaerobic/anoxic/oxic 
(A2O), 
nitrification/denitrification, etc.) and constructed wetlands, as well as various types of septic 
systems (e.g., bottomless systems). 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.1  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
Issue 3:  Discuss updates/changes from 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.1.1   
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
6.2 Methane emissions from wastewater  
6.2.1 
Methodological issues  
6.2.2 
Domestic wastewater 
Issue 1: Update Section 6.2.2.1. Some inventory compilers are misinterpreting Equation 6.1 and 
combining zero emissions from aerobic systems with recovered methane from sludge 
digestion, but missing the step of calculating emissions from sludge digestion.  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.2.1  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2: Develop new Methane Correction Factors (MCFs) to reflect treatment processes that may be a 
combination of aerobic and anaerobic or anoxic zones (e.g., anaerobic/anoxic/oxic (A2O), 
modified Ludzack-Ettinger (MLE), etc.). 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.2.2  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 3: Consider the development of new MCFs to reflect different types of septic system (e.g., 
bottomless) and also to consider the effect of temperature on the MCF. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.2.2  
Type of refinement:  Potential update 
Issue 4: Elaborate guidance on what systems are classified as “not well managed”/overloaded for 
centralized aerobic treatment plants. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.2.2  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
Issue 5: Provide guidance on estimating emissions from septic systems that are connected to larger 
centralized treatment plants. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.2.2  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
Issue 6: Determine whether methane emissions from treated effluent should be included, particularly 
that discharged to stagnant water or overloaded receiving waters. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.2.2  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 7: Provide guidance on the origin of the (maximum CH4 producing capacity) Bo values presented 
in the chapter. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.2.2  
Type of refinement:  Update 
 

 
56 
6.2.3 Industrial wastewater  
Issue 1: Develop new MCFs to reflect treatment processes that may be a combination of aerobic and 
anaerobic or anoxic zones (e.g., anaerobic/anoxic/oxic (A2O), modified Ludzack-Ettinger 
(MLE), etc.). 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.3.2 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 2: Elaborate guidance on what systems are classified as “not well managed”/overloaded for 
centralized aerobic treatment plants 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.3.2  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
Issue 3: Determine whether methane emissions from treated effluent should be included, particularly 
that discharged to stagnant water or overloaded receiving waters. 
Location in 2006 IPCC GL: Section 6.2.3.2 
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 4: Update uncertainty tables to include new EFs and AD  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.2.3.5 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
6.3 Nitrous oxide emissions from wastewater 
6.3.1 Methodological issues  
Issue 1: Address “indirect” emissions and how this terminology interacts with Chapter 7.3, Volume 1 of 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.1.1  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
Issue 2: Add discussion on the latest research related to how N2O is formed and emitted in treatment 
system  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.1.1  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 
Issue 3: Consider introducing Tier 1 and Tier 2 methods, similar to the CH4 section. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.1.1  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 4: Correct EF for nitrification/denitrification and develop N2O emission factors for additional 
treatment system configurations (aerobic/anaerobic/anoxic systems) as well as activated 
sludge systems. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.1.2  
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
 Issue 5: Add EF for septic systems. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Section 6.3.1.2  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
Issue 6: Update text regarding N (influent) to make consistent with Table 6.11. 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.1.3  
Type of refinement:  Elaboration 

 
57 
Issue 7: Clarify Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) data in relation to protein supplied vs protein 
consumed  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.1.3 
Type of refinement:  Elaboration/Update 
Issue 8: Addition of N2O emission calculation for centralized plants and septic systems 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Sections 6.3.1.3/6.3.1.1  
Type of refinement:  Update 
Issue 9: Improve the calculation of Neffluent 
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.1.3 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
Issue 10: Addition of N2O from industrial wastewater  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: New guidance in Sections 6.3.1.1 and 6.3.1.3  
Type of refinement:  New guidance 
6.3.2 Time series consistency  
No refinement 
6.3.3 Uncertainties  
Issue: Update uncertainty tables to include new EFs and AD  
Location in 2006 IPCC Guidelines: Section 6.3.3 
Type of refinement:  Update/Elaboration 
6.3.4 QA/QC, completeness, reporting and documentation  
No refinement 
 
 
 
