Policymaker Summary of Working Group II 
(Potential Impacts of Climate Change) 
Executive Summary 
1. 
The IPCC Working Groups on scientific analysis 
(Working Group I), impacts (Working Group II) and response 
strategies (Working Group 111) were established in November 
1988 and proceeded to work in parallel under instructions from 
IPCC. The responsibility of Working Group II is to describe 
the environmental and socio-economic implications of 
possible climate changes over the next decades caused by 
increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases. 
2. 
The report of Working Group 11 is based on the 
work of a number of subgroups, using independent studies 
which have used different methodologies. Based on the 
existing literature, the studies have used several scenarios to 
assess the potential impacts of climate change. These have 
the features of: 
(i) 
an effective doubling of CO2 in the atmosphere 
between now and 2025 to 2050 for a 'business-as-
usual" scenario; 
(ii) 
a consequent increase of global mean temperature in 
the range of 1.5°C to4.5°C; 
(iii) 
an unequal global distribution of this temperature 
increase, namely a smaller increase of half the global 
mean in the tropical regions and a larger increase of 
twice the global mean in the polar regions; and 
(1 v) 
a sea-level rise of about 0.3—0.5 m by 2050 and about 
1 m by 2100, together with a rise in the temperature of 
the surface ocean layer of between 0.2° and 2.5°C. 
3. 
These scenarios pre-date, but are in line with, the 
recent assessment of Working Group I which, for a 'business-
as-usual" scenario (scenario A in Working Group I Report) 
has estimated the magnitude of sea-level rise at about 20 cm 
by 2030 and about 65 cm by the end of the next century. 
Working Group I has also predicted the increa.se in global 
mean temperatures to be about 1°C above the present value 
by 2025 and 3°C before the end of the next century. 
4. 
Any predicted effects of climate change must be 
viewed in the context of our present dynamic and changing 
world. Large-scale natural events such as El Niño can cause 
significant impacts on agnculture and human settlement. The 
predicted population explosion will produce severe impacts 
on land use and on the demands for energy, fresh water, food 
and housing, which will vary from region to region according 
to national incomes and rates of development. In many 
cases, the impacts will be felt most severely in regions 
already under stress, mainly the developing countries. 
Human-induced 
climate change 
due 
to continued 
uncontrolled emissions will accentuate these impacts. For 
instance, climate change, pollution and ultraviolel-B radiation 
from ozone depletion can interact, reinforcing their damaging 
effects on materials and organisms. Increases in atmospheric 
concentrations of greenhouse gases may lead to irreversible 
change in the climate which could be detectable by the end 
of this century. 
5. 
Comprehensive estimates of the physical and 
biological effects of climate change at the regional level are 
difficult. Confidence in regional estimates of cntical climatic 
factors IS low. This is paniculariy true of precipitation and 
soil moisture, where there is considerable disagreement 
between various general circulation model and palaeoanalog 
results. Moreover, there are several scientific uncertainties 
regarding the relationship between climate change and 
biological effects 
and between these effects 
and 
socioeconomic consequences. 
6. 
This report does not attempt to anticipate any 
adaptation, technological innovation or any other measures 
to diminish the adverse effects of climate change that will 
take place in the same time frame. 
This is especially 
important for heavily managed sectors, e.g. agriculture, 
forestry and public health. This is one of the responsibilities 
of Working Group III. 
7. 
Finally, the issue of timing and rates of change 
need to be considered; there will be lags between: 
i) 
emissions of greenhouse gases and doubling of 
concentrations: 
11) 
doubling of greenhouse gas concentrations and 
changes in climate; 
iii) 
changes in climate and resultant physical and 
biological effects: and 
iv) 
changes in physical and ecological effects and resultant 
socioeconomic (including ecological) consequences. 
The shorter the lags, the less the ability to cope and the 
greater the socioeconomic impacts 
8. 
There is uncertainty related to these time lags. 
The changes will not be steady and suфrises cannot be 
ruled out. The severity of the impacts will depend to a large 
degree on the rate of climate change. 
9. 
Despite these uncertainties. Working Group II has 
been able to reach some major conclusions, which are: 
Agriculture and forestry 
10. 
Sufficient evidence is now available from a variety 
of different studies to indicate that changes of climate would 
87 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
have an important effect on agriculture and livestock. 
Studies have not yet conclusively determined whether, on 
average, global agricultural potential will increase or 
decrease. 
Negative impacts could be felt at the regional 
level as a result of changes in weather and pests associated 
with climate change, and changes in ground-level ozone 
associated with pollutants, necessitating innovations in 
technology and agricultural management practices. There 
may be severe effects m some regions, particularly decline 
in production in regions of high present-day vulnerability 
that are least able to adjust. These include Brazil, Peru, the 
Sahel Region of Africa, Southeast Asia, the Asian region of 
the U S S R and China. There is a possibility that potential 
productivity of high and mid latitudes may increase because 
of a prolonged growing season, but it is not likely to open 
up large new areas for production and it will be mainly 
confined to the Northem Hemisphere. 
11. 
Patterns of agricultural trade could be altered by 
decreased cereal production in some of the currently high-
production areas, such as Westem Europe, southern U S . 
parts of South America and westem Australia. Horticultural 
production in mid-latitude regions may be reduced. On the 
other hand, cereal production could increa.se in northern 
Europe. Policy responses directed to breeding new plant 
cultivars. and agricultural management designed to cope 
with changed climate conditions, could lessen the severity 
of regional impacts. On balance, the evidence suggests that 
in the face of estimated changes of climate, food production 
at the global level can be maintained at essentially the same 
level as would have occurred without climate change; 
however, the cost of achieving this is unclear. Nonetheless, 
climate change may intensify difficulties in coping with 
rapid population growth. A n increase or change in U V - B 
radiation at ground level resulting from the depletion of 
stratospheric ozone will have a negative impact on crops and 
livestock. 
12. 
The rotation period of forests is long and current 
forests will mature and decline during a climate in which 
they are increasingly more pooriy adapted. Actual impacts 
depend on the physiological adaptability of trees and the 
host-parasite relationship. Large losses from both factors in 
the form of forest declines can occur. Losses from wildfire 
will be increasingly extensive. The climate zones which 
control species distribution will move poleward and to 
higher elevations. Managed forests require large inputs in 
terms of choice of seedlot and spacing, thinning and 
protection. They provide a variety of products from fuel to 
food. The degree of dependency on products varies among 
countries, as does the ability to cope with and to withstand 
loss. The most sensitive areas will be where species are 
close to their biological limits in terms of temperature and 
moisture. This is likely to be, for example, in semi-arid 
areas. 
Social stresses can be expected to increase and 
consequent anthropogenic damage to forests may occur. 
These increased and non-sustainable uses will place more 
pressure on forest investments, forest conservation and 
sound forest management. 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
13. 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems could face significant 
consequences as a result of the global increases in the 
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and the 
associated climatic changes. 
Projected changes in 
temperature and precipitation suggest that climatic zones 
could shift several hundred kilometres towards the poles 
over the next fifty years. Flora and fauna would lag behind 
these climatic shifts, surviving in their present location and, 
therefore, could find themselves in a different climatic regime. 
These regimes may be more or less hospitable and, therefore, 
could increase productivity for some species and decrease that 
of others. Ecosystems are not expected to move as a single 
unit, but would have a new structure as a consequence of 
alterations in distribution and abundance of species. 
14. 
The rate of projected climate changes is the major 
factor determining the type and degree of climatic impacts 
on natural terrestrial ecosystems. These rates are likely to 
be faster than the ability of some species to respond and 
responses may be sudden or gradual. 
15. 
Some species could be lost owing to increased 
stress leading to a reduction in global biological diversity. 
Increased incidence of disturbances such as pest outbreaks 
and fire are likely to occur m some areas and these could 
enhance projected ecosystem changes. 
16. 
Consequences of C O ^ enrichment and climate 
change for natural terrestrial ecosystems could be modified 
by other environmental factors, both natural and man-
induced (e.g. by air pollution). 
17. 
Most at risk are those communities in which the 
options for adaptability are limited (e.g. montane, alpine, 
polar, island and coastal communities, remnant vegetation, 
and heritage sites and reserves) and those communities 
where climatic changes add to existing stresses. 
18. 
The socioeconomic consequences of these impacts 
will be significant, especially for those regions of the globe 
where societies and related economies are dependent on 
natural terrestrial ecosystems for their welfare. Changes in 
the availability of food, fuel, medicine, construction 
materials and income are possible as these ecosystems are 
changed. Important fibre products could also be affected in 
some regions. 
Hydrology and water resources 
19. 
Relatively small climate changes can cause large 
water resource problems in many areas, especially arid and 
semi-arid regions and those humid areas where demand or 
pollution has led to water scarcity. Little is known about 
regional details of greenhouse-gas-induced hydrometeor-
ological change. It appears that many areas will have increased 
precipitation, soil moisture and water storage, thus altering 
pattems of agricultural, ecosystem and other water use. Water 
88 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
availability will decrease in other areas, a most important 
factor for already marginal situations, such as the Sahelian zone 
in Africa. This has significant implications for agriculture, for 
water storage and distribution, and for generation of 
hydroelectric power. In some limited areas, for example, 
under the assumed scenario of a 1°C to 2°C temperature 
increase, coupled with a 10% reduction in precipitation, a 40-
70% reduction in annual runoff could occur. Regions such as 
Southeast Asia, that are dependent on unregulated river 
systems, are particularly vulnerable to hydrometeorological 
change. On the other hand, regions such as the westem USSR 
and westem United States that have large regulated water 
resource systems are less sensitive to the range of hydro-
meteorological changes in the assumed greenhouse scenario. 
20. 
In addition to changes in water supply, water 
demand may also change through human efforts to conserve, 
and through improved growth efficiency of plants in a higher 
CO2 environment. Net socio-economic consequences must 
consider both supply and demand for water. Future design 
in water resource engineering will need to take possible 
impacts into account when considering structures with a 
life span to the end of the next century. Where precipitation 
increases, water management practices, such as urban storm 
drainage systems, may require upgrading in capacity. 
Change in drought risk represents potentially the most 
serious impact of climate change on agriculture at both 
regional and global levels. 
Human settlements, energy, transport, and 
industrial sectors, human health and air 
quality 
21. 
The most vulnerable human settlements are those 
especially exposed to natural hazards, e.g. coastal or river 
flooding, severe drought, landslides, severe wind storms 
and tropical cyclones. The most vulnerable populations are 
in developing countries, in the lower income groups, 
residents of coastal lowlands and islands, populations in 
semi-arid grasslands, and the urban poor in squatter 
settlements, slums and shanty towns, especially in 
megacities. In coastal lowlands such as in Bangladesh, 
China and Egypt, as well as in small island nations, 
inundation due to sea-level rise and storm surges could lead 
to significant movements of people. Major health impacts 
are possible, especially in large urban areas, owing to 
changes in availability of water and food and increased 
health problems due to heat stress spreading of infections. 
Changes in precipitation and temperature could radically 
alter the patterns of vector-borne and viral diseases by 
shifting them to higher latitudes, thus putting large 
populations at risk. As similar events have in the past, these 
changes could initiate large migrations of people, leading 
over a number of years to severe disruptions of settlement 
pattems and social instability in some areas. 
22. 
Global warming can be expected to affect the 
availability of water resources and biomass, both major 
sources of energy in many developing countries. 
These 
effects are likely to differ between and within regions with 
some areas losing and others gaining water and biomass. 
Such changes in areas which lose water may jeopardize 
energy supply and materials essential for human habitation 
and energy. Moreover, climate change itself is also likely 
to have different effects between regions on the availability 
of other forms of renewable energy such as wind and solar 
power. In developed countries some of the greatest impacts 
on the energy, transport and industrial sectors may be 
determined by policy responses to climate change such as 
fuel regulations, emission fees or policies promoting greater 
use of mass transit. In developing countries, climate-related 
changes in the availability and price of production resources 
such as energy, water, food and fibre may affect the 
competitive position of many industries. 
23. 
Global warming and increased ultraviolet radiation 
resulting from depletion of stratosphere ozone may produce 
adverse impacts on air quality such as increases in ground-
level ozone in some polluted urban areas. A n increase of 
U V - B radiation intensity at the earth's surface would 
increase the risk of damage to the eye and skin and may 
disrupt the marine food chain. 
Oceans and coastal zones 
24. 
Global warming will accelerate sea-level rise, 
modify ocean circulation and change marine ecosystems, 
with considerable socioeconomic consequences. These 
effects will be added to present trends of rising sea-level, and 
other effects that have already stressed coastal resources, 
such as pollution and over-harvesting. A 30—50 cm sea-
level rise (projected by 2050) will threaten low islands and 
coastal zones. A 1 m rise by 2100 would render some 
island countries uninhabitable, displace tens of millions of 
people, seriously threaten low-lying urban areas, flood 
productive land, contaminate fresh water supplies and 
change coastlines. 
A l l of these impacts would be 
exacerbated if droughts and storms become more severe. 
Coastal protection would involve very significant costs. 
Rapid sea-level rise would change coastal ecology and 
threaten many important fisheries. Reductions in sea ice will 
benefit shipping, but seriously impact on ice-dependent 
marine mammals and birds. 
25. 
Impacts on the global oceans will include changes 
in the heat balance, shifts in ocean circulation which will 
affect the capacity of the ocean to absorb heat and CO^, and 
changes in upwelling zones associated with fisheries. 
Effects will vary by geographic zones, with changes in 
habitats, a decrease in biological diversity and shifts in 
marine organisms and productive zones, including 
commercially important species. Such regional shifts in 
fisheries will have major socioeconomic impacts. 
Seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost 
26. 
The global areal extent and volume of elements of 
the terrestrial cryosphere (seasonal snow cover, near-surface 
89 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
layers of permafrost and some masses of ice) will be 
substantially reduced. These reductions, when reflected 
regionally, could have significant impacts on related 
ecosystems and social and economic activities. 
Com-
pounding these impacts in some regions is that, as a result 
of the associated climatic warming positive feedbacks, the 
reductions could be sudden rather than gradual. 
27. 
The areal coverage of seasonal snow and its 
duration are projected to decrease in most regions, 
particularly at mid-latitudes, with some regions at high 
latitudes possibly experiencing increases in seasonal snow 
cover. Changes in the volume of snow cover, or the length 
of the snow cover season, will have both positive and 
negative impacts on regional water resources (as a result of 
changes in the volume and the timing of runoff from 
snowmelt); on regional transportation (road, marine, air and 
rail); and on recreation sectors. 
28. 
Globally, the ice contained in glaciers and ice 
sheets is projected to decrease, with regional responses 
complicated by the effect of increased snowfall in some 
areas which could lead to accumulation of ice. 
Glacial 
recession will have significant implications for local and 
regional water resources, and thus impact on water 
availability and on hydroelectric power potential. Glacial 
recession and loss of ice from ice sheets will also contribute 
to sea-level rise. 
29. 
Permafrost, which currently underlies 20—25% 
of the land mass of the Northern Hemisphere, could 
experience significant degradation within the next 40—50 
years. Projected increases in the thickness of the freeze-
thaw (active) layer above the permafrost and a recession of 
permafrost to higher latitudes and altitudes could lead to 
increases in terrain instability, erosion and landslides in 
those areas which currently contain permafrost. As a result, 
overlying ecosystems could be significantly altered and the 
integrity of man-made structures and facilities reduced, 
thereby influencing existing human settlements and 
development opportunities. 
Future action 
30. 
The results of the W o r k i n g Group II studies 
highlight our lack of knowledge, particularly at the regional 
level and in areas most vulnerable to climate change. 
Further national and intemational research is needed on: 
regional effects of climate change on crop yields, 
livestock productivity and production costs; 
• 
identification of agricultural management practices 
and technology appropriate for changed climate; 
factors influencing distribution of species and their 
sensitivity to climate change: 
initiation and maintenance of integrated monitoring 
systems for terrestrial and marine ecosystems; 
intensive assessment of water resources and water 
quality, especially in arid and semi-arid developing 
countries and their sensitivity to climate change; 
regional predictions of changes in soil moisture, 
precipitation, surface and subsurface runoff regimes 
and their interannual distributions as a result of climate 
change; 
assessment of vulnerability of countries to gain or loss 
of energy resources, particularly biomass and 
hydroelectric power in developing countnes; 
adaptability of vulnerable human populanons to heat 
stress and vector-bome and viral diseases; 
global monitoring of sea-level changes, particulariy for 
island countries; 
• 
identification of populations and agricultural and 
industrial production at risk in coastal areas and 
islands; 
better understanding of the nature and dynamics of ice 
masses and their sensitivity to climate change; 
integration of climate change impact information into 
the general planning process, particularly in 
developing countries; and 
development of methodology to assess sensitivity of 
environments and socioeconomic systems to climate 
change. 
31. 
Some of these topics are already being covered by 
existing and proposed programmes and these will need 
continuing support. 
In particular, there are three core 
projects of the Intemational Geosphere-Biosphere Program, 
namely: 
Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone 
Biosphere Aspects of the Hydrological Cycle 
Global Change Impact on Agriculture and 
Society 
that will provide valuable data in the coming years. 
90 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
1. 
Scenarios 
I.O.I 
Any changes which take place as the results of 
increasing emissions must be viewed against a background of 
changes which are already occurring and which will continue 
to occur as a result of other factors such as: 
natural changes—these include long-term changes 
which are driven by solar and tectonic factors, and 
short-to-medium term changes which are driven by 
ocean and atmospheric circulation pattems; 
population increase—the predicted world population 
is expected to be above 10 billion by the middle of the 
next century; this growth will be unevenly distributed 
on a regional basis and w i l l impact on already 
vulnerable areas; 
• 
land use changes—the clearing of forests for new 
agricultural production, together with more intensive 
use of existing agricultural land, will contribute to land 
degradation and increase demands for water resources. 
1.0.2 
In an ideal worid. Working Group 1 would have had 
the time to produce scenarios for emission-induced climate 
change which could have been used as a basis for the analyses 
of this Working Group. However, this was precluded because 
work proceeded in parallel. As a result, and in order to complete 
its work in time. Working Group II has used a number of 
scenarios based on existing models in the literature. 
1.0.3 
The scenarios generally have the following features: 
(i) 
an effective doubling of C O , in the atmosphere over 
pre-industrial levels between now and 2025 to 2050 for 
a 'business-as-usual" scenario, with no changes to 
present policy: 
(ii) 
an increase of mean global temperature in the range 
1.5°C to 4.5°C corresponding to the effective doubling 
of C O , ; 
(iii) 
an unequal global distribution of this temperature 
increase, namely half the global mean in the tropical 
regions and twice the global mean in the polar regions; 
(iv) 
a sea-level rise of about 0.3 to 0.5 m by 2050 and 
about 1 m by 2100. together with a rise in temperature 
of the surface ocean layer of between 0.2° and 2.5°. 
1.0.4 
These scenarios can be compared with the recent 
assessment of Working Group I which, for a 'business-as-
usual' scenario, has predicted the increase in global 
temperatures to be about 1 °C above the present value by 2025 
and 3°C before the end of next century. However, it has also 
estimated the magnitude of sea-level rise to be about 20 cm by 
2030 and about 65 cm by the end of next century. Nevertheless, 
the impacts based on 1—2 m rise serve as a warning of the 
consequences of continued uncontrolled emissions. 
1.0.5 
The smaller rise does not lessen the anxiety, for their 
continued existence, of the small island countries, particulariy 
the Pacific and Indian Oceans and the Caribbean, or of the larger 
populations in low-lying coastal areas such as Bangladesh. It 
is difficult to predict the regional effects of sea-level rise with 
any certainty. Significant variations of sea-level already occur 
for a variety of reasons, while there are considerable shifts in 
land levels associated with tectonic plate movements which can 
also lead to rises and falls. 
1.0.6 
The scenarios of Working Group II are derived both 
from General Circulation Models and from palaeoanalog 
techniques. Palaeoclimate analogs are proposed by Soviet 
scientists as a means by which climate changes can be assessed. 
The methodology assumes that past warm geologic intervals 
provide insight into possible future climate conditions. The 
General Circulation Models, developed by Westem scientists, 
are based on three-dimensional mathematical representations of 
the physical processes in the atmosphere and the interactions of 
the atmosphere with the earth's surface and the oceans. There 
is considerable scientific debate about the merits and demerits 
of each of these, as discussed in the report of Working Group I. 
1.0.7 
The palaeoclimate scenarios used by Soviet scientists 
are based on three warm geological periods with estimated 
future levels of concentration of CO2 applied to them. The 
details of these are shown in the table overleaf. While these are 
superficially similar to the predictions of the general circulation 
model approach for different CO2 concentrations, the factors 
which caused the climate changes in geologic times are not 
clear. Nevertheless, they have been used to make predictions 
of climate change of regions in the USSR. 
1.0.8 
The General Circulation Models are, in their current 
state of development, comparatively crude in their description 
of many of the processes involved. However they can be used 
to simulate regional changes resulting from a range of 
concentrations of CO2 in the atmosphere. Working Group I has 
favoured the general circulation model approach in producing 
its predictions of temperature rise and precipitation changes. In 
its report, estimates for 2030 have been given for central North 
America, southem Asia, Sahel, southem Europe and Australia. 
These are reproduced in the table overleaf and are broadly 
similar to those used by Working Group II. 
1.0.9 
Despite the current uncertainties, both techniques 
have been used by Working Group II in the development of 
regional impacts to assist policy makers. There are problems 
with prediction of regional precipitation since there is 
disagreement between various general circulation model outputs 
as a result of simplifications to the representation of complex 
physical processes. Current research is seeking to improve the 
general circulation model approach and to increase resolution 
to enable better regional predictions. There are also problems 
with the palaeoanalog approach which yields differing scenarios 
for precipitation from the general circulation model approach. 
This leads to different assessments of impact on water resources 
and agriculture. Soviet scientists are working to validate their 
techniques and improve regional scenarios. 
91 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
Estimates for regional changes by Working Group I 
(IPCC Business-as-Usual scenario; changes from pre-industrial) 
The estimates are based on high resolution models, scaled to give a global mean warming of 1.8°C consistent with the best 
estimate (2.5°C) of climate response to greenhouse gases. With the low estimate of 1.5°C, these values should be reduced 
by 30%; with the high estimate of 4.5°C. they should be increased by 50%. Confidence in these regional estimates is low. 
Central North America (35°-50°N 
85°-J05°W) 
The warming varies from 2 to 4°C in winter and 2 to 3°C in summer. Precipitation increases range from 0 to 15% in winter 
whereas there are decreases of 5 to 10% in summer. Soil moisture decreases in summer by 15 to 20%. 
Southern Asia (5°-30°N 
70°-105°E) 
The warming varies from 1 to 2°C throughout the year. Precipitation changes little in winter and generally increases 
throughout the region by 5 to 15% in summer. Summer soil moisture increases by 5 to 10%. 
Sahel (]0°-20°N 
20°W-40°E) 
The wanning ranges from 1 to 3°C. Area mean precipitation increases and area mean soil moisture decreases marginally 
in summer. However, throughout the region, there are areas of both increase and decrease in both parameters throughout 
the region. 
Southern Europe (35°-50°N W°W- 45°E) 
The warming is about 2°C in winter and varies from 2 to 3°C in summer. There is some indication of increased precipitation 
in winter, but summer precipitation decreases by 5 to 15%, and summer soil moisture by 15 to 25%. 
Australia (12°-45°S 
IJ0°-IJ5°E) 
The warming ranges from 1 to 2°C in summer and is about 2°C in winter. Summer precipitation increases by around 10%, 
but the models do not produce consistent estimates of the changes in soil moisture. The area averages hide large variations 
at the sub-continental level. 
1.0.10 
It should be noted that, in many situations, the overall 
impact IS detenmined more by the changes in the magnitude and 
frequency of extreme events than by changes in the average. 
This is especially the case for tropical storms and droughts. The 
assessment of Working Group I of possible climate changes 
suggests a low probability of increased frequency of extreme 
events. However, it is entirely possible that shifts in climate 
regimes will result in changes in frequency in certain regions. 
1.0.12 
Despite all these uncertainties, it is possible to make 
assessments of potential impacts of climate change by 
considering the sensitivity of natural systems to significant 
variations. These are summarised in the following sections 
under: agriculture and forestry; terrestrial ecosystems; 
hydrology and water resources; human settlement, energy, 
transport, industry, human health and air quality; worid ocean 
and coastal zones; seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost. 
1.0.11 
An issue of importance not considered in any detail is 
the impact of possible response strategies (developed by Working 
Group III) on the scenarios used here. Thus, a major change in 
energy production from fossil fuel to nuclear or renewable 
energy sources could drastically alter our assessments. Further, 
changes in agricultural practice could dramatically alter yields 
of particular crops in certain regions. These impacts of response 
strategies require much additional work. 
Paleoclimatic analogues used by Soviet scientists 
Period 
Analogue 
Temperature 
Past C O i concn. 
Assumed COj 
(year) 
(difference from present) 
(ppm) 
concn (ppm) 
Holocene 
2000 
+1 
280 
380 
Optimum 
Eemian 
2025 
+2 
280 
420 
Interglacial 
Pliocene 
2050 
+4 
500-600 
560 
92 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 
2 
Potential impacts of climate 
change on agriculture, land use 
and forestry 
2.1 
Potential impacts on agriculture 
Major findings 
Sufficient evidence is now available from a variety 
of different studies to indicate that changes of 
climate w o u l d have an important effect 
on 
agriculture, including livestock. Yet the fact that 
there are major uncertainties regarding likely effects 
in specific regions should be a cause for concem. 
Studies have not yet c o n c l u s i v e l y determined 
whether, on average, global agricultural potential 
will increase or decrease. 
• 
Negative impacts could be felt at the regional level as 
a result of changes in weather, diseases, pests and 
weeds associated with climate change, necessitating 
innovation in technology and agriculture management 
practices. 
There may be severe effects in some 
regions, particulariy in regions of high present-day 
vulnerability 
that 
are 
least 
able 
to 
adjust 
technologically to such effects. 
There is a possibility that potential productivity of 
high and mid-latitudes may increase because of a 
prolonged growing season, but it is not likely to open 
up large new areas for production, and will be largely 
confined to the Northem Hemisphere. 
• 
On balance, the evidence is that in the face of 
estimated changes of climate, food production at the 
global level can be maintained at essentially the same 
level as would have occurred without climate change; 
but the cost of achieving this is unclear. Nonetheless, 
climate changes may intensify difficulties in coping 
with rapid population growth. 
Principal issues 
Magnitudes of possible dislocation 
2.1.1 
Under the estimate of changes in productive 
potential for the changes of climate outlined in this report, 
the cost of producing some mid-latitude crops, such as maize 
and soybean, could increase, reflecting a small net decrease 
in the global food production capability of these crops. Rice 
production could, however, increase if available moisture 
increased in Southeast Asia, but these effects may be limited 
by increased cloudiness and temperature. The average 
global increase in overall production costs due to climate 
change could thus be small. 
2.1.2 
Much depends on the possible benefits of the so-
called "direct' effects of increased C O , on crop yield. If 
plant productivity were substantially enhanced and more 
moisture were available in some major production areas, 
then worid production of staple cereals could increase 
relative to demand. 
If. on the contrary, there is little 
beneficial direct CO2 effect and climate changes are negative 
for agricultural potential in all or most of the major food-
exponing areas, then the average costs of world agricultural 
production due to climate change could 
increase 
significantly. 
Most vulnerable regions and sectors 
2.1.3 
On the basis of both limited resource capacity in 
relation to present-day population and possible future 
diminution of the agricultural resource base as a 
consequence of reduced cropwater availability, two broad 
sets of regions appear most vulnerable to climate change: (i) 
some semi-arid, tropical and subtropical regions (such as 
westem Arabia, the Maghreb, westem West Africa, Н о т of 
Africa and southem Africa, eastem Brazil), and (ii) some 
humid tropical and equatorial regions (such as Southeast 
Asia and Central America). 
2.1.4 
In addition, certain regions that are currently net 
exporters of cereals could also be characterized by 
reduced productive potential as a result of climate 
changes. 
A n y decrease in production in these regions 
could markedly affect future global food prices and 
patterns of trade. 
These regions might include, for 
example, Westem Europe, southem U S , parts of South 
America, and Westem Australia. 
Effect of altered climate extremes 
2.1.5 
Relatively small changes in the mean values of 
rainfall and temperature can have a marked effect on the 
frequency of extreme levels of available warmth and 
moisture. For example, the number of very hot days which 
can cause damaging heat stress to temperate crops and 
livestock could increase significantly in some regions as a 
result of a 1 °C to 2°C increase in mean annual temperatures. 
Similarly, reduction in average levels of soil moisture as a 
result of higher rates of évapotranspiration could increase 
substantially the number of days below a m i n i m u m 
threshold of water availability for given crops. 
2.1.6 
Although at present we know little about how the 
frequency of extreme events may alter as a result of climate 
change, the potential impact of concurrent drought or heat 
stress in the major food-exponing regions of the worid 
could be severe. In addition, relatively small decreases in 
rainfall, changes in rainfall distribution or increases in 
évapotranspiration could markedly increase the probability, 
intensity and duration of drought in currently drought-prone 
(and often food-deficient) regions. Increase in drought risk 
represents potentially the most serious impact of climate 
change on agriculture at both the regional and global level. 
93 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
Effects on crop growth potential, land 
degradation, pests and diseases 
2.1.7 
Higher levels of atmospheric C O , are expected to 
enhance the growth rate of some staple cereal crops, such as 
wheat and rice, but not of others such as millet, sorghum and 
maize. The use of water by crop plants may also be more 
efficient under higher CO2 levels. However, it is not clear 
how far the potentially beneficial 'direct' effects of enhanced 
atmospheric C O , will be manifested in the farmer's field. 
2.1.8 
Warming is likely to result in a poleward shift of 
thermal limits of agriculture, which may increase productive 
potential m high-latitude regions. But soils and terrain may 
not enable much of this potential to be realized. Moreover, 
shifts of moisture limits in some semi-arid and sub-humid 
regions could lead to significant reductions of potential with 
serious implications for regional food supplies in some 
developing countries. Horticultural production in mid-
latitude regions may be reduced owing to insufficient 
accumulated winter chilling. The impact of climate change 
will be far greater for long-lived horticultural fruit crops, 
with long establishment periods, than for annual crops where 
new cultivars can quickly replace others. 
2.1.9 
Temperature increases may extend the geographic 
range of some insect pests, diseases and weeds, allowing 
their expansion to new regions as they warm and become 
suitable habitats. Changes in temperature and precipitation 
may also influence soil characteristics. 
Regional impacts 
2.1.10 
Impacts on potential yields are likely to vary 
greatly according to types of climate change and types of 
agriculture. 
2.1.11 
In the northern mid-latitude regions, where 
summer drying may reduce productive potential (e.g. in the 
south and central US and in southem Europe), yield potential 
IS estimated to fall by 10—30% under an equilibrium 2 x 
C O , climate by the middle of the next century. Towards the 
northem edge of current core producing regions, however, 
warming may enhance productive potential in climatic 
terms. When combined with direct CO2 effects, increased 
climatic potential could be substantial—though in actuality 
it may be limited by soils, terrain and land use. 
2.1.12 
There are indications that warming could lead to an 
overall reduction of cereal production potential in North 
America and to southern Europe, but increased potential in 
northem Europe. Wanming could allow increased agricultural 
output in regions near the northem limit of current production 
in the USSR and North America, but output in the southem areas 
of these regions could only increase if cortesponding increases 
in soil moisture were to occur; this is at present uncertain. 
2.1.13 
Little IS known about likely impacts in semi-arid 
and humid tropical regions, because production potential 
here largely depends on cropwater availability, and the 
regional pattern of possible changes in precipitation is 
unclear at present. It is prudent, however, to assume that 
cropwater availability could decrease in some regions. 
Under these circumstances there could be substantial 
regional dislocation of access to food. 
Adaptation in agriculture 
2.1.14 
In some parts of the worid, climatic limits to 
agriculture are estimated to shift poleward by 200—300 
km per degree of warming. The warming-induced upwards 
shift in thermal zones above mountain slopes could be in the 
order of 150—200 m. 
2.1.15 
Agriculture has an ability to adjust, within given 
economic and technological constraints, to a limited rate and 
range of climate change. This capability varies greatly 
between regions and sectors, but no thorough analysis of 
adaptive capacity has yet been conducted for the agriculture 
sector 
2.1.16 
In some currently highly variable climates, farmers 
may be more adaptable than those in regions of more 
equable climate. But in developing economies, and 
particularly in some marginal types of agriculture, this 
intrinsic adaptive capability may be much lower. It is 
important to establish in more detail the nature of this 
adaptability and thus help to determine critical rates and 
ranges of climatic change that would exceed those that 
could be accommodated by adjustments within the system. 
Recommendations for action 
2.1.17 
This study has emphasized the inadequacy of our 
present knowledge. It is clear that more information on 
potential impacts would help to identify the full range of 
potentially useful responses and assist in determining which 
of these may be most valuable. 
2.1.18 
Some priorities for future research may be 
summarised as follows: 
Improved knowledge is needed of effects of changes 
in climate on crop yields and livestock productivity in 
different regions and under varying types of 
management. 
To date, less than a dozen detailed 
regional studies have been completed, and these are 
insufficient as a basis for generalizing about effects on 
food production at the regional or world scale. Further 
research in vulnerable regions in particular should be 
encouraged. 
• 
Improved understanding of the effects of changes in 
climate on other physical processes is needed: for 
example on rates of soil erosion and salinization; on 
soil nutrient depletion; on pests, diseases and soil 
microbes, and their vectors; on hydrological conditions 
as they affect irrigation water availability. 
94 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
A n improved ability is required to 'scale-up' our 
understanding of effects on crops and livestock, effects 
on farm production, on village production, and on 
national and global food supply. This is particularly 
important because policies must be designed to respond 
to impacts at the national and global levels. Further 
information is needed on the effects of changes in climate 
on social and economic conditions in rural areas (e.g. 
employment and income, equity considerations, farm 
infrastructure, and support services). 
Further information is needed on the range of potentially 
effective technical adjustments at the farm and village 
level (e.g. inrigation, crop selection, fertilizing, etc) and 
on the economic and political constraints on such 
adjustments. 
In particular, it is recommended that 
national and intemational centres of agricultural research 
consider the potential value of new research programs 
aimed at identifying or developing cultivars and 
management practices appropriate for altered climates. 
Further information is needed on the range of potentially 
effective policy responses at regional, national and 
intemational levels (e.g. reallocation of land use, plant 
breeding, improved agricultural extension schemes, 
large-scale water transfers etc). 
2.2 
Potential impacts on managed forests 
and the forest sector 
2.2.1 
All impacts referred to in this section reflect the current 
uncertainty in the extent of warming, and levels and distribution 
of precipitation. They reflect the consensus that anthropogenic 
change is occumng; the direction is towards higher temperatures, 
with the extent affected by latitude and continentality. 
2.2.2 
The distinction between managed and unmanaged 
forests is often unclear, but it is taken here to be one of degree 
in the intensity of human intervention. In managed forests, 
harvesting takes place and the forests are renewed, replaced or 
restmctured in such a way that actual physical inputs are 
needed to achieve goals. 
2.2.3 
Managed forests are quite distinct from the 
unmanaged forests. They supply a wide variety of products and 
are found in a wide variety of countries with different social, 
physical and political environments. The intensity of forest 
management may not necessarily parallel the degree of 
economic development; different countries depend to different 
degrees on the products from forests. Therefore the severity 
of the impacts will vary among countries as will the ability to 
respond. In tropical countries the managed forests character-
istically employ exotic species, whereas in the northern 
countries greater reliance is placed on indigenous species. 
Biophysical effects on forest ecosystems 
2.2.4 
Impacts on forest ecosystems will be at the tree and 
microsite levels, at the stand/watershed level and at the 
regional level. Impacts on individual trees include tolerance 
of drought and winds, the possible effects of altered 
seasonality 
(active vs dormant 
stages), 
altered 
photosynthetic rates and increased water use efficiency. A t 
the microsite level, moisture may be limited and biological 
soil processes may be enhanced. Forest renewal will be 
adversely affected if there is a shortage of moisture at the 
critical establishment phase. 
2.2.5 
O n stand levels, insects and diseases can be 
expected to cause significant losses to forests and these 
losses can be expected to increase with increasing change. 
Fire severity will increase, and while managed forests may 
have less fuel available than unmanaged ecosystems, this 
will not lessen the incidence of fire, nor will it affect the 
weather conditions giving rise to the rates of spread or the 
extent of the areas burned. Developed countries can barely 
cope with the current state and the extent of areas burned 
seem to be rising. The incidence of fire may be less in the 
tropics as the climate there changes less, but many 
plantations are in semi-arid zones and will suffer adverse 
impacts. Costs associated with flooding, resulting from 
rising sea-levels and disruption of weather pattems, can be 
expected. There will be problems in using the lower quality 
wood grown under stress and large costs associated with 
moving processing facilities and infrastructure as the wood 
supply zones move northward. The most important feature 
of these costs and disruptions from a global point of view is 
that the changes will differ among countries and that some 
countries are better able than others to cope with the impacts. 
2.2.6 
Major forest-type zones and species ranges could 
shift significantly as a result of climate change. Results of 
several Northem Hemisphere studies show that both high-
latitude and low-latitude boundaries of temperate and 
northem forests (and tree species) may shift hundreds of 
kilometres poleward. In contrast, studies in the Southem 
Hemisphere suggest that Australian species could adapt and 
grow at temperatures much warmer than those of their 
natural distribution. 
2.2.7 
At the stand level, the following effects of climate 
change on forests are likely: increased mortality owing to 
physical stress: increased susceptibility to and infestations 
of insects and diseases; increased susceptibility to and 
incidences of fire; changed stand growth rates, both 
increases and decreases; more difficult stand establishment 
by both natural and artificial regeneration; and changed 
composition of species. 
2.2.8 
Two broad types of forests are likely to be sensitive 
to a changing climate: (i) boreal forests, where stands are 
mainly even-aged and often temperature-limited, and where 
temperature changes are expected to be large; and (ii) forests 
in arid and semi-arid regions where increased temperatures 
and stable or decreasing precipitation could render sites 
inhospitable to the continued existence of current forest 
stands. However, there could be compensating effects of 
faster growth owing to higher ambient CO2. 
95 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
Socioeconomic implications 
2.2.9 
A l l countries use forests for heating, cooking and 
food. The degree to which people are dependent on these, 
however, varies widely. Forest eco.system changes and tree 
distribution have no regard for political or administrative 
boundaries. Managed forests have, by definition, high levels 
of investment in them; some countries are better able than 
others to tolerate the risk to. and possible loss, of these 
investments. 
2.2.10 
Intensively managed forests have high inputs from 
choice of species, sites, spacing, tending, thinning, 
fertilization and protection. These interventions are costly 
and some countries may not be able to supply the inputs 
necessary to establish, maintain and protect the investments. 
2.2.11 
Increased protection costs will be unevenly borne 
and could encourage poorer countries to accelerate 
harvestmg, reduce rotation periods and engage in other 
practices, which may not be sustainable. 
More data are 
needed on these secondary and insidious effects of climate 
change. Associated disruptions in the social fabric of many 
countries may impact adversely on forests, as instances of 
arson or other damage do now. 
2.2.12 
The socioeconomic implications of shifts in the 
ranges of tree species will be influenced by the fact that 
climate will probably change much faster than tree species 
can naturally respond (e.g. through migration). 
2.2.13 
Moreover, new sites may not be hospitable, having 
evolved over thousands of years under other climatic and 
vegetative regimes. The suitability of new ranges and the 
actual composition and growth patterns of forests under 
new climates w i l l have no regard for non-ecological 
boundaries such as watersheds, ownerships, parks, nature 
reserves and recreation areas. 
2.2.14 
h is concluded that climate change could more 
likely exacerbate most current and near-term issues and 
tensions rather than relieve them. This finding is very 
dependent on the assumption that during the next 30—50 
years, in response to climate change, forests everywhere in 
the world will be prone to some measure and form of 
decline. These changes will be taking place at the same time 
as a substantial increase in population with increased 
demands. If, on the other hand, forests in some regions are 
largely unaffected by climate change, or actually experience 
increased growth rates, then perhaps most of the issues and 
tensions could be at least partly relieved. 
Adaptation 
2.2.15 
Much can be done to reduce the susceptibility of 
socioeconomic systems to climate-induced forest declines. 
Appropriate measures include the whole array of forest-
management tools, to be chosen and implemented as local 
conditions warrant, but some may be detrimental to other 
indicators, for example, wildlife or recreation. 
2.2.16 
For wood supply, the forest-products industry can 
move processing technology towards new kinds and 
qualities of fibre, and plan new mills in areas improving in 
wood-supply potential. Govemments can support efforts in 
economic diversification in forest-based communities, and 
engage in improved long-range planning for future changes 
in land potential for forestry. The provision of recreational 
facilities is another example of an important forest-based 
economic sector. Govemments and private firms must 
anticipate how forested landscapes might change, and plan 
accordingly to divest themselves of the old facilities and 
invest in the new. 
Recommendations for action 
l.l.M 
The ability to deal with climate change and the 
forest sector is related to the amount of knowledge available. 
There are uncertainties to be considered: for instance, in the 
future, will the same tensions and issues have similar high 
priority? Studies of the socioeconomic impacts must be 
global in scope, intemational in organization, institutional in 
focus and historical in breadth. We need regional climate 
scenarios and better information on stand-level responses, 
the biological relationship between species and sites and the 
inherent variability of species. 
Changing climates 
demonstrate the need for strategies in active management in 
the forest sector. Even better knowledge is needed of the 
potential role of forest management in mitigating impacts 
and exploiting opportunities from climate change. 
2.2.18 
A major impact, of which there is evidence now, 
will be considerable apprehension on the part of the general 
public, particularly those dependent on the forest sector for 
their livelihood. Public cooperation in the implementation of 
decisions will be required for dealing with a problem which 
has biological rather than ideological solutions. 
2.2.19 
Research on the socioeconomic impacts of climate 
change must focus on the transitional climates occurring 
over the next several decades, not only at specific points in 
time. This reflects the way people live—in specific localities 
and in real time. It makes sense to prepare for serious 
impacts by implementing policies which are biologically 
sustainable, even if the eventual changes are minimal. 
2.2.20 
Examining biogeochemical changes on a global 
scale is complex enough; adding humans as a variable 
factor complicates the issue even more. 
Nevertheless, 
humans are the critical element in the study of ecological 
systems. We must consider the institutional imperatives and 
the economic and political influences on people in different 
nations, together with the cultural diversity that distinguishes 
and may dominate our actions. 
2.2.21 
The nature and temporal/spatial distribution of 
climate change itself is highly uncertain, as are the various 
ways by which a changing climate could influence forests 
96 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
and their growing sites, and the various repercussions this 
might have on our uses of forests. Moreover, the means by 
which society might cope with the changing environmental 
and socio-economic conditions, in a context in which those 
conditions are rapidly changing quite independently of 
climate change, are largely unexplored so far. 
2.2.22 
The following major research and assessment 
initiatives should be developed and pursued in the near 
future (early 1990s) to begin to shed light on the impacts 
discussed in this section: (i) more secure regional climate 
scenarios; (ii) simulation of impacts of climate change on 
managed forest stands; (iii) modelling studies for better 
understanding of matches between species and sites; (iv) 
analyses of the potential role of forest management m 
mitigating undesirable impacts and capitalizing on desirable 
impacts of climate change; (v) regional analyses of potential 
disruption of wildlife habitat and the recreational potential 
of forests due to forest-structure changes brought on by 
climate change; (vi) regional analyses of potential 
socioeconomic repercussions of fluctuations in timber 
supply due to climate change on rural communities, 
industrial concems, markets and trade in forest products, and 
government;, 
(vii) synthesis studies of the policy 
possibilities for the forest sector to prepare for climate 
change; and (viii) periodical assessment of the destruction 
of tropical forests using remote sensing. 
3 
Potential impacts of climate 
change on natural terrestrial 
ecosystems and the socio-
economic consequences 
Major findings 
3.0.1 
Major findings incliude; 
Global increases in the atmospheric concentration of 
greenhouse gases and related climatic changes will 
have significant consequences for natural terrestrial 
ecosystems and related socioeconomic systems. 
Climatic zones could shift several hundred kilometres 
towards the poles. Flora and fauna would lag behind 
these climatic shifts, surviving m their present location; 
they would therefore find themselves m a different 
climatic regime. 
The rate of projected climatic changes is the major 
factor determining the type and degree of climatic 
impacts on natural terrestrial ecosystems. These rates 
are likely to be faster than the ability of some species 
to respond and these responses may be sudden or 
gradual. 
New climatic regimes may be less hospitable under 
some circumstances (e.g. towards lower latitudes and 
lower altitudes) and may be more hospitable under 
others (e.g. towards higher latitudes). Vegetation zone 
changes are projected to be greatest where the land is 
classified as polar desert, tundra and boreal forest. 
• 
Ecosystems are not expected to move as a single unit, 
but would have a new structure as a consequence of 
alterations in species distributions and abundance. 
Some species could be lost owing to increased stresses 
leading to a reduction in global biological diversity, 
whereas other species may thrive as stresses decrease. 
• 
Most sensitive are those communities in which the 
options for adaptability are limited (e.g. montane, 
alpine, polar, island and coastal communities, remnant 
vegetation, and heritage sites and reserves) and those 
communities where climatic change adds to existing 
stresses. 
Increased incidents of disturbances such as pest 
outbreaks and fire are likely to occur in some areas and 
these could enhance projected ecosystem changes. 
The 
direct effects 
of increased 
atmospheric 
concentrations of C O j may increase plant growth, 
water use efficiency and tolerance to salinity, though 
this positive effect could be reduced over time by 
ecosystem feedbacks. Enhanced levels of air pollution 
could also reduce this positive effect. 
Socioeconomic consequences of these impacts will 
be significant, especially for those regions of the globe 
where societies and related economies are dependent 
on natural terrestrial ecosystems for their welfare. 
Changes in the availability of food, fuel, medicine, 
construction materials and income are possible as these 
ecosystems are affected. 
Important fibre products, 
recreation and tourism industnes could also be affected 
in some regions. 
Principal issues 
3.0.2 
The projected changes in climate will present these 
ecosystems with a climate warmer than that experienced 
during their recent evolution and there will be warming at 
a rate 15—40 times faster than past glacial-interglacial 
transitions. This combination of relatively large and fast 
changes in climate will cause disruption of ecosystems, 
allowing some species to expand their ranges while others 
will become less viable and, in some cases, may disappear. 
3.0.3 
Current 
knowledge 
does 
not 
allow 
a 
comprehensive and detailed analysis of all aspects of the 
impacts of climate change on natural terrestrial ecosystems. 
It is possible, however, to make some plausible implications. 
A l l estimates presented below are based on scenarios of 
enhanced atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases 
and related changes in global climate. It is impossible to 
97 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
evaluate the consequences of change in climatic variability 
since the required climatic analyses are not available. 
Particularly sensitive species 
3.0.4 
The species which are particularly sensitive to 
climatic changes are: 
species at the edge of (or beyond) their optimal range: 
geographically localized species (e.g. those found on 
islands, on mountain peaks, in remnant vegetation 
patches in rural areas, and in parks and reserves); 
genetically impoverished species; 
specialized organisms with specific niches; 
poor dispersers; 
more slowly reproducing species; and 
• 
localized populations of annual species. 
3.0.5 
This would suggest that montane and alpine, polar, 
island and coastal communities, and heritage sites and 
reserves are particularly at risk, since their component 
species may not be able to survive or adapt to climate change 
because of the limited number of adaptive options available 
to them. 
Changes in the boundaries of vegetation zones 
3.0.6 
Projected changes in global temperature of 
1.5°—4.5°C and changes in precipitation will result in the 
movement of the boundaries of vegetation zones, and will 
impact on their floristic composition and associated animal 
species. Boundaries (e.g. boreal-tundra, temperate forests, 
grasslands etc) are expected to shift several hundreds of 
kilometres over the next 50 years. 
Real rates of the 
movement of species, however, will be restricted by limits 
on their ability to disperse and the presence of barriers to 
dispersion: they will, therefore, average approximately 10-
100 m/year. 
3.0.7 
Both coniferous and broad-leaved thermophilic 
tree species will find favourable environments much further 
poleward than their current limits. In the northem parts of 
the Asian U S S R , the boundary of the zone will move 
northward 40°-50° of latitude (500—600 km). The tundra 
zone is expected to disappear from the north of Eurasia. 
3.0.8 
Expected changes in precipitation will allow 
species to extend their boundaries equatorward. As a result, 
the broad-leaved species range w i l l expand and these 
ecosystems will be more maritime in terms of species 
composition. The forest steppe subzone in the European 
USSR will change while in southem portions of westem 
Siberia the forest-steppe boundary could move up to 200 km. 
3.0.9 
In the semi-arid, arid and hyper-arid ecoclimatic 
zones of the Mediterranean, greenhouse-gas-induced climate 
change w i l l reduce plant productivity and result in 
desertification of the North African and Near Eastem steppes 
owing to increased évapotranspiration. The upper limit of 
the deserts would migrate under the influence of climate 
change and most likely extend into the area that currently 
corresponds to the lower limits of the Semi-Arid Zone (ie 
foothills of the high. M i d and Tell Atlas and Tunisian Dorsal 
in Northem Africa, and of the main mountain ranges of the 
Near-Middle East: Taurus. Lebanon, Alaoui, Kurdistan, 
Zagros and Alborz). 
3.0.10 
The impact of climate changes on the present 
tropical and temperate rainforest is uncertain. For example, 
almost all of Tasmania is expected to become, at best, 
climatically 'marginal" in terms of temperate rainforests, 
largely owing to a rise in winter temperatures suggested by 
climate scenarios. This increase in temperature is unlikely 
to have a direct effect on the forest, but may facilitate the 
invasion of less frost-tolerant species. 
Changes within ecosystems 
3.0.11 
Projected greenhouse-gas-induced climate changes 
will profoundly affect hydrologie relationships in natural 
terrestrial ecosystems, both directly by altering inputs of 
precipitation, runoff, soil moisture, snow cover and melt, and 
évapotranspiration, as well as indirectly by altering sea and 
lake levels which influence water levels in coastal and 
shoreline ecosystems. 
3.0.12 
The seasonality of rainfall also affects its impact. 
A lengthening of the dry season or, conversely, an increase 
in ground-water table levels could both 
accentuate 
salinization problems. In Mediterranean and semi-arid 
climates, where évapotranspiration exceeds precipitation 
for long periods and increased percolation from vegetation 
clearing or excessive irrigation may have raised the water 
table, surface soil salinization can be a major problem. Such 
salinization can kill all but the most halophytic vegetation, 
increase soil erosion and reduce water quality. Salinization 
is already a problem in many Mediterranean and semi-arid 
regions (e.g. coastal Westem Australia, the Mediterranean, 
subtropical Africa) and is a major cause of increased 
desertification. 
3.0.13 
Greenhouse-gas-induced climatic changes will 
affect the structure and composition of natural terrestrial 
ecosystems as a result of altered relationships within these 
ecosystems, perhaps leading to the introduction of new 
species. 
3.0.14 
Given the new associations of species that could 
occur as climate changes, many species will face 'exotic' 
competitors for the first time. Local extinctions may occur 
as climate change causes increased frequencies of droughts 
and fires, and invasion of species. One species that might 
spread, given such conditions, is Melaleuca quinquenervia. 
98 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
a bamboo-like Australian plant. This species has already 
invaded the Florida Everglades, forming dense monotypic 
stands where drainage and frequent fires have dried the 
natural marsh community. 
3.0.15 
Pests and pathogens, in some cases, are expected 
to increase their ranges as a result of climate change and, in 
the case of insects, their population densities. This could 
place at risk the health of ecosystems, and thereby play an 
important role in determining future vegetation and animal 
distributions 
3.0.16 
Pest outbreaks can also be expected as a result of 
the increased stress and mortality of standing vegetation 
resulting from a combination of climate-dnven stressors. A n 
example from N e w Zealand concerns hard 
beech 
(Nothofagus truncata). 
A 3°C rise in temperature would 
increase annual respiratory carbon losses by 30%; such a 
loss exceeds the total annual amount allocated to stem and 
branch growth for this species. With insufficient reserves 
to replace current tissue, the tree is weakened, and becomes 
more susceptible to pathogens and insects. Following 
repeated drought episodes, several (Nothofagus) species 
succumbed to defoliation insects. 
This would be 
exacerbated by non-induced climate change. 
3.0.17 
Since wetlands, particularly seasonal wetlands in 
warmer regions, provide habitat for the breeding and growth 
of vectors of a number of serious diseases such as malana, 
filariasis and schistosomiasis, an increase in average 
temperature and any change in the distribution of seasonal 
wetlands will alter the temporal and spatial distribution of 
these diseases. 
3.0.18 
Higher temperatures and changed precipitation 
may well lead to increased drought frequency and fire risk 
in many forested areas. Coupled with probably increased 
fuel density because of the direct effects of increased 
ambient C O , on forest understorey, this could lead to 
increased exposure of forests to fire, which would tend to 
accelerate changes in ecosystem composition under 
conditions of changing climate. 
3.0.19 
In areas with a distinct wet and dry season (parts 
of the tropic, and all of the Mediterranean-climate regions), 
change in the amount of precipitation in rainy months could 
alter fuel loads by influencing growth. The altered fuel 
loads, along with changes in precipitation, could affect fire 
intensities during the dry season. A shift towards a slightly 
wetter climate during the summer rainy season could 
increase fuel loadings in most of the subtropical and 
temperate woodlands of Mexico, which would suggest 
increased fire frequencies. 
3.0.20 
Global biological diversity is expected to decrease 
with possible socioeconomic consequences as a result of 
climate change; however, some local increases may also 
result, especially over the longer term. The resulting impacts 
on biological diversity are dependent on the balance between 
changes in species interactions and adaptation through 
migration. 
3.0.21 
Warming could set off a chain of extinctions by 
eliminating keystone herbivores or their functional 
counteфarts in other ecosystems. For example, in the 100 
years following the disappearance of elephants in the 
Hluhluwe Game reserve in Natal, several species of antelope 
have been extirpated and populations of open country 
grazers, such as wildebeest and waterbuck, have been 
greatly reduced. 
3.0.22 
The direct effects of increased atmospheric 
concentrations of CO2 may increase the rate of plant growth; 
however, man-induced changes in the chemical composition 
of the atmosphere (e.g. ozone) and ecosystem feedbacks 
could reduce this positive effect over time. 
Recommendations for action 
3.0.23 
While the specific impacts of global warming on 
any one region or a single species are to some degree matters 
of conjecture, there are some clear conclusions that can be 
made. Natural terrestrial ecosystems will change in make­
up and shift in location, and those species which can adapt 
and shift will survive. The sensitive species, especially 
those for which options are limited, will dwindle and 
disappear. 
3.0.24 
Examination of the environmental impacts of climate 
change on natural terrestrial ecosystems and the associated 
socioeconomic consequences is in its infancy. The studies that 
have been carried out are limited; only specific regions and 
sectors have been examined. Further limiting this work is that, 
for the most part, existing studies have taken a narrow view 
of the problem and not looked at it from a multi-disciplinary 
perspective. In addition, most of the studies have examined 
the effects of climate change on current social, economic and 
environmental systems and have not considered social and 
economic adjustments nor impacts and consequences during 
ecosystem transitional periods. 
3.0.25 
These limitations can be addressed by: 
assembling relevant inventories of species and 
ecosystems; 
• 
initiating and maintaining integrated monitoring 
programs; 
gathering information on relative species and 
ecosystems sensitivities to climate change; 
initiating and supporting regional, national and 
international research and impacts programs; and 
• 
educating resource managers and the public about the 
potential consequences of climatic change for natural 
terrestrial ecosystems. 
99 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
4 
Potential impacts of climate 
change on hydrology and water 
resources 
Major findings 
4.0.1 
Major findings include: 
For many watersheds worldwide, especially those in 
arid and semi-arid regions, runoff is very sensitive to 
small changes and variations in climate. For example, 
a I °C to 2°C temperature increase coupled with a 10% 
reduction in precipitation could conceivably produce 
a 40—70% reduction in annual runoff 
Based on empirical data and hydrological models, 
annual runoff appears to be more sensitive to 
changes in p r e c i p i t a t i o n than to changes in 
temperature. 
However, in regions where seasonal 
snowfall and snowmelt are a major part of the total 
water supply, the monthly distribution of runoff and 
soil moisture is more sensitive to temperature than 
to precipitation. 
• 
The construction of hypothetical scenarios provides 
a range of runoff responses and the characteristics of 
those responses for particular areas. However, 
credible forecasts for any specific region, sufficient 
to designate either direction or magnitude of change, 
are not yet available. W e can conduct warm 
sensitivity analysis using General C i r c u l a t i o n 
Models while the scientific basis slowly improves. 
Vulnerabilities in present water uses (ie where 
demand exceeds firm yield) and conflicts among 
current uses are likely to be exacerbated by global 
warming in most arid and semi-arid regions. 
The regions that appear to be at greatest risk, in terms 
of serious threats to sustaining the population are: 
Africa—Maghreb, Sahel, the north of Africa, southem 
Africa; Asia—westem Arabia, Southeast Asia, the 
Indian subcontinent; North America—Mexico, Central 
America, southwest U S ; South America—parts of 
eastem Brazil; Europe—Mediterranean zone. 
The relative degree of water management (storage 
versus mean annual flow) is a primary determinant 
in adapting to changes in the mean annual 
variability. 
• 
It is essential that future design of water resource 
engineering takes into account that climate is a non-
stationary process, and that structures with a design life 
of 50 to more than 100 years should be designed to 
accommodate climatic and hydrometeorological 
conditions which may exist over the entire life of the 
structure. 
Principal issues 
4.0.2 
If worthwhile estimates of water resources 
conditions, appropriate for planning and policy formulation, 
are to be produced, then studies must include estimates on 
the frequency, intensity and duration of potential future 
hydrologie events. This is especially critical for evaluating 
effects on agriculture, the design of water resource 
management systems, and for producing reasonably accurate 
water supply estimates. 
4.0.3 
. In many instances it can be expected that changes 
in hydrologie extremes in response to global wanning will 
be more significant than changes in hydrologie mean 
conditions. Thus, attention must be focused on changes in 
the frequency and magnitude of floods and droughts in 
evaluating the societal ramifications of water resource 
changes. 
4.0.4 
Initial water resource planning and policy making 
w i l l continue to be implemented even in the face of 
uncertainty about global change. Clarification and 
specification of the useful information about the various 
methods for estimating future change must be made 
available to the management community. 
Regional impacts 
Continental/national 
4.0.5 
Based on palaeoclimatic analogs coupled with 
physically based water-balance models, annual runoff over 
the whole of the U S S R is projected to rise, although mnoff 
is expected to decrease slightly in the forest steppe and 
southem forest zones. In any case, winter runoff is expected 
to increase in the regions with snowfall and snowmelt. 
Serious flooding problems could arise in many nonhem 
rivers of the U S S R . 
4.0.6 
A n assessment of all the river basins in the US 
shows that the arid and semi-arid regions of the U S would 
be most severely affected by global wanning, even though 
there is a high degree of water control. The competing uses 
of agricultural irrigation, municipal water supply, and 
generation of hydroelectric power, have stressed even the 
present system. A l l other regions in the U S will probably 
suffer adverse water-resource impacts to some degree, 
whether for generation of hydroelectric power, municipal 
water supply shortages, or agricultural inigation. 
4.0.7 
A n assessment of the general circulation model 
studies for the nations of the European Economic Conununity 
(EEC) indicates that precipitation and runoff may increase 
in the northem nations, possibly causing flooding problems 
in low-lying countries. The Mediterranean countries of the 
E E C may experience a decline in runoff, thereby increasing 
the already serious and frequent water supply shortages 
occurring in that region. It is most probable that agriculture 
will suffer the most adverse effects. 
100 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
4.0.8 
In Japan, prolonged periods of droughts and 
shorter periods of intense precipitation may be likely. 
Current storage capacity is limited and a large proportion of 
the population is located on flood-plains. Water demand can 
be expected to increase, which will seriously stress the 
existing water management system. 
4.0.9 
A n increase in precipitation and consequent 
flooding, 
along with overloads of stormwater/sewerage 
systems leading to degradation of surface water quality, is 
possible in New Zealand. 
4.0.10 
The U K can expect an increase in mean annual 
runoff over most of the country, but with a stronger seasonal 
variation in peak flows, imposing the need for redesigning 
existing water management systems. 
River basins and critical environments 
4.0.11 
Runoff in the Volga River basin, after undergoing 
an initial decrease through the year 2000, is expected to 
increase after that year. 
4.0.12 
Studies indicate that hydrological conditions in 
the Sahelian zone are very sensitive to climatic conditions, 
especially precipitation. Research suggests, for example, 
that a 20% to 30% decrease in precipitation could lead to a 
15% to 59% reduction in runoff. As for potential changes 
in water resources in the future, it can be said that the 
situation is very uncertain. 
Therefore, additional 
comprehensive studies of this problem, which is very 
important for the region, are required. 
4.0.13 
A study of the Sacramento-San Joaquin River 
basin showed how a highly managed water resource system, 
dependent on snowmelt-generated runoff, would be affected 
by global warming. Air temperature increases changed the 
timing and increased the magnitude of snowmelt-generated 
runoff by 16% to 81%. severely stressing the 
flood-control 
capabilities of existing reservoirs. However, summer runoff 
decreases of 30% to 68%, coupled with soil moisture 
decreases of 14% to 36% and a doubling of water demand 
by the year 2020. suggest that serious water use conflicts and 
periodic shortages are a distinct possibility for this system. 
4.0.14 
In the Murray-Darling basin of Australia, the use 
of spatial analogs indicates that precipitation could decrease 
by 40% to 50%. However, based on general circulation 
model outputs, the summer-dominant rainfall area of 
Australia will possibly expand to encompass 75% of the 
continent by 2035. Runoff could double on the Darling 
River. 
4.0.15 
A water supply-demand stochastically-based 
sensitivity analysis was conducted for the Delaware River 
basin, a highly urbanized watershed in the northeastern U S . 
Basin-wide estimates of annual runoff indicate a possible 
decrease of 9% to 25%. Also, the probability of drought 
increases substantially throughout the basin. The Delaware 
River supplies a large percentage of New York City's water 
supply, which is already operating below its safe yield. 
Reduced flows in the Delaware River would threaten the city 
of Philadelphia's water supply intakes in the estuarine 
portion of the river through upstream movement of the 
freshwater-saltwater interface. 
Large lakes/seas 
4.0.16 
The Caspian Sea is the largest closed water body 
in the world. It receives nearly 80% of its runoff from the 
Volga River and will respond to the initial decrease in 
projected Volga River flows to the year 2000, but will 
increase thereafter. This will greafly improve the severely 
degraded water quality and ecological conditions in the Sea. 
4.0.17 
Based on general circulation model results, the 
Great Lakes are expected to incur net basin runoff decreases 
of 23% to 51 % under an effective doubling of CO2 scenario. 
Generation of hydro-electric power, the very important 
commercial navigational uses, and lake water quality which 
is due to thermal stratification, are expected to be adversely 
affected. 
4.0.18 
The Aral Sea would continue to experience water-
quality degradation by polluted irrigation retum flows, as the 
precipitation-runoff increases projected for the area would 
not be enough to compensate for increased expansion of 
irrigated agriculture. 
Recommendations for action 
4.0.19 
The most essential need is for more reliable and 
detailed (both in space and time) estimates of future climatic 
conditions. These estimates must be regionally specific 
and provide information on both the frequency and 
magnitude of events. Increased understanding of relations 
between climatic variability and hydrologie response must 
be developed. Such work should include the development 
of methods for translating climate model information into a 
form that provides meaningful input data to watershed and 
water resource system models. 
4.0.20 
Areas particularly vulnerable to even small 
changes in climate must be identified worldwide. 
Vulnerabilities must be ascertained considering both natural 
and anthropogenic conditions and potential changes. 
4.0.21 
Intensive 
assessments 
of 
water 
resource 
sensitivities are necessary in developing countries, especially 
those located in environmentally sensitive arid and semi-arid 
regions, where the potential for conflicts associated with low 
water resource system development and rapidly increasing 
water demands is high. 
4.0.22 
Studies are needed that produce improved 
procedures for operating water management systems in 
consideration of climate uncertainty. A related aspect of this 
work is the development of design criteria for engineered 
101 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
structures that specifically incoфorate estimates of climatic 
variability and change. 
4.0.23 
Very little is currently known about the effects of 
climate change on water quality. Although concerns about 
water quality are becoming increasingly important, the 
separation of human-induced versus climate-induced 
changes in water quality is a very difficult problem. 
Specifically, there is an immediate need to identify those 
aspects of this problem that hold the most promise for 
yielding credible evaluations of climatic effects on water 
quality. 
5. 
Potential impacts of climate change 
on human settlement, the energy, 
transport and industrial sectors, 
human health and air quality 
Major findings 
5.0.1 
Major findings include: 
• 
Throughout the world the most vulnerable populations 
are farmers engaged in subsistence agriculture, 
residents of coastal lowlands and islands, populations 
in semi-arid grasslands and the urban poor in slums in 
shanty towns, especially in megacities—those with 
several millions of inhabitants. 
Climate change and even a modest global sea-level rise 
can be expected to prove disruptive to human 
settlement in many vulnerable coastal areas of some 
island nations and communities where drought, floods 
and changed agricultural growing conditions have 
affected water resources, energy, public health and 
sanitation, and industrial or agricultural production. 
Global warming can be expected to cause a significant 
shift in the permafrost zone: such rapid change will 
prove quite disruptive to roads, railways, buildings, oil 
and gas pipelines, mining facilities and infrastructure 
in the permafrost region. 
G l o b a l warming can be expected to affect the 
availability of water resources and biomass, both major 
energy sources in a large number of developing 
countries. Such changes in areas which lose water 
may jeopardize energy supply and materials essential 
for human habitation and energy. Climate change will 
also affects the regional distribution of other renewable 
energy resources such as wind and solar power 
Vector-borne and viral diseases such as malaria, 
schistosomiasis and dengue can be expected under 
warmer climatic conditions to shift to higher latitudes. 
Should severe weather, such as tropical cyclones. 
occur more frequently or become more intense as a 
result of climate changes, human settlement and 
industry may be seriously affected, with large loss of 
human life. 
Principal issues 
5.0.2 
The impact on developing countries, many of 
which lack resources for adaptation, may be particularly 
disruptive. Understanding likely impacts of climate change 
on human settlement, energy, transport, industry and human 
health in such countries should be a high priority, together 
with reinforcing indigenous capability to design and 
implement strategies to reduce adverse impacts of climate 
change. 
5.0.3 
The impacts of climate change on human 
settlement and related socioeconomic activity, including 
the energy, transport and industry sectors, will differ 
regionally, depending on regional distribution of changes in 
temperature, precipitation, soil moisture, pattems of severe 
storm, and other possible manifestations of climate change. 
As the general circulation model scenarios provided by 
Working Group I have indicated, changes in some of these 
climatic characteristics may differ considerably among 
regions. In addition, the vulnerability to change in climate 
of human settlement and related economic activity varies 
considerably among regions and within regions. 
For 
example, coastal areas may generally be more vulnerable to 
climate change than inland areas within the same region. 
5.0.4 
Development of effective strategies to respond to 
climate change will require much better capability to predict 
and detect regional climate change and occurrence of severe 
meteorological phenomena. A major issue is that of timing. 
For example, a sea-level rise of 0.5 m over 50 years would 
have substantially different impacts than the same rise over 
100 years. Not only are present-value costs for adaptation 
measures vastly different, but also much of the present-day 
infrastructure would have undergone replacement in the 
longer time period. 
Human settlement 
5.0.5 
A principal difficulty in determining the impact of 
climate change on human habitat is the fact that many other 
factors, largely independent of climate change, are also 
important. One can reliably predict that certain developing 
countries will be extremely vulnerable to climate changes 
because they are already at the limits of their capacity to 
cope with climatic events. 
These include populations in 
low-lying coastal regions and islands, subsistence farmers, 
populations in semi-arid grasslands, and the urban poor. 
5.0.6 
The largest impacts on humanity of climate change 
may be on human settlement, with the existence of entire 
countries such as the Maldives, Tuvalu, and Kiribati 
imperilled by a rise of only a few metres in sea-levels and 
populous river delta and coastal areas of such countries as 
102 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
Egypt, Bangladesh, India, China and Indonesia, threatened 
by inundation from even a moderate global sea-level rise. 
Coastal areas of such industrialized nations as the United 
States and Japan will also be threatened, although these 
nations are expected to have the requisite resources to cope 
with this challenge. The Netherlands has demonstrated how 
a small country can effectively marshal resources to deal 
with such a threat. 
5.0.7 
Besides flooding of coastal areas, human 
settlement may be jeopardized by drought, which could 
impair food supplies and the availability of water resources. 
Water shortages caused by irregular rainfall may especially 
affect developing countries, as seen in the case of the 
Zambezi river basin. Biomass is the principal source of 
energy for most of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa, and 
changed moisture conditions in some areas, reducing this 
biomass, could pose grave problems for domestic energy 
production and construction of shelter. 
5.0.8 
Although there has been only a handful of city-
specific studies, they suggest that climate change could 
prove costly to major urban areas in developed nations. A 
study has projected that an effective CO2 doubling could 
produce a major water shortfall for New York City equal to 
28% to 42% of the planned supply in the Hudson River 
Basin, requiring a $3 billion project to skim Hudson River 
flood waters into additional reservoirs. 
5.0.9 
Although in the permafrost region global warming 
may result in expansion of human settlement poleward, 
thawing of the permafrost may also disrupt infrastructure 
and transport and adversely affect stability of existing 
buildings and conditions for future construction. 
5.0.10 
The gravest effects of climate change may be those 
on human migration as millions are displaced by shoreline 
erosion, coastal flooding and severe drought. Many areas to 
which they flee are likely to have insufficient health and 
other support services to accommodate the new arrivals. 
Epidemics may sweep through refugee camps and 
settlements, spilling over into surrounding communities. 
In addition, resettlement often causes psychological and 
social strains, and this may affect the health and welfare of 
displaced populations. 
Energy 
5.0.11 
Among the largest potential impacts of climate 
change on the developing world are the threats in many 
areas to biomass, a principal source of energy in most sub-
Saharan African nations and many other developing 
countries. More than 90% of the energy in some African 
countries depends on biomass energy (fuelwood). Owing to 
uncertainties in water resource projections derived from 
cunrent climate models, it is very difficult to provide reliable 
regional projections of future moisture conditions in these 
countries. 
Drier conditions could be expected in some 
countries or regions, and in those situations energy resources 
could be severely impaired. There could be possible 
compensating effects of faster growth of fuelwood due to 
higher ambient C O , . Analysis of this situation should be a 
top priority for energy planners. 
5.0.12 
In addition to affecting the regional distribution of 
water and biomass, climate-related changes in cloud cover, 
precipitation and wind circulation intensity will affect the 
distribution of other forms of potential renewable energy 
such as solar and wind power. Understanding these impacts 
on hydro, biomass, solar and wind energy is particulariy 
important because renewable energy sources are playing a 
significant role in the energy planning of many countries. 
This could become an increasingly important concem in 
developing countries, many of which are facing serious 
economic pressures from the need to import conventional 
energy resources. 
5.0.13 
Developing countries, including many in Africa, 
depend significantly on hydroelectric power. By changing 
water resource availability, climate change may make some 
present hydroelectric power facilities obsolete and future 
energy planning more troubled, although others may benefit 
from increased runoff 
5.0.14 
Major studies to date of the likely impact of global 
warming on the energy sector in developed countries are 
confined largely to six countries: Canada, the Federal 
Republic of Gennany. Japan, the U K , the USSR and the US. 
Generally, they show differing overall aggregate impacts, 
depending on how much energy use is related to residential 
and office heating and cooling. Climate warming will 
increase energy consumption for air-conditioning and, 
conversely, lower it for heating. 
5.0.15 
In addition, the energy sector may be affected by 
response strategies against global warming, such as a policy 
on emission stabilization. This may be among the most 
significant energy sector impacts in many developed 
countries, enhancing opportunities for technologies that 
produce low quantities of greenhouse gases. Controversy on 
the way to obtain COj-free energy has already risen, 
particularly the options of increased reliance on nuclear 
power or hydro-electric power, weighed against related 
safety and environmental concems. Energy sector changes 
in both developing and developed countries may have broad 
economic impacts affecting regional employment, migration 
and pattems of living. 
Transport 
5.0.16 
Generally, the impacts of climate change on the 
transport sector appear likely to be quite modest, with two 
exceptions. Ultimately, the greatest impact of climate change 
on the transport sector in developed countries would appear 
to be changes produced by regulatory policies or consumer 
shifts designed to reduce transport-related emissions of 
greenhouse gases. Because of the importance of the transport 
sector as a source of greenhouse gases, it is already being 
103 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
targeted as a major source of potential reductions m 
greenhouse gas emissions, with potentially added constraints 
on private automobile traffic, automotive fuel and emissions, 
and increased use of efficient public transport. 
5.0.17 
A second large impact on the transport sector 
concems inland shipping, where changes in water levels of 
lakes and rivers may seriously affect navigation and the 
costs of barge and other transport. Studies to date, focused 
entirely on the Great Lakes region of Canada and the US, 
have shown quite large potential impacts. Climate scenarios 
have shown a likely drop of lake levels of as much as 2.5 m 
resulting from an effective CO2 doubling. Such changes 
could increase shipping costs, but the shipping season could 
be longer than at present due to decreased ice. Lake and river 
levels may rise in some other regions with potentially 
enhanced opportunities for shipping. 
5.0.18 
Generally, impacts on roads appear likely to be 
quite modest, except in coastal areas where highways or 
bridges may be endangered by sea-level rise or in 
mountainous regions where potentially increased intensity in 
rainfall might pose the risk of mudslides. Studies in Atlantic 
Canada and Greater M i a m i , U S , indicate that highway 
infrastructure costs could prove very costly in such exposed 
coastal areas. Reduced snow and ice and lessened threat of 
frost heaves should generally produce highway maintenance 
savings as suggested by a study of Cleveland, Ohio. US. 
5.0.19 
Impacts on railways appear likely to be modest, 
although heat stress on tracks could increase summertime 
safety concerns on some railways and reduce operational 
capability during unusually hot periods. Dislocations due to 
flooding may increase. 
5.0.20 
There has been little analysis of likely impacts on 
ocean transport. The greatest effect would appear likely to 
be some jeopardy to shipping infrastructure such as ports 
and docking facilities, threatened both by sea-level ruse and 
storm surge. 
Some climate projections indicate the 
possibility that tropical cyclone intensity may increase. This 
could have adverse implications for ocean shipping and 
infrastructure. On the other hand, decreased sea ice could 
provide greater access to northem ports and even enable 
regular use of the Arctic Ocean for shipping. Moderate 
sea-level rise could also increase the allowable draught for 
ships using shallow channels. 
5.0.21 
There is a strong need for analysis of likely impacts 
of climate change for the transport sector in developing 
countries, as efficiency of the transport sector is likely to be 
an essential element in the ability of countries to respond to 
climate change. 
Industij 
5.0.22 
Studies of likely impacts of climate change on the 
industrial sector tend to be concentrated heavily on certain 
sectors such as recreation and only on a handful of 
developed countries, principally Australia, Canada, Japan, 
the U K and the U S . There is very little analysis of the 
likely impacts of climate change on industry in developing 
countries, although there is some evidence to suggest that 
industry of developing countries may be particularly 
vulnerable to climate change. 
A n especially important 
factor is the likely change in the production map of primary 
products as a result of climate change. 
5.0.23 
Changes in the regional and global availability 
and cost of food and fibre may significantly affect the 
competitiveness and viability of such derivative industries 
as food processing, forest and paper products, textiles and 
clothing. Climate change may be expected to have impacts 
on the availability and cost of food, fibre, water and energy 
which would differ markedly from region to region. 
5.0.24 
Just as the motor vehicle and the energy sectors are 
likely to be influenced by regulatory decisions and shifts in 
consumer patterns emanating from concems about limiting 
greenhouse gas emissions, heavy manufacturing may face 
readjustment to new situations such as transboundary siting 
constraints and intemational mechanisms for development 
and transfer of new technology. Efficiency in the use of 
energy may become an even more significant competitive 
factor in steel, aluminium and other metal industnes, and 
automotive manufactunng. Public concems about limiting 
greenhouse gas emissions may also create opportunities for 
energy conservation or for industries based on 'clean 
technology'. Studies of likely impacts of climate change on 
industry tend to be clustered in the recreational sector, where 
direct impacts of climate change are more ascertainable. 
5.0.25 
With sufficient lead time, industry may be able to 
adjust to many of the changes accompanying global 
warming. Shortages of capital in developing countries which 
may be vulnerable to flood, drought or coastal inundation 
may, however, constrain such industry's ability to design 
effective response strategies. 
Human health 
5.0.26 
Humans have a great capacity to adapt to climatic 
conditions. However, adaptations have occurred over many 
thousands of years. The rate of projected climatic changes 
suggest that the cost of future adaptation may be significant. 
5.0.27 
A greater number of heatwaves could increase the 
nsk of excess mortality. Increased heat stress in summer is 
likely to increase heat-related deaths and illnesses. 
Generally, the increase in heat-related deaths would be 
likely to exceed the number of deaths avoided by reduced 
severe cold in winter. Global warming and stratospheric 
ozone depletion appear likely to worsen air pollution 
conditions, especially in many heavily populated and 
polluted urban areas. Climate change-induced alterations in 
photochemical reaction rates among chemical pollutants in 
the atmosphere may increase oxidant levels, adversely 
affecting human health. 
104 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
5.0.28 
There is a risic that increased ultraviolet-B radiation 
resulting from depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer 
could raise the 
incidence of skin cancer, cataracts and 
snow blindness. The increased skm cancer risks are expected 
to rise most among fair-skinned Caucasians in high-latitude 
zones. 
5.0.29 
Another major effect of global warming may be 
the movement poleward in both hemispheres of vector-
borne diseases carried by mosquitoes and other parasites. 
Parasitic and viral diseases have the potential for increase 
and reintroduction in many countries. 
5.0.30 
Changes in water quality and availability may also 
affect human health. 
Drought-induced famine and 
malnutrition have enormous consequences for human health 
and survival. 
5.0.31 
The potential scarcity in some regions of biomass 
used for cooking, and the growing difficulty in securing 
safe drinking water because of drought, may increase 
malnutrition in some developing countries. 
Air pollution 
5.0.32 
SOx, NOx and auto-exhaust controls are already 
being implemented to improve air quality in urban areas in 
some developed countries. Concems about possible energy 
penalties and overall implications of such control measures 
for greenhouse gas emissions will need to be lncoфorated 
in future planning. Moreover, global warming and 
stratospheric ozone depletion appear likely to aggravate 
tropospheric ozone problems in polluted urban areas. The 
tropospheric temperature rise induced by the enhanced 
greenhouse effect could change homogeneous 
and 
heterogeneous reaction rates, solubility to cloud water, 
emission from marine, soil and vegetative surfaces, and 
deposition to plant surfaces of vanous atmospheric gases, 
including water vapour and methane. 
A change in water 
vapour concentration 
w i l l lead to changes 
in the 
concentration of H O x radicals and H2O2, which are 
important for the oxidation of SO2 and N O x in the 
atmosphere 
The predicted change of the pattems of cloud 
cover, stability in the lower atmosphere, circulation and 
precipitation, could concentrate or dilute pollutants, and 
change their distribution pattems and transformation rates in 
regional or local sectors. A change in aerosol formation by 
atmospheric conversion from NOx, and SO2 and windblown 
dust from arid land could lead to changes in visibility and 
albedo. Material damage caused by acidic and other types 
of air pollutants may be aggravated by higher levels of 
humidity. 
Ultraviolet-B radiation 
5.0.33 
Besides the human health implications of increased 
ultraviolet-B radiation already discussed, such radiation 
may also significantly affect terrestrial vegetation, marine 
organisms, air quality and materials. Increased ultraviolet-
B radiation may adversely affect crop yields. There are 
some indications that increased solar ultraviolet-B radiation 
which penetrates into the ocean surface zone where some 
marine organisms live, may adversely affect marine 
phytoplankton. potentially reducing marine productivity 
and affecting the global food supply. Increased ultraviolet-
B radiation can also be expected to accelerate degradation' 
of plastic and other coating used outdoors. The enhanced 
greenhouse effect is expected to decrease stratospheric 
temperatures and this may affect the state of the stratospheric 
ozone layer. 
Recommendations for action 
Assessment of the vulnerability of countries, especially 
in the developing world, to gam or loss of energy 
resources such as hydroelectric power, biomass, wind 
and solar, and an examination of available substitutes 
under new climate conditions, should be a high 
priority. 
Research is critically needed into the adaptability of 
vulnerable human populations, especially the elderly 
and the sick, to the occurrence of increased heat stress 
as well as the potential for vector-borne and viral 
diseases to shift geographically. 
Policy makers should give priority to the identification 
of population and agricultural and industrial 
production at risk in coastal areas subject to inundation 
from sea-level rise of various magnitudes and to storm 
surge. 
It IS important that developing countries have the 
capability to assess climate change impacts and to 
integrate this information into their planning. The 
worid community should assist countries in conducting 
such assessments and work to create indigenous 
climate-change impact assessment capabilities in such 
countries. 
6, 
Potential impacts of climate 
change on the world ocean and 
coastal zones 
Major findings 
6.0.1 
The projected global warming will cause sea-level 
rise, modify ocean circulation, and cause fundamental 
changes 
to marine ecosystems, 
with 
considerable 
socioeconomic consequences. 
6.0.2 
Sea level is already rising on average over 6 cm per 
50 years, with important regional variations because of local 
geological movements. The Greenland and perhaps the 
Antarctic ice sheets may still be responding to changes since 
the last glaciation. Fisheries and various coastal resources 
are presently under growing stress from pollution. 
105 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
exploitation and development, creating serious problems 
for populations dependent on them. 
Impacts from the 
enhanced greenhouse effect, which have been considered by 
the IPCC, will be added to these present trends. 
6.0.3 
A 20—30 cm sea-level rise (projected by the year 
2050) poses problems for the low-lying island countries 
and coastal zones, destroying productive land and the 
freshwater lens. Protecting these areas entails considerable 
cost. 
6.0.4 
A 1 m sea-level rise (the maximum projected by 
the year 2100) would eliminate several sovereign states, 
displace populations, destroy low-lying urban infrastructure, 
inundate productive lands, contaminate freshwater supplies 
and alter coastlines. These effects could not be prevented 
except at enormous cost. The severity would vary among 
coastal regions and would depend on the actual rate of rise. 
6.0.5 
Coastal ecology is affected by the rate of sea-level 
rise. Too rapid a nse could reduce or eliminate many coastal 
ecosystems, drown coral reefs, reduce biological diversity 
and disrupt the life cycles of many economically and 
culturally important species. 
6.0.6 
Erosion of wetlands and increasing availability of 
organic matter from sea-level rise can increase estuarine 
and near-shore productivity for some decades. 
6.0.7 
Global warming will change the thermal budget of 
the World Ocean and shift the global ocean circulation. 
Changes in ocean circulation, including high-latitude deep 
water formation, will affect the capacity of the ocean as a 
sink of atmospheric heat and C O , . Upwellings of nutrient-
rich waters associated with major fisheries are also expected 
to change, causing a decrease in primary production in open 
ocean upwelling zones and an increase in primary 
production in coastal upwelling zones. The expected impacts 
will include chemical changes m biogeochemical cycles 
such as the global carbon cycle which affects the rate of 
accumulation of atmospheric CO2. 
6.0.8 
Adverse ecological and biological consequences 
will vary by geographic zones of the worid's oceans. The 
loss of habitat will cause changes in biological diversity, 
redistnbution of marine organisms and a shift in the ocean 
production zones. 
6.0.9 
A simultaneous rise m both water temperature and 
sea-level may lead to the redistribution of commercially 
important 
species and benthic organisms. 
Changes in 
fisheries production may well balance globally in the long 
term, but there could be important regional shifts in areas of 
fisheries, with major socioeconomic impacts. 
6.0.10 
Shipping and ocean transportation will benefit 
from less sea ice and small increases in depth in harbours, 
but some ice-dependent marine mammals and birds will 
lose migratory and hunting routes and essential habitats. 
6.0.11 
Increase in ultraviolet-B radiation can have 
widespread effects on biological and chemical processes, on 
life m the upper layer of the open ocean, on corals, and on 
wetlands. 
These impacts are of concern but not well 
understood. 
Impacts of sea-level rise on coastal zones 
6.0.12 
The magnitude and rate of sea-level rise will 
determine the ability of social and natural ecosystems to 
adapt to the rise. Direct effects 
of the rise 
are 
straightforward: inundation of low-lying coastal areas; 
erosion and recession of sandy shorelines and wetlands; 
increased tidal range and estuarine salt-front intrusion; 
increases in sedimentation in the zone of tidal excursion; and 
increase in the potential for salt water contamination of 
coastal freshwater acquifers. The predicted changes m 
climate may also affect the frequency and intensity of coastal 
storms and hurricanes, which are the major determinants of 
coastal g e o m o ф h i c features and extreme high sea-level 
events. 
6.0.13 
The socioeconomic impacts of these direct 
physical effects are uncertain and more difficult to assess, 
and are region- and site-specific. There are three general 
impact categories that encompass the physical effects: 
threatened populations in low-lying areas and island 
nations; 
alteration and degradation of the biophysical properties 
of beaches, estuaries and wetland;. 
inundation, erosion and recession of barrier beaches 
and shorelin;. 
Threatened populations in low-lying areas and 
island nations 
6.0.14 
The most important socioeconomic impact of sea-
level rise is the inundation of intensely utilized and densely 
populated coastal plains. A I m rise would produce a 
coastline recession of several kilometres in a number of 
countries. Other countries have a substantial proportion of 
land area between 1 m and 5 m above sea-level, with high 
density coastal populations. For example, a 1 m sea-level 
rise could inundate 12—15% of Egypt's arable land and 
14% of Bangladesh's net cropped area, displacing millions 
of inhabitants. 
6.0.15 
Sea-level rise would also expose a greater 
proportion of low-lying areas to coastal storm flooding from 
storm surges. 
Densely populated urban areas could be 
protected at great cost, but less densely populated areas 
stretched out along the coastline could not be protected. In 
these situations, large-scale resettlement might be necessary. 
Another consequence of sea-level rise is greater incursion of 
salt water into freshwater estuarine areas, along with larger 
tidal excursion. This would reduce the freshwater portion 
106 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
of estuarine rivers, especially during drought periods, 
adversely affecting tnunicipal and industrial freshwater 
supplies, and could contaminate coastal groundwater 
acquifers, which also supply water for municipal рифовев 
in many areas. Many estuarine areas across the world, with 
large population centres, would be affected, particularly 
those where a decrease in net freshwater runoff is also 
projected as a consequence of global warming. 
6.0.16 
Finally, 
as 
sea-level 
rises, 
much of 
the 
infrastructure in low-lying urban areas would be affected, 
requiring major engineering design adjustments 
and 
investments. 
In particular, stormwater drainage and 
sewerage systems of many cities will be affected. Coastal 
protection structures, highways, power plants and bridges 
may require redesign and reinforcement to withstand 
increased flooding, erosion, storm surges, wave attack and 
sea-water intrusion. 
Alteration of the biophysical properties of 
estuaries and wetlands 
6.0.17 
A n accelerated rise in sea-level could severely 
redistribute coastal wetlands. Salt, brackish and fresh 
marshes as well as mangrove and other swamps would be 
lost to inundation and erosion; others would transform and 
adapt to the new hydrologie and hydraulic regime or would 
migrate inland through adjacent lowlands not impeded by 
protective structures. The value of these wetlands as habitat 
for wildlife would be impaired during the transitional period 
and their biodiversity may decrease. 
Although many 
wetlands have kept pace or have increased in area under the 
historic rate of sea-level rise owing to sediment entrapment 
and peat formation, vertical accretion of wetlands has not 
been observed to occur at rates comparable to those 
projected for sea-level rise in the next century. 
6.0.18 
Wetlands are vital to the ecology and economy of 
coastal areas. Their biological productivity is equal to or 
exceeds that of any other natural or agricultural system, 
although little of that productivity may be available to marsh 
animals and coastal fisheries. Over half the species of 
commercially important fishes in the southeastem U S use 
salt marshes as nursery grounds. Wetlands also serve as 
sinks for pollutants and provide a degree of protection from 
floods, storms and high tides. Based on these functions, 
marshes can provide a present value to society of as much 
as $US5.500/acre or over $US 10,000^a. 
6.0.19 
Coastal wetlands and estuaries are important to 
many species. If sea-level rise is too rapid, natural 
succession of the coastal ecology will not take place and will 
lead to great disruption in life cycles. In the short term, 
production of fisheries could rise as marshes flood, die and 
decompose, thus improving fisheries habitat in some cases 
and providing more nutrients. Further nutrients will become 
available from the leaching of soils and peat which become 
more frequently 
flooded. 
This temporary increase in 
productivity appears to be happening now in the southeast 
US where sea-level rise is compounded by land subsidence. 
However, this temporary benefit for fisheries may be 
balanced by negative impacts on birds and other wildlife as 
the habitat area is decreased. In the longer term, by 2050 the 
overall impact on fisheries and wildlife is likely to be 
negative. 
6.0.20 
W h i l e considering potential changes in the 
biogeochemical cycles of chemicals from sea-level rise, it 
should be noted that (i) growth of nitrogen and phosphorus 
concentrations on a regional scale (in subpolar and mid 
latitudes, in the Bering Sea in particular) would result from 
flooding 
of coastal areas and from soil erosion; and (ii) 
many pesticides which are presently held in sediments could 
be released into the marine environment by coastal 
flooding. 
6.0.21 
The combination of climatic changes will cause 
coastal ecosystems to move inland, unless humankind 
intervenes, and poleward. Also, if sea-level rise is rapid, as 
predicted, productivity will probably fall, but there may be 
some decades during which wetlands-based productivity 
increases before it falls. Once the ocean begins to stabilize 
at its new level (if this were to occur in the foreseeable 
future), productivity will begin to decrease. 
Inundation and recession of barrier islands, 
coral atolls and other shorelines 
6.0.22 
Sea-level rise would cause inundation and 
recession of all types of shorelines, especially low-lying 
coastal areas. Many beaches have very small gradients of 
1:100 or less. A I m rise in sea-level would inundate 100 
m of beach. Additional shoreline recession would result 
from normal erosive processes including storm surges and 
wave attack. The potential destruction of coral atolls is 
perhaps most significant, because these island areas serve 
both as contained human habitats as well as important 
ecological habitats with high biodiversity. 
U n l i k e 
continental areas with receding coastlines, where areas for 
resettlement are available landward of the coasts, coral 
islands have very limited possibilities. If the rate of sea-level 
rise exceeds the maximum rate of vertical coral growth (8 
mm/yr). then inundation and erosive processes begin to 
dominate, leading to the demise of the coral atoll. However, 
if the rate of sea-level rise is small, then coral growth may 
be able to keep pace. 
Although there are engineering 
solutions for retarding erosion and protecting against storm 
damage of continental coasts, coral atolls cannot be 
effectively protected. 
6.0.23 
Barrier beaches are important for human use, both 
for subsistence and recreation, and as protection for lagoons 
and mainland areas from coastal storms. Coastal areas have 
always been hazardous. Societies have adapted to or sought 
to control the most extreme conditions resulting from natural 
climate variability. The loss of habitable coastal areas, 
which are typically densely populated will undoubtedly lead 
to large-scale resettlement. 
Since most commercial and 
subsistence fisheries are de facto located in the very same 
107 

vulnerable areas, the impacts are twofold: reduction in 
ecological (wetlands) habitat that sustains fish populations, 
coupled with increased threats to habitable coastal areas. 
Many areas around the globe, comprising thousands of 
kilometres of shoreline and affecting millions of people 
would be adversely affected by a rise of 1 m, or even 0.5 m. 
For the most part, prevention of the primary physical effects 
is not economical for most of the threatened coastline. 
Therefore, the prospect for adverse impacts should be 
considered to be extremely important and virtually 
irreversible. 
Impacts on the World Ocean 
6.0.24 
Global climate warming can change the physical, 
chemical and biological processes in the oceans, and affect 
productivity of the oceans and fisheries. Effective C O , 
doubling could lead to an increase of 
sea-surface 
temperature by 0.2°—2°C and to changed heat balance 
components. Impacts will differ among geographic zones. 
6.0.25 
In addition, an increase in atmospheric C O , could 
cause an increase in sea-water acidity up to 0.3 p H and 
elevation of the lysoclme (because of solution of additional 
amounts 
of C a C O j ) . 
These processes 
might 
be 
accompanied by a decrease in the stability of the complexes 
of trace metals with aquatic humus, strengthening the toxic 
impacts of these substances on marine organisms as well as 
a change in the conditions of accumulation of deposits. 
6.0.26 
Coastal ecosystems will be exposed to the most 
severe impact owing to a water temperature increase and, 
especially, to sea-level rise. Disturbances by hydrological 
and hydrochemical conditions in these regions will be 
accompanied by a shift of feeding zones of many 
commercial fish species and benthic organisms, a change in 
the trophic structure of coastal communities and, as a 
consequence, a decrease in their productivity. At the first 
stage, as the flux of nutrient increases, in the process of 
land flooding, a certain increase in the productivity of coastal 
areas might be observed. 
6.0.27 A change in heat balance and the circulation system 
in the oceans will produce a direct effect on the productivity 
of marine ecosystems. Taking into consideration the fact 
that 45% of the total annual production is in the zones of 
oceanic and coastal upwellings and subpolar regions, a 
change in these regions would determine the future 
productivity of the oceans. 
6.0.28 
According to the results of numerical experiments 
with the use of General Circulation Models of the 
atmosphere-ocean 
system, 
as 
well 
as 
palaeo-
oceanographical data, the global warming would be 
accompanied by a weakening of the intensity of oceanic 
upwellings because of a decrease in the meridional 
temperature gradient. This process will involve a decrease 
in the productivity of these ecosystems. However, some 
increase in the intensity of coastal upwellings as a result of 
increasing temperature difference between land and water 
surface, would partially compensate for the reduction of 
oceanic upwellings. Besides, an increase in the temperature 
at high latitudes will be accompanied by an increase in their 
productivity. 
A s a result of the above changes, a 
redistribution of productive zones will probably occur. This 
could lead to disturbances in the trophic structure of marine 
ecosystems and to a change in the conditions of the 
formation of the stocks of commercial fishes. 
6.0.29 
A n increase in the zone of the area of warm 
equatorial and tropical waters would cause the movement of 
pelagic and benthic communities of these areas to the boreal 
and temperate regions. This circumstance 
might 
significantly affect the structure of world fisheries. Under 
conditions of climate warming, the intensification of 
biodégradation processes will occur by up to 30—50% in the 
zone of high latitudes. This factor, along with the expected 
increase of ultraviolet-B radiation, resulting from the 
depletion of the ozone layer, could accelerate bacterial and 
photochemical degradation of pollutants and reduction of 
their 'residence time' in the marine environment. Ecological 
and biological consequences of climate changes will vary 
among geographic zones. A regional approach is needed to 
study the biogeochemical carbon cycle, especially in the 
most productive and vulnerable ecosystems of the ocean. 
6.0.30 
The highly productive subpolar and polar 
ecosystems of the Bering Sea, Arctic Seas and Southem 
Ocean are important to study because the high-latitude areas 
will see the greatest changes. These areas are important to 
the total global carbon cycle in the ocean, in climate-forming 
processes, in fisheries, and in marine mammal and bird 
production. 
6.0.31 
International investigations, for example those 
planned for the region of the Bering Sea, will contribute to 
the determination of the role of subpolar ecosystems in the 
formation of earth's climate, as well as to a more 
comprehensive study of possible ecological impacts of 
global warming on the ocean, in particular on fisheries. 
6.0.32 
Many fisheries and marine mammal populations 
are heavily stressed from fishing pressure. Climate changes 
will increase stress and the chance of collapse. However, for 
some species, the new climate may be more advantageous 
to their wellbeing. 
6.0.33 
One benefit of warming will be the reduction of 
sea ice and thus improved access for shipping. However, 
there are ecological concems. Land animals use sea ice for 
migratory and hunting routes, while for many species of 
marine mammals (e.g. seals, polar bears, penguins) sea ice 
is an essential part of their habitat. Thus, reduction of the 
amount or duration of ice can cause difficulties for such 
animals. Moderate rises in sea-level, provided they are 
insufficient to threaten port installations, may prove to be 
beneficial by increasing the allowable draught of ships in 
shallow ports and channels. 
108 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
Recommendations for action 
• 
Identification and assessment of the risks to coastal 
areas and islands and living resources of a 0.3—0.5 m 
rise in sea-level. 
• 
Assessment of potential leaching of toxic chemicals 
with sea-level rise. 
• 
Improvement of the methods for analyzing the major 
components of oceanic branch of carbon cycle (the 
carbonate system and organic carbon). 
Assessment of the possible impacts of increased U V -
B radiation from stratospheric ozone depletion on 
oceanic and estuarine ecosystems. 
• 
Determination of ecological impacts of Arctic and 
Antarctic sea ice reductions. 
Development of methodologies to assess the impacts 
on living marine resources, and socioeconomic 
impacts, of changes in the ocean and coastal zones. 
Development and implementation of multinational 
systems to detect and monitor expected environmental 
and socioeconomic impacts of ocean and coastal zone 
changes. 
7. 
Impacts of climate change on 
seasonal snow cover, ice and 
permafrost, and socioeconomic 
consequences 
Major findings 
7.0.1 
Major findings are: 
The global areal extent and volume of the terrestrial 
cryosphere (seasonal snow cover, near-surface layers 
of permafrost and some masses of ice) w i l l be 
substantially reduced. These reductions, when reflected 
regionally, could have significant impacts on related 
ecosystems and social and economic activities. 
Thawing and reduction in the areal extent of the 
terrestrial cryosphere can enhance global warming 
(positive feedback on climate warming) through 
changes in the global and local radiation and heat 
balances, and the release of greenhouse gases. This 
positive feedback could increase the rate of global 
warming and, in some regions, could result in changes 
that are sudden rather than gradual. The possibility of 
relatively rapid changes, increases the potential 
significance of the associated impacts. 
The areal coverage of seasonal snow and its duration 
are projected to decrease in most regions, particularly 
at mid latitudes, with some regions at high latitudes in 
the Arctic and Antarctic possibly experiencing 
increases in seasonal snow cover. 
Decreases in seasonal snow cover can have both 
positive and negative socioeconomic consequences 
owing to impacts on regional water resources, winter 
transportation and winter recreation. 
Globally, the ice contained in glaciers and ice sheets 
is projected to decrease. Regional responses, however, 
are complicated by the effect of increased snowfall in 
some areas which could lead to accumulation of ice. 
Glacial recession will have significant implications 
for local and regional water resources and thus impact 
on water availability and on hydroelectric power 
potential. Enhanced melt rates of glaciers may initially 
increase the flow of melt-waters: however, flows will 
decrease and eventually be lost as glacial ice mass 
decreases. Glacial recession and loss of ice from ice 
sheets will also contribute to sea-level rise. 
Degradation of permafrost is expected with an increase 
in the thickness of the seasonal freeze-thaw (active) 
layer and a recession of permafrost to higher latitudes 
and higher altitudes. The thickness of the active layer 
is expected to increase by 1 m over the next 40—50 
years. Although major shifts are expected in climatic 
zones, recession of permafrost will significantly lag 
behind, receding only 25—50 km during the next 40— 
50 years. These changes could lead to increases in 
terrain instability, erosion and landslides in those areas 
which are currently underlaid by permafrost. 
The socioeconomic consequences of these changes in 
permafrost could be significant. Ecosystems which are 
undedaid by pemiafrost could be substantially altered 
owing to terrain disturbances and changes in the 
availability of water. 
The integrity of existing and 
planned structures and associated facilities and 
infrastructure could be reduced by changes in the 
underlying permafrost. Retrofitting or redesigning 
would be required at a minimum: however, in some 
situations the associated terrain disruptions and/or 
costs (environmental, social and economic) may be too 
large, necessitating abandonment. Development 
opportunities could also be affected in areas where 
the risks associated with developing in an area 
susceptible to permafrost degradation are assessed as 
too high. 
The terrestrial cryosphere, because of its relative 
responsiveness to climate and climatic changes, 
provides an effective means of monitoring and 
detecting climatic change. 
Lack of sufficient data and gaps in the understanding 
of associated processes limits more quantitative 
assessments at this time. 
109 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
Principal issues 
7.0.2 
The terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
consists of seasonal snow cover, mountain glaciers, ice 
sheets, and frozen ground, including permafrost and 
seasonally frozen ground. These elements of the terrestrial 
cryosphere currently cover approximately 41 million km^, 
with seasonal snow cover covering as much as 62% of the 
Eurasian continent and virtually all of North America north 
of 35° latitude. 
7.0.3 
Projected changes in climate will dramatically 
reduce the areal extent and volume of these elements of the 
terrestrial cryosphere. This has implications not only with 
respect to changes in the availability of fresh water, changes 
in sea-level and in terrain charactenstics, but also for societies 
and related economic systems which have come to depend 
on, or are limited by. the existence of a terrestrial cryosphere. 
7.0.4 
Feedback mechanisms are an important factor in 
understanding the impacts of climatic change on the 
terrestrial cryosphere. 
Reduced areal coverage of these 
elements and degradation of permafrost as a result of 
climatic warming can enhance warming through changes in 
surface characteristics and release of greenhouse gases. 
7.0.5 
The impacts of socioeconomic consequences of 
changes m the terrestrial cryosphere will depend to a large 
extent on the rate at which the changes occur. Where the rate 
of change is quick or sudden, environment and associated 
social and economic systems will have little time to adapt. 
Under these circumstances the impacts and socioeconomic 
consequences could be large. 
Seasonal snow cover 
7.0.6 
General Circulation Models indicate that in most 
parts of the Northem and Southem Hemispheres the area of 
snow cover is expected to decrease as a result of increased 
temperature and, in most regions, a corresponding decrease 
in total mass of the snow. Areas where snow cover is 
projected to increase include latitudes south of 60°S and 
higher elevations of inland Greenland and Antarctica 
(though the latter is, and will remain, largely a cold desert). 
7.0.7 
A reduction in the areal snow coverage and in the 
length of the snow cover season will result in a positive 
climatic feedback, increasing global warming as a result of 
the greater amount of solar radiation that a snow-free surface 
can absorb relative to one that is snow-covered. 
7.0.8 
Loss of snow cover has both negative and positive 
socioeconomic consequences. 
Decreases in snow cover 
will result in increased risks of damages and losses for those 
systems which rely on snow as protection (ie insulation) 
from cold winter climates. Included are agricultural crops 
such as winter wheat, trees and shrubs, hibernating animals, 
and 
construction 
and 
maintenance 
of municipal 
infrastructures. 
7.0.9 
Reductions in both the temporal and spatial 
coverage of seasonal snow cover will have significant 
ramifications for water resources as the amount of water 
available for consumptive (e.g. potable and irrigation water) 
and non-consumptive (e.g. hydroelectric power and waste 
management) uses decreases. Particulariy sensitive are those 
areas such as the Alps and Caфathians, the Altai mountains 
of Central Asia, the Syr Dar'ya and A m u Dar'ya region of 
the USSR, the Rocky Mountains and the North American 
Great Plains, all of which are dependent on snowmelt for the 
majority of their spring and summer water resources. 
7.0.10 
Changes in snow cover will also affect tourism 
and recreation-based industnes and societies, particulariy 
winter recreation sports such as skiing. Projected climate 
change could eliminate a S50 million per annum ski industry 
m Ontario, Canada. 
7.0.11 
From a positive impacts perspective, reductions of 
seasonal snow cover will reduce expenditures on snow 
removal and will increase access opportunities and ease 
transportation problems. 
A reduction in snow cover, 
however, will also have adverse impacts for transportation 
in those areas which rely on snow roads in winter. Inability 
to use snow roads will result in the necessity of using other 
more costly methods of transportation. 
Ice sheets and glaciers 
7.0.12 
The relationships between climate and ice sheets 
and glaciers are complex, and because of relatively limited 
monitoring and research, not fully understood at this time. 
Increased temperatures generally result in increased ablation 
and, hence, a decrease in ice mass. Conversely, increased 
snowfall usually increases ice mass. 
Since projected 
changes in climate for some ice-covered regions include 
both increases in temperature and snowfall, understanding 
the impact of climatic changes on glaciers and ice sheets 
must consider the combined impact. 
7.0.13 
The bulk of the earth's ice mass is stored in the 
Antarctic ice sheet, divided between an eastern portion 
resting on continental crust and a large westem portion 
which IS underlaid both by continental crust and ocean. 
M u c h of the remaining ice mass is contained in the 
Greenland ice sheet, with smaller quantities stored in 
glaciers throughout the worid. 
7.0.14 
Although observed data are limited, it is estimated 
that both the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets are at 
present roughly in equilibrium, with annual gams close to 
annual losses. There is some evidence that suggests that the 
Greenland ice sheet has been thickening since the late 1970s, 
which has been attributed to new snow accumulations on the 
ice sheet. 
7.0.15 
Greenhouse-gas-induced climatic change will tend 
gradually to warm these sheets and bring them out of 
balance with the new climate regime. Change in ice-sheet 
110 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
volume is likely to be slow, however, with significant loss 
unlikely to occur until after 2100. 
Calculations for 
Greenland suggest that a 3% loss of ice volume in the next 
250 years is possible, based on the projected changes in 
climate. In the case of the Antarctic ice sheet the situation 
is more complex. The mass of the eastern ice sheet is 
expected to remain virtually the same or increase slowly as 
a result of expected increases in precipitation and 
temperatures. In contrast, the westem ice sheet, like other 
marine ice sheets is inherently unstable. 
7.0.16 
Climatic warming could cause groundline retreat 
and rapid dispersal of ice into the surrounding ocean by 
way of relatively fast-flowing ice streams. These changes 
in behaviour could lead to collapse of a portion of the 
westem Antarctic ice sheet which, depending on the amount 
of ice involved, could have a dramatic impact on sea-level 
and the surrounding environment. 
7.0.17 
The response of glaciers to climatic change will 
depend on their type and geographic location. In general, 
however, they have been shrinking for the last 100 years and 
are expected to continue to do so in response to projected 
changes in climate. In Austria a 3°C warming by 2050 is 
projected to cause a reduction by about one-half in the 
extent of alpine glaciers. Melting of glaciers in the Soviet 
arctic archipelagoes may result in their disappearance in 
150—250 years. In contrast, an assessment of mountain 
glaciers in the temperate zone of Eurasia indicates that up to 
2020 these glaciers will, in general, remain essentially 
unchanged, with increased precipitation compensating for 
increased melt. 
7.0.18 
Ice sheet and glacier melting will result in higher 
sea-levels. Observations over the last century indicate that 
levels have been rising between 1 and 3 mm/year primarily 
as a result of mass loss from alpine glaciers. Current 
projections suggest an accelerated rise with greenhouse gas 
warming to a most probable rise of 65 cm by the end of the 
next century. 
7.0.19 
Glacial melting can act as a negative feedback to 
regional and global warming, with heat extracted from the 
air to melt glacial ice and snow, thereby reducing the degree 
of warming. 
7.0.20 
The melting of glaciers will also alter regional 
hydrologie cycles. In New Zealand it has been estimated 
that a 3°C increase in temperature would, in the short 
term, increase glacier-fed river flow in some western 
rivers, increasing hydroelectric power generation by 
10%. 
A n o t h e r effect of glacier retreat is possible 
increased debris flows. Large amounts of debris masses 
on steep slopes w i l l become exposed as a result of 
glacial retreat and, therefore, would be unstable and 
vulnerable to the effects of erosion. Landslides would 
result, leading to burial of structures, traffic routes and 
vegetation. 
Obstructions of river flows and increased 
sediment loads resulting in changes in water quantity 
(e.g. local floods and reduced flows downstream) and 
water quality would also be likely to occur as a result of 
debris flows. 
Permafrost 
7.0.21 
Permafrost is the part of the terrestrial cryosphere 
consisting of ground (soil and rock) that remains at or below 
freezing throughout the year. It usually contains ice which 
can take a variety of forms from ice held in soil pores to 
massive bodies of more or less pure ice many metres thick. 
The presence of this ice in the ground makes it behave 
uniquely as an earth material, and makes its properties 
vulnerable to climatic warming. 
7.0.22 
At present about 20—25% of the land suri'ace of 
the earth contains permafrost, primarily in the polar regions 
but also in the alpine areas at lower latitudes. It occupies 
approximately 10.7 million km^ in the USSR, 5 million 
km2 in Canada, 2 million km^ in China and 1.5 million km^ 
in Alaska. Present and past climate is the major determinant 
of permafrost occurrence and characteristics; however, a 
variety of other factors is also important, for example, the 
properties of the soil, and overiying terrain, vegetation and 
snow cover. 
7.0.23 
Permafrost is usually present where the mean 
annual air temperature is less than -1°C. At temperatures 
near this value it is discontinuous in extent (discontinuous 
permafrost zone). Both its extent and thickness increase at 
progressively higher latitudes where temperatures are lower. 
It has been found to extend to depths of approximately 1000 
m or more in parts of Canada, approximately 1500 m in the 
USSR and 100—250 m in China. 
7.0.24 
Permafrost can also exist in seabeds. There is 
extensive ice-bound material in the continental shelf beneath 
the Arctic Ocean; however, this permafrost is commonly 
relict (ie it formed under past conditions and would not 
form under current ones). 
7.0.25 
Permafrost is to a large extent inherently unstable 
since it exists so close to its melting point. Most responsive 
to changes in climate would be those portions nearest the 
surface. Climate warming would thicken the active layer, 
leading to a decrease in soil stability. This permafrost 
degradation would lead to thaw settlement of the surface 
(thermokarst), ponding of surface water, slope failures 
(landslides) and increased soil creep. This terrain instability 
would result in major concems for the integrity and stability 
of roads, pipelines, airfields, dams, reservoirs and other 
facilities in areas which contain permafrost. 
Terrain 
instability of the surface layer can also occur as a result of 
permafrost degradation in alpine areas, such as the Alps. 
This instability could result in dangerous debris falls from 
thawed rocks and mudflows. 
7.0.26 
Slope failures, thermokarst and loss of near-surface 
moisture, as the increased depth of the active layer moved 
111 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
limited water supplies further from the surface, would have 
detrimental effects on vegetation and could lead to 
significant decreases in plant populations. In the longer 
term, permafrost degradation would allow the growth of 
deeper rooted, broadleaved species and the establishment of 
denser forest of coniferous species. Wildlife could also be 
affected through changes in terrain, surface hydrology and 
food availability. 
Loss of species and habitats can be 
expected, especially where wetlands dry out or areas are 
flooded as a result of melt. 
7.0.27 
Assessment of the effects of climate change on 
permafrost in any particular location must consider factors 
other than temperature, e.g. changes in summer rainfall and 
snow cover. In general, however, the projected warming 
during the next several decades would significantly deepen 
the active layer and initiate a northward retreat of 
permafrost. It is expected that a 2°C global warming would 
shift the southem boundary of the climatic zone currently 
associated with permafrost over most of Siberia north and 
northeast by at least 500—700 km. The southem extent of 
permafrost will lag behind this, moving only 25—50 km in 
the next 40—50 years (up to 10% reduction in an area 
underlaid by continuous permafrost). The depth of the active 
layer is expected to increase by I m during the next 40—50 
years. Projected changes in permafrost in Canada are of 
similar magnitude. 
7.0.28 
The melting of permafrost would result in the 
release of methane and, to a lesser extent, CO2 from 
previously frozen biological material and from gas hydrates. 
The extent to which this will enhance the greenhouse effect 
is uncertain, but could be about 1 °C by the middle of the 
next century. 
7.0.29 
The socioeconomic impacts of permafrost 
degradation will be mixed. Maintenance costs of existing 
northem facilities such as buildings, roads and pipelines 
will tend to rise with abandonment and relocation needed in 
some cases. Changes in current constmction practices will 
be necessary, as may be changes in sanitary waste disposal. 
Benefits from climate warming and permafrost melt are 
likely for agriculture, forestry, and hunting and trapping. 
Recommendations for action 
7.0.30 
Projected greenhouse-gas-induced changes in 
climate w i l l lead to ablation of global ice masses. 
Uncertainty exists, however, regarding how this global 
response will be reflected at the regional/local level and 
how the individual ice masses and seasonal ice and snow 
will respond. The most important effects of climatic change 
at high latitudes and elevated regions will be on and through 
changes in the terrestrial cryosphere. 
Furthermore, the 
terrestrial cryosphere is particularly suited for early detection 
of the effects of climate change. 
These two points 
necessitate a better understanding of the nature and 
dynamics of these ice masses and the factors that control 
them. This will require: 
establishment or enhancement 
of 
integrated, 
systematic observation programmes commensurate 
with research on the use of more efficient ground-
based systems and remote sensing technologies 
designed to provide baseline information and trends; 
• 
concurrent monitoring of those facilities, structures 
and natural resources that are at risk owing to projected 
changes in the terrestrial cryosphere; 
establishment of new guidelines and procedures for 
design and construction practices that consider the 
impacts of climatic changes on permafrost; 
• 
research, including intemational cooperative efforts, 
on the relationships between components of the 
terrestrial cryosphere and climate in conjunction with 
other determining factors, including feedback 
mechanisms; 
• 
refinement of existing climate-terrestrial cryosphere 
models; 
• 
impacts assessments nationally and regionally that 
will provide data and information on the impacts of 
climate change on areas in which components of the 
terrestrial cryosphere occur and the resulting 
socioeconomic consequences; 
assessment of the needs for protected areas (natural 
reserves) for affected species and habitats; and 
development and distribution of relevant educational 
material and information on climatic changes, their 
impacts 
on 
the 
terrestrial 
cryosphere 
and 
socioeconomic consequences, as well as a wider 
distribution of research results. 
8. 
Summary of major future 
actions 
8.0.1 
The results of the W o r k i n g Group II studies 
highlight our lack of knowledge, particularly at the 
regional level and in areas most vulnerable to climate 
change. 
Further national and international research is 
needed on: 
regional effects of climate change on crop yields, 
livestock productivity and production costs; 
identification of agricultural management practices 
and technology appropriate for changed climate; 
• 
factors influencing distribution of species and their 
sensitivity to climate change; 
initiation and maintenance of integrated monitoring 
systems for terrestrial and marine ecosystems; 
112 

Potential Impacts of Climate Change 
• 
intensive assessment of water resources and water 
quality, especially in arid and semi-arid developing 
countries and their sensitivity to climate change; 
• 
regional predictions of changes in soil moisture, 
precipitation, surface and subsurface runoff regimes 
and their interannual distributions as a result of climate 
change; 
assessment of vulnerability of countries to gain or loss 
of energy resources, particularly biomass and 
hydroelectric power in developing countries; 
adaptability of vulnerable human populations to heat 
stress and vector-bome and viral diseases; 
• 
a global monitoring of sea-level changes, particularly 
for island countries; 
identification of populations and agricultural and 
industrial production at risk in coastal areas and 
islands; 
better understanding of the nature and dynamics of ice 
masses and their sensitivity to climate change; 
integration of climate change impact information into 
the general planning process, particularly in 
developing countries; and 
development of methodology to assess sensitivity of 
environments and socioeconomic systems to climate 
change. 
Some of these topics are already being covered by 
existing and proposed programs and these will need 
continuing support. In particular, there are three core 
projects of the International Geosphere-Biosphere 
Program, namely: 
- 
Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone 
- 
Biosphere Aspects of the Hydrological Cycle 
- 
Global Change Impact on Agriculture and Society 
that will provide valuable data in the coming years. 
9 
Concluding remarks 
9.0.1 
Human-induced climate change can have profound 
consequences for the worid's social, economic and natural 
systems. Each country should take steps to understand the 
impacts on its population and land resources resulting from 
such a change, and the consequences of sea-level rise, the 
changed character of atmospheric circulation and the 
resulting changes in typical weather pattems, reduction of 
freshwater resources, increased ultraviolet-B radiation and 
spreading of pests and diseases. 
These can affect the 
potential of food and agricultural production and adversely 
affect human health and well-being. 
9.0.2 
Too rapid a change in climate may not allow 
species to adapt and, thus, biodiversity could be reduced. 
This reduction could occur equally as well in the cryosphere 
regions, where melting of sea ice could accelerate, and in the 
equatorial regions where sea surface temperatures could 
increase. Traditional cost-benefit analyses do not allow for 
assessment of these risks. Although substantial scientific 
uncertainty remains concerning the precise time, location 
and nature of particular impacts, it is inevitable, under the 
scenario developed by Working Group I, that in the absence 
of major preventive and adaptive actions by humanity, 
significant and potentially disruptive changes in the earth's 
environment will occur. 
9.0.3 
The world community recognizes the need to 
undertake certain actions to reduce and mitigate the impact 
of climate change. Specific measures should follow the 
assessments of potential impact on the biosphere and on 
human activity, and a comparison of the net costs of 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Some of these impacts, 
such as sea-level rise, are likely to proceed slowly but 
steadily while others such as shifts in climate zones—which 
will affect the occurrence of such events as floods, droughts 
and severe storms—may occur unpredictably. Regions and 
nations differ considerably in their vulnerability to such 
changes and subsequent impacts. Generally human activity 
in developing countries is more vulnerable than that in 
developed countries to the disruption associated with climate 
change. Global warming and its impact must not widen the 
gap between developed and developing countries. 
9.0.4 
The capacity of developing nations to adapt to 
likely climate changes and to minimize their own 
contributions to it through greenhouse gas emissions, is 
constrained by their limited resources, by their debt 
problems and by their difficulties in developing their 
economies on a sustainable and equitable basis. 
These 
countries 
w i l l 
need assistance 
in developing and 
implementing appropriate response options (including 
consideration of technological development and transfer, 
additional financial assistance, public education and 
information). 
As they possess greater resources to cope 
with climate change, develop)ed countries must recognize the 
need to assist developing countries to assess and deal with 
the potential impacts of climate change. 
113 

