100 days of Trump & his billionaires’ war on the environment
Across the world, right now, billionaires, oligarchs, and corporations are using their wealth to silence dissent, undo decades of social and environmental progress, and manipulate the game in their favour.In the first 100 days of his second term, President Trump has actively dismantled and weakened environmental protection and gone after those who fight to protect our nature and climate, with relentless attacks on democratic institutions and public protections, putting corporate profits and powerfor him and his billionaire friendsahead of people and planet and our future.
The Trump administration has not only left the Paris Climate agreement and offeredAlaskan wilderness to oil drilling. He has also opened up pristine and protected marineecosystems in the Pacific to industrial fishingand wants tolaunch deep sea mining in US and International waters. And while heexempted oil and gas products from the universal tariffearlier in April, he has ended investments in clean energy and instead boosted coal, oil and gas byweakening regulations and removing obstacles to the fossil fuel industry.[1]

A post shared by Greenpeace USA (@greenpeaceusa)

Trump’s biggest allies are a handful of billionaires, and the fossil fuel companieswho are knowingly burning the planet, polluting our waters, and hurting families and communities around the world. These corporate bullies will stop at nothing to keep their oil and gas empire alive – even weaponising the legal system to crush dissent and silence environmental activism.A key weapon being used by the oligarchy against those advocating for a green, just future is SLAPP lawsuits, like the one waged against Greenpeace in the US and Greenpeace International by the fossil fuel pipeline giant Energy Transfer – a company headed bybillionaire and Trump donor Kelcy Warren.In a deeply disappointing verdict,a US jury found Greenpeace International and Greenpeace in the US liable for over $660 million to Energy Transfer.For the billionaires and big oil companies, this is not about the money. They simply want to silence the uncomfortable truth: their business models are the root cause of climate change and environmental destruction.Make no mistake: this is a direct attack on our rights and freedoms, on the climate movement and peaceful protest. But we will fight back. Our supporters and allies number in the millions, and fight environmental polluters in every corner of the world. Neither a fossil fuel company nor any other corporate bully will silence us.100 days have gone by. The next 100 days are time for action: it is time to resist Trump and his billionaire bullies. Will you join us?
It’s time to resist – starting today. So will you join the fight against the billionaire takeover?
1.Learn more about the some of the other climate destroying actions Trump has taken in his first 100 Days.
Daniel Bengtsson is the Head of Communications for Greenpeace Nordic.
Related Posts
Meet 6 Marshallese women activists who are changing the world
With an image connected to nuclear legacy, climate change, and the very real threat of further displacement due to rising sea levels, it is women who are at the forefront of this small but sprawling Pacific Island nation.
Billionaire joyrides to space: the ultimate symbol of privilege and pollution
While millions of people around the world are struggling to afford basic necessities, the super-rich and their friends are launching joyrides into space that cost tens of millions of dollars.
The eyes of Europe are on Switzerland: increased European scrutiny on implementing the KlimaSeniorinnen judgment
The Council of Europe’s Committee of Ministers (CMDH) will meet in Strasbourg from 4 to 6 March to examine Switzerland’s implementation of the KlimaSeniorinnen judgment. In April 2024, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ruled that Switzerland’s weak climate policy breached human rights—an unprecedented victory. Nearly a year later, with no action taken, the…
Comments
Leave your replyCancel reply


Δ
Manage your cookies preferences
Please select which cookies you are willing to store.
These cookies are required for technical reasons so that you can visit our website and use the functions we offer. These cookies are used to recognise you between successive visits and thus provide you with a better experience, storing your consent preferences and the last Greenpeace.org website visited.
We use tracking and analysis tools to ensure continuous optimisation and demand-oriented design of our website. These cookies will allow us to collect statistical and anonymised data, such as how visitors use our website or which pages are accessed most frequently, to ultimately improve Greenpeace.org and provide you with a better experience of our website.
In addition to the Performance cookies mentioned above, we may also place in your browser cookies from third-party services (e.g. Facebook or Google) to track the effectiveness of our online marketing strategies and to deliver adverts more relevant to you and your interests. These cookies may also be used to serve advertising to you after you have left our site (retargeting cookies).