Stories
Millions of people are working towards a more green and peaceful future for our planet and its people — these are their stories.
All articles
100 days of Trump & his billionaires’ war on the environment
In the first 100 days of his second term, President Trump has actively dismantled and weakened environmental protection, putting corporate profits and power for him and his billionaire friends ahead of people and planet and our future.
Tracing radiation through the Marshall Islands: Reflections from a Greenpeace nuclear specialist
We’ve visited ground zero. Not once, but three times. But for generations, before these locations were designated as such, they were the ancestral home to the people of the Marshall Islands.
From Manila to LA: How Greenpeace is turning Make Polluters Pay into law
Whether you live in Manila or in Los Angeles, you’re already feeling the impacts of the climate crisis. Scientific studies confirm Big Oil’s greenhouse gas emissions makes catastrophes significantly more likely to occur.
The definitive guide to the animals of the Amazon Rainforest
From elusive jaguars and to playful river dolphins, every creature from the Amazon relies entirely on the rainforest for food, protection, and life itself.
The true cost of AI romance:  A 4.5-fold increase in emissions in one year
Recall the scene from the film Her (2013) when Theodore meets his AI lover, Samantha, in the cloud and they embark on a romance through endless conversations. While this fantastical…
Greenpeace Pictures of the Week
Jane Fonda in New York, a Pandanus in Rongelap, and Earth Day in Luxembourg. Here are a few of our favourite images from Greenpeace work around the world this week.
2025 is the year to make polluters pay
As governments and communities around the world face growing costs from devastating climate impacts, there’s a looming elephant in the room: The billionaire-polluter class has never had it so good.
A multi-billion dollar question: What good can come from taxing oil and gas corporations for climate damages?
As storms, floods, fires, and droughts are hitting us more frequently and with greater intensity around the world, the costs of the climate crisis are going up significantly. Bold taxes or fines on oil and gas corporations would help to raise vital revenues.
Fossil fuels are a threat to our security – here’s 6 reasons why
About 80% of the world’s energy still comes from fossil fuels. This reliance is a huge risk for us. Not just because gas, oil and coal are fuelling the climate crisis.
Meet 6 Marshallese women activists who are changing the world
With an image connected to nuclear legacy, climate change, and the very real threat of further displacement due to rising sea levels, it is women who are at the forefront of this small but sprawling Pacific Island nation.
Manage your cookies preferences
Please select which cookies you are willing to store.
These cookies are required for technical reasons so that you can visit our website and use the functions we offer. These cookies are used to recognise you between successive visits and thus provide you with a better experience, storing your consent preferences and the last Greenpeace.org website visited.
We use tracking and analysis tools to ensure continuous optimisation and demand-oriented design of our website. These cookies will allow us to collect statistical and anonymised data, such as how visitors use our website or which pages are accessed most frequently, to ultimately improve Greenpeace.org and provide you with a better experience of our website.
In addition to the Performance cookies mentioned above, we may also place in your browser cookies from third-party services (e.g. Facebook or Google) to track the effectiveness of our online marketing strategies and to deliver adverts more relevant to you and your interests. These cookies may also be used to serve advertising to you after you have left our site (retargeting cookies).