About WWF
WWF works to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and wildlife, collaborating with partners from local to global levels in nearly 100 countries.
Stories & updates
World Wildlife Magazine
Newsroom
Building a Future for Snow Leopards
Countries come together to ensure 20 healthy snow leopard landscapes by 2020
For many years, I wondered how the snow leopard got its nickname the “ghost of the mountains.” It’s such a majestic and graceful animal that the frightful name did not seem appropriate.
But after several failed attempts to see a snow leopard, I know now why the name fits. It’s an elusive animal. Rarely seen, yet its presence is always felt. A colleague of mine who was lucky enough to see a snow leopard said it was so well-camouflaged—its grey and black fur blending into the mountain slopes—that her companion couldn’t even spot it after she pointed it out.
I am fascinated by this endangered species and hope to see one in the wild someday. I’ve only seen snow leopards in zoos. Every time I go to the Himalayas, I look for the leopards’ slender body and long fury tail that helps it balance on rocky cliffs.
This week, I’m once again in snow leopard country. But there is no chance I will see one, as I am in a meeting room all week. However, the work I am involved in here will, hopefully, lead me to seeing one in the future.
That’s because government representatives from the 12 Asian countries where snow leopards roam endorsed an ambitious new plan at the meeting today—a plan to protect and conserve snow leopards and their high mountain range habitat. The goal is to ensure 20 healthy landscapes of snow leopards by 2020. Representatives also agreed to promote climate smart development that ensures water, food and energy security for the people living in and downstream from the high mountains of Asia.
This could be a threshold moment for snow leopard conservation in the same way that the 2010 tiger summit changed the conversation about tigers—shifting the emphasis away from a defensive to a pro-active, ambitious conservation strategy.
There are believed to be fewer than 7,500 snow leopards in the wild and numbers continue to decline. Snow leopards face a multitude of threats—poaching for their pelts and bones; development of mines and roads; degradation of grazing land on which their prey species depend; and retaliatory deaths by farmers whose livestock are killed by snow leopards.
Snow leopards also are likely to rapidly feel the effects of climate change. Retreating glaciers in Central Asia and melting permafrost could increase the risk of droughts and degrade pasture land that is home to their prey species.
The new plan will strengthen work already being done by WWF and USAID to build support for conservation of this iconic species at local, national and regional levels. Our approach is based, in part, on highlighting the environmental, economic and social benefits downstream of protecting snow leopard habitat upstream.
The politicians, scientists and conservationists here this week are all thrilled to be part of this transformational event. The dangers facing the snow leopard are very real, but today we are all part of securing a brighter future for the “ghost of the mountains.”
Protect foreign assistance and critical conservation programs
Ask Congress to support continued US foreign assistance funding, including for critical conservation efforts around the world.
Give an Hour for Earth
What will you do for nature? Join our movement to reach 125,000 hours of collective action for our planet this Earth Day.
Get the latest conservation news
Be a part of our community
We’ll send you conservation news and updates on how you can protect nature through activism, donating, events, and more. You can unsubscribe at any time.
We will keep your information safe and secure. Please see ourPrivacy Policyfor details of how we use your information.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the GooglePrivacy PolicyandTerms of Serviceapply.
World Wildlife Fund
1250 24th Street, N.W.Washington, DC 20037
World Wildlife Fund Inc. is a nonprofit, tax-exempt charitable organization (tax ID number 52-1693387) under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Donations are tax-deductible as allowed by law.
© 2025 World Wildlife Fund. WWF®and ©1986 Panda Symbol are owned by WWF. All rights reserved.
Cookie Preference Center
Manage Consent Preferences
Strictly Necessary Cookies
These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.
Performance Cookies
These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.
Functional Cookies
These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.
Targeting Cookies
These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.
Cookie List
