About WWF
WWF works to sustain the natural world for the benefit of people and wildlife, collaborating with partners from local to global levels in nearly 100 countries.
Stories & updates
World Wildlife Magazine
Newsroom
Effects of Climate Change Stories
How big is the Arctic Ocean? And eight other Arctic facts
The Arctic Ocean is about 5.4 million square miles—about 1.5 times as big as the US—but it is the world’s smallest ocean. Learn more about the Arctic and what WWF is doing to help protect it.
Is climate change increasing the risk of disasters?
From deadly wildfires in Texas to devastating floods in North Carolina, disasters have wreaked havoc across the US in 2024, set to be the world’s hottest year on record. As climate change intensifies, there is no question that the intensity and frequency of extreme weather—often resulting in disasters—is increasing.
Healing community relationships with crocodiles
Marisa Tellez has devoted her life to crocodiles, first as a biologist and now as the Executive Director of the Crocodile Research Coalition, a nonprofit she founded to support the conservation of crocodiles and their habitats. Crocodiles keep aquatic ecosystems in balance as apex predators, but they also hold a cultural significance in Central America.
After Cyclone Gamane, working with nature to build back safer and greener
In May 2024, WWF's Environment & Disaster Management program team traveled to Madagascar to build capacity for and conduct a Rapid Environmental Assessment with local governments, organizations, and communities.
Weather vs. climate: Understanding climate change through attribution science
With advances in climate science, scientists have identified strong links between our planet’s warming and changing weather patterns. This is known as attribution science: the study of to what degree human influence may have contributed to the frequency, intensity, and likelihood of extreme climate or weather events.
The Convention on Biological Diversity, COP16, and the grand plan for life on Earth
This fall marks a pivotal moment for the future of nature conservation. In late October, world governments will meet in Colombia to continue work on the most ambitious plan ever to save the vast array of diversity of life on planet Earth.
What are nature-based solutions and how can they help us address climate change
Tackling climate change will be one of the biggest challenges of our time, and nature itself can contribute to the fight.
Breaking the wrong records
Climate change is impacting our planet faster than anyone had predicted. With storms increasing in number and severity, with temperatures rising to unsupportable levels, with more flooding and more sea level rise and saltwater encroachment, we’re seeing more and more records getting broken. But these are the kinds of record-breaking events that cost lives and livelihoods, that harm our communities and the natural resources that sustain us.
Is seaweed nutritious? And 5 other facts about seaweed
String. Toothpaste. Burgers. Fertilizer. Makeup. Printer ink. What do all of these things have in common?
They all can be made with seaweed! Commonly categorized into red, green, and brown species, seaweed is a broad term for plants and algae that live in the ocean. In the US,farming kelp, a brown macroalgae,is a rapidly growing industry. Farmed seaweed is good for people and good for nature!
Sharks are key to the health of our oceans and climate
There are more than 530 species of sharks in our oceans today protecting the delicate balance of marine ecosystems, which helps ensure a healthy ocean and climate.
Why seaweed is a jack-of-all-trades in the fight against climate change
On the surface, brown kelp might not look like the most exciting plant. But when it comes to tackling climate change, this large algae—one of around 12,000 species of seaweed worldwide—has superpowers. It can store harmful greenhouse gases, reduce the carbon footprint of the global food system, help coastal communities adapt to climate impacts, and even be made into a climate-friendly alternative to plastic!
How WWF is preparing mangroves for a new climate future
The new Climate-Smart Mangrove Tool will help ensure the long-term viability and effectiveness of mangroves in the fight against climate change.
What you need to know about climate "doomers"
More worrying than climate deniers are those that believe climate change can't be stopped. But we can't let that zap our motivation. With collective action, change is possible.


Why are African forest elephants climate heroes?
Elephants’ important role in maintaining biodiversity and healthy ecosystems has earned them various names including ecosystem engineers, seed dispersers, and forest gardeners. However, African forest elephants—a species inhabiting the dense rain forests of central Africa—are increasingly recognized by another name: ‘climate hero.’
What a whale needs
The 2024 climate change forecast
After the hottest year on record, here's what we can expect—and what we must accomplish—to combat climate change in the year ahead.
Rebuilding trust at Davos after COP28
The theme for the 2024 World Economic Forum (WEF) in Davos is “Rebuilding Trust,” a timely choice given the pledge that 190 nations made at last year’s UN climate conference (COP28) a few months ago to transition away from fossil fuels. The gathering at Davos is an opportunity for the government leaders and powerhouses in business and culture in attendance to take on the challenge of delivering this promise of a clean energy transition. The World Economic Forum is putting its stated goal of driving trust and accountability to the test, and the world is watching.
What makes whales fin-tastic nature champions?
Whales are the largest living creatures on the planet. But this massive stature is not their only superpower: whales play an important role when it comes to ocean productivity that could, by extension, influence the climate.
Key takeaways from the COP28 climate summit in Dubai
After days of intense negotiations, a landmark agreement emerged from the UN climate summit in Dubai, marking a significant step towards addressing climate change. For the first time in history, the agreement explicitly calls on all nations to transition away from fossil fuels, a crucial step in curbing greenhouse gas emissions and limiting global warming.
WWF's Marcene Mitchell on what we need to see at COP28
The negotiators gathering in Dubai today for the UN COP28 climate summit are fully aware of the challenge before them. Thefirst iteration of the global stocktake report, a key component of the Paris Agreement released in the lead-up to this year’s summit, paints a sobering picture: while we have made strides since 2010, the current trajectory of global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions still falls perilously short of the targets set to limit warming.
Halftime at the COP
With over 100,000 attendees in the massive Dubai Expo Center, it's halftime at the Superbowl of climate change talks—but this is no game. Our fate as a planet hangs in the balance of what is happening here.
We’re experiencing the hottest year in human history. World leaders must act now to fight climate change
This year is set to be the hottest year ever recorded, according to an announcement by the World Meteorological Organization at critical international climate talks underway in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Is COP 28 worth it?
This year’s COP is critical as an inflection point in the transition away from fossil fuels and towards a renewable energy economy. We need to rapidly scale clean energy, and we need to do it while minimizing harm to nature.
A brief history of carbon in our atmosphere
Carbon is essential to life on Earth. As the atmosphere has evolved, the amount of carbon in it has increased due to human activity, primarily from burning fossil fuels, resulting in climate change.
We need to transform how we power the world—for the benefit of people and nature
In a first-of-its-kind analysis, WWF and Boston Consulting Group compare a rapid transition to renewable energy to our current approach dominated by fossil fuels across key areas. The results show that a rapid transition to renewable energy is dramatically better for nature, human health and safety, and jobs.
Get the latest conservation news
Be a part of our community
We’ll send you conservation news and updates on how you can protect nature through activism, donating, events, and more. You can unsubscribe at any time.
We will keep your information safe and secure. Please see ourPrivacy Policyfor details of how we use your information.
This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the GooglePrivacy PolicyandTerms of Serviceapply.
World Wildlife Fund
1250 24th Street, N.W.Washington, DC 20037
World Wildlife Fund Inc. is a nonprofit, tax-exempt charitable organization (tax ID number 52-1693387) under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Donations are tax-deductible as allowed by law.
© 2025 World Wildlife Fund. WWF®and ©1986 Panda Symbol are owned by WWF. All rights reserved.
Cookie Preference Center
Manage Consent Preferences
Strictly Necessary Cookies
These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.
Performance Cookies
These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site. All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.
Functional Cookies
These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages. If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.
Targeting Cookies
These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites. They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.
Cookie List
