EMISSIONS SCENARIOS

How will the world's climate change in the coming century? The answer to this question depends on how human societies develop in terms of demographics and economic development, technological change, energy supply and demand, and land use change. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Emissions Scenarios describes new scenarios of the future, and predicts greenhouse gas emissions associated with such developments. These scenarios are based on a thorough review of the literature, the development of narrative "storylines", and the quantification of these storylines with the help of six different integrated models from different countries. The scenarios provide the basis for future assessments of climate change and possible response strategies.

The report illustrates that future emissions, even in the absence of explicit climate policies, depend very much on the choices people make; how economies are structured, which energy sources are preferred, and how people use available land resources. The IPCC published previous greenhouse gas emissions scenarios in 1990 and 1992. The current scenarios introduce many innovative aspects, such as narrative descriptions of the scenarios, inclusion of information on the availability of energy technologies, and an analysis of international equity issues. This IPCC Special Report is the most comprehensive and state-of-the-art assessment available of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios, and provides invaluable information for industry, policy-makers, environmental organizations, and researchers in global change, technology, engineering and economics.

Nebojsa Nakicenovic is the Leader of the Transitions to New Technologies Project at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), in Austria. Rob Swart is Head of the Technical Support Unit of Working Group III on Mitigation of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in the Netherlands.

Special Report on Emissions Scenarios

Nebojsa Nakicenovic, Joseph Alcamo, Gerald Davis, Bert de Vries, Joergen Fenhann, Stuart Gaffin, Kenneth Gregory, Arnulf Grübler, Tae Yong Jung, Tom Kram, Emilio Lebre La Rovere, Laurie Michaelis, Shunsuke Mori, Tsuneyuki Morita, William Pepper, Hugh Pitcher, Lynn Price, Keywan Riahi, Alexander Roehrl, Hans-Holger Rogner, Alexei Sankovski, Michael Schlesinger, Priyadarshi Shukla, Steven Smith, Robert Swart, Sascha van Rooijen, Nadejda Victor, Zhou Dadi

A Special Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE

The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge, United Kingdom

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK  
http://www.cup.cam.ac.uk

40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA  
http://www.cup.org

10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia

Ruiz de Alarcón 13, 28014 Madrid, Spain

© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2000

This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.

First published 2000

Printed in the United States of America

A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available

ISBN 0 521 80081 1 hardback  
ISBN 0 521 80493 0 paperback

Special Report on Emissions Scenarios

Coordinating Lead Author:  
Nebojsa Nakicenovic (Austria)

Lead Authors:  
Joseph Alcamo (Germany), Gerald Davis (United Kingdom), Bert de Vries (The Netherlands), Joergen Fenhann (Denmark), Stuart Gaffin (United States), Kenneth Gregory (United Kingdom), Arnulf Grübler (IIASA), Tae Yong Jung (Republic of Korea), Tom Kram (The Netherlands), Emilio Lebre La Rovere (Brazil), Laurie Michaelis (United Kingdom), Shunsuke Mori (Japan), Tsuneyuki Morita (Japan), William Pepper (United States), Hugh Pitcher (United States), Lynn Price (United States), Keywan Riahi (IIASA), Alexander Roehrl (IIASA), Hans-Holger Rogner (IAEA), Alexei Sankovski (United States), Michael Schlesinger (United States), Priyadarshi Shukla (India), Steven Smith (United States), Robert Swart (The Netherlands), Sascha van Rooijen (The Netherlands), Nadejda Victor (United States), Zhou Dadi (China)

Contributing Authors:  
Dennis Anderson (United Kingdom), Johannes Bollen (The Netherlands), Lex Bouwman (The Netherlands), Ogunlade Davidson (IPCC), Jae Edmonds (United States), Christopher Elvidge (United States), Michel den Elzen (The Netherlands), Henryk Gaj (Poland), Erik Haites (Canada), William Hare (The Netherlands), Marco Janssen (The Netherlands), Kejun Jiang (China), Anne Johnson (United States), Eric Kreileman (The Netherlands), Mathew Luhanga (United Republic of Tanzania), Nicolette Manson (United States), Toshihiko Masui (Japan), Alan McDonald (IIASA), Douglas McKay (United Kingdom), Bert Metz (IPCC), Leena Srivastava (India), Cees Volkers (The Netherlands), Robert Watson (IPCC), John Weyant (United States), Ernst Worrell (United States), Xiaoshi Xing (United States)

Review Editors:  
Eduardo Calvo (Peru), Michael Chadwick (United Kingdom), Yukio Ishimura (Japan), Jyoti Parikh (India)

Report Editors:  
Nebojsa Nakicenovic (Austria) and Robert Swart (The Netherlands)

Acknowledgements:  
Thomas Büttner (United Nations), Renate Christ (IPCC), Ewa Delpos (IIASA), Angela Dowds (IIASA), Günther Fischer (IIASA), Anne Goujon (IIASA), Andrei Gritsevskii (IIASA), Niklas Hohne (UNFCCC), Fortunat Joos (University of Bern), Frank Kasper (University of Kassel), Kathy Kienleitner (IIASA), Ger Klaassen (IIASA), Katalin Kuszko (IIASA), Matt Lloyd (Cambridge University Press), Yuzuru Matsuoka (Kyoto University), Mack McFarland (DuPont), Anita Meier (IPCC-WGIII Technical Support Unit/RIVM), Martin Middelburg (Report Layout, RIVM), Roberta Miller (CIESIN), Janina Onigkeit (University of Kassel), John Ormiston (Copy Editor), Jiahua Pan (IPCC-WGIII Technical Support Unit/RIVM), Joyce Penner (University of Michigan), Michael Prather (University of California), Paul Reuter (University of Kassel), Susan Riley (IIASA), Cynthia Rosenzweig (Goddard Institute for Space Studies), Stephen Schneider (Stanford University), Leo Schrattenholzer (IIASA), Dennis Tirpak (UNFCCC), David Victor (US Council on Foreign Relations), Patricia Wagner (IIASA)

* Members of the Modeling Teams

Affiliations indicate country of residency or an international organization and not necessarily citizenship.

Contents

Foreword  
Preface  
Summary for Policymakers 1  
Technical Summary 21  

1. Background and Overview 59  
2. An Overview of the Scenario Literature 77  
3. Scenario Driving Forces 103  
4. An Overview of Scenarios 167  
5. Emission Scenarios 239  
6. Summary Discussions and Recommendations 293  

Appendices  
I: SRES Terms of Reference 323  
II: SRES Writing Team and SRES reviewers 325  
III: Definition of SRES World Regions 331  
IV: Six Modeling Approaches 335  
V: Database Description 347  
VI: Open Process 353  
VII: Statistical Tables 379  
VIII: Acronyms and Abbreviations 581  
IX: Chemical Symbols 585  
X: Units 587  
XI: Glossary of Terms 589  
XII: List of Major IPCC Reports 597  

Foreword

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was jointly established by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess the scientific, technical and socio-economic information relevant for the understanding of the risk of human-induced climate change. Since its inception the IPCC has produced a series of comprehensive Assessment Reports on the state of understanding of causes of climate change, its potential impacts and options for response strategies. It prepared also Special Reports, Technical Papers, methodologies and guidelines. These IPCC publications have become standard works of reference, widely used by policymakers, scientists and other experts.

In 1992 the IPCC released emission scenarios to be used for driving global circulation models to develop climate change scenarios. The so-called IS92 scenarios were pathbreaking. They were the first global scenarios to provide estimates for the full suite of greenhouse gases. Much has changed since then in our understanding of possible future greenhouse gas emissions and climate change. Therefore the IPCC decided in 1996 to develop a new set of emissions scenarios which will provide input to the IPCC third assessment report but can be of broader use than the IS92 scenarios. The new scenarios provide also input for evaluating climatic and environmental consequences of future greenhouse gas emissions and for assessing alternative mitigation and adaptation strategies. They include improved emission baselines and latest information on economic restructuring throughout the world, examine different rates and trends in technological change and expand the range of different economic-development pathways, including narrowing of the income gap between developed and developing countries. To achieve this a new approach was adopted to take into account a wide range of scientific perspectives, and interactions between regions and sectors. Through the so-called "open process" input and feedback from a community of experts much broader than the writing team were solicited.

The results of this work show that different social, economic and technological developments have a strong impact on emission trends, without assuming explicit climate policy interventions. The new scenarios provide also important insights about the interlinkages between environmental quality and development choices and will certainly be a useful tool for experts and decision makers.

As usual in the IPCC, success in producing this report has depended first and foremost on the co-operation of scientists and other experts worldwide. In the case of this report the active contribution of a broad expert community to the open process was an important element of the success. These individuals have devoted enormous time and effort to producing this report and we are extremely grateful for their commitment to the IPCC process. We would like to highlight in particular the enthusiasm and tireless efforts of the co-ordinating lead author for this report Nebojsa Nakicenovic and his team at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Laxenburg/Austria who ensured the high quality of this report.

Further we would like to express our sincere thanks to:  
• Robert T. Watson, the Chairman of the IPCC,  
• The Co-chairs of Working Group III Bert Metz and Ogunlade Davidson,  
• The members of the writing team,  
• The staff of the Working Group III Technical Support Unit, including Rob Swart, Jiahua Pan, Tom Kram, and Anita Meier,  
• N. Sundararaman, the Secretary of the IPCC, Renate Christ Deputy Secretary of the IPCC and the staff of the IPCC Secretariat Rudie Bourgeois, Chantal Ettori and Annie Courtin.

G.O.P. Obasi  
Secretary-General  
World Meteorological Organization  

K. Töpfer  
Executive Director  
United Nations Environment Programme and  
Director-General  
United Nations Office in Nairobi  

Preface

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established jointly by the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess periodically the science, impacts, and Anita Meier, • N. Sundararaman, the Secretary of the IPCC, • Renate Christ Deputy Secretary of the IPCC and the staff of the IPCC Secretariat Rudie Bourgeois, Chantal Ettori and Annie Courtin. K. Töpfer Executive Director United Nations Environment Programme and Director-General United Nations Office in Nairobi Preface The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established jointly by the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to assess periodically the science, impacts, and socio-economics of climate change and of adaptation and mitigation options. The IPCC provides, on request, scientific and technical advice to the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its bodies. In response to a 1994 evaluation of the earlier IPCC IS92 emissions scenarios, the 1996 Plenary of the IPCC requested this Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) (see Appendix I for the Terms of Reference). This report was accepted by the Working Group III (WGIII) plenary session in March 2000. The long-term nature and uncertainty of climate change and its driving forces require scenarios that extend to the end of the 21st century. This report describes the new scenarios and how they were developed. The SRES scenarios cover a wide range of the main driving forces of future emissions, from demographic to technological and economic developments. As required by the Terms of Reference, none of the scenarios in the set includes any future policies that explicitly address climate change, although all scenarios necessarily encompass various policies of other types. The set of SRES emissions scenarios is based on an extensive assessment of the literature, six alternative modelling approaches, and an "open process" that solicited wide participation and feedback from many groups and individuals. The SRES scenarios include the range of emissions of all relevant species of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and sulfur and their driving forces. The SRES writing team included more than 50 members from 18 countries who represent a broad range of scientific disciplines, regional backgrounds, and non-governmental organizations (see Appendix II). The team, led by Nebojsa Nakicenovic of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria, included representatives of six scenario modeling groups and lead authors from all three earlier IPCC scenario activities - the 1990 and 1992 scenarios and the 1994 scenario evaluation. The SRES preparation included six major steps; • analysis of existing scenarios in the literature; • analysis of major scenario characteristics, driving forces, and their relationships; • formulation of four narrative scenario "storylines" to describe alternative futures; • quantification of each storyline using a variety of modelling approaches; • an "open" review process of the resultant emission scenarios and their assumptions; and • three revisions of the scenarios and the report subsequent to the open review process, i.e., the formal IPCC Expert Review and the final combined IPCC Expert and Government Review. As required by the Terms of Reference, the SRES preparation process was open with no single "official" model and no exclusive "expert teams." To this end, in 1997 the IPCC advertised in relevant scientific journals and other publications to solicit wide participation in the process. A web site documenting the SRES process and intermediate results was created to facilitate outside input. Members of the writing team also published much of their background research in the peer-reviewed literature and on web sites. In June 1998, the IPCC Bureau agreed to make the unapproved, preliminary scenarios available to climate modelers, who could use the scenarios as a basis for the assessment of climatic changes in time for consideration in the IPCC's Third Assessment Report. We recommend that the new scenarios be used not only in the IPCC's future assessments of climate change, its impacts, and adaptation and mitigation options, but also as the basis for analyses by the wider research and policy community of climate change and other environmental problems. Ogunlade Davidson and Bert Metz Co-chairs of IPCC WGIII SUMMARY FOR POLICYMAKERS SPECIAL REPORT ON EMISSIONS SCENARIOS A Special Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Based on a draft prepared by: Nebojsa Nakicenovic, Ogunlade Davidson, Gerald Davis, Arnulf Grübler, Tom Kram, Emilio Lebre La Rovere, Bert Metz, Tsuneyuki Morita, William Pepper, Hugh Pitcher, Alexei Sankovski, Priyadarshi Shukla, Robert Swart, Robert Watson, Zhou Dadi CONTENTS Why new Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change scenarios? 3 What are scenarios and what is their purpose? 3 What are the main characteristics of the new scenarios? 3 What are the main driving forces of the GHG emissions in the scenarios? 5 What is the range of GHG emissions in the SRES scenarios and how do they relate to driving forces? 9 How can the SRES scenarios be used? 11 What future work on emissions scenarios would be useful? 11 Summary for Policymakers Why new Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change scenarios? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) developed long-term emissions scenarios in 1990 and 1992. These scenarios have been widely used in the analysis of possible climate change, its impacts, and options to mitigate climate change. In 1995, the IPCC 1992 scenarios were evaluated. The evaluation recommended that significant changes (since 1992) in the understanding of driving forces of emissions and methodologies should be addressed. These changes in understanding relate to, e.g., the carbon intensity of energy supply, the income gap between developed and developing countries, and to sulfur emissions. This led to a decision by the IPCC Plenary in 1996 to develop a new set of scenarios. The new set of scenarios is presented in this report. What are scenarios and what is their purpose? Future greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are the product of very complex dynamic systems, determined by driving forces such as demographic development, socio-economic development, and technological change. Their future evolution is highly uncertain. Scenarios are alternative images of how the future might unfold and are an appropriate tool with which to analyze how driving forces may influence future emission outcomes and to assess the associated uncertainties. They assist in climate change analysis, including climate modeling and the assessment of impacts, adaptation, and mitigation. The possibility that any single emissions path will occur as described in scenarios is highly uncertain. What are the main characteristics of the new scenarios? A set of scenarios was developed to represent the range of driving forces and emissions in the scenario literature so as to reflect current understanding and knowledge about underlying uncertainties. They exclude only outlying "surprise" or of the scenarios and they are not assigned probabilities of occurrence, neither must they be interpreted as policy recommendations. The scenarios are based on an extensive assessment of driving forces and emissions in the scenario literature, alternative modeling approaches, and an "open process" that solicited wide participation and feedback. These are all-important elements of the Terms of Reference (see Appendix I). The open process defined in the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) Terms of Reference calls for the use of multiple models, seeking inputs from a wide community as well as making scenario results widely available for comments and review. These objectives were fulfilled by the SRES multi-model approach and the open SRES website. Four different narrative storylines were developed to describe consistently the relationships between emission driving forces and their evolution and add context for the scenario quantification. Each storyline represents different demographic, social, economic, technological, and environmental developments, which may be viewed positively by some people and negatively by others. The scenarios cover a wide range of the main demographic, economic, and technological driving forces of GHG and sulfur emissions, and are representative of the literature. Each scenario represents a specific quantitative interpretation of one of four storylines. All the scenarios based on the same storyline constitute a scenario "family". As required by the Terms of Reference, the scenarios in this report do not include additional climate initiatives, which means that no scenarios are included that explicitly assume implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change (UNFCCC) or the emissions targets of the Kyoto Protocol. However, GHG emissions are directly affected by non-climate change policies designed for a wide range of other purposes. Furthermore government policies can, to varying degrees, influence the GHG emission drivers such as demographic change, social and economic development, technological change, resource use, and pollution management. This influence is broadly reflected in the storylines and resultant scenarios. For each storyline several different scenarios were developed using different modeling approaches to examine the range of outcomes arising from a range of models that use similar assumptions about driving forces. Six models were used which are representative of integrated assessment frameworks in the literature. One advantage of a multi-model approach is that the resultant 40 SRES scenarios together encompass the current range of uncertainties of future GHG emissions arising from different characteristics of these models, in addition to the current knowledge of and uncertainties that arise from scenario driving forces such as demographic, social and economic, and broad technological developments that drive the models, as described in the storylines. Thirteen of these 40 scenarios explore variations in energy technology assumptions. Included are anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide (CO₂), methane (CH₄), nitrous oxide (N₂O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF₆), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), the aerosol precursor and the chemically active gases sulfur dioxide (SO₂), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOₓ), and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs). Emissions are provided aggregated into four world regions and global totals. In the new scenarios no feedback effect of future climate change on emissions from biosphere and energy has been assumed. Summary for Policymakers Box SPM-1: The Main Characteristics of the Four SRES Storylines and Scenario Families. A1 Storyline Illustrative Scenario Scenario Groups Illustrative Marker Scenario Illustrative Marker Scenario Illustrative Marker Scenario Illustrative Marker Scenario OS HS OS HS OS HS OS HS OS HS OS HS Number of Scenarios 1 5 1 2 2 6 4 2 2 7 4 4 Figure SPM-1: Schematic illustration of SRES scenarios. Four qualitative storylines yield four sets of scenarios called "families": A1, A2, B1, and B2. Altogether 40 SRES scenarios have been developed by six modeling teams. All are equally valid with no assigned probabilities of occurrence. The set of scenarios consists of six scenario groups drawn from the four families: one group each in A2, B1, B2, and three groups within the A1 family, characterizing alternative developments of energy technologies: A1FI (fossil fuel intensive), A1B (balanced), and A1T (predominantly non-fossil fuel). Within each family and group of scenarios, some share "harmonized" assumptions on global population, gross world product, and final energy. These are marked as "HS" for harmonized scenarios. "OS" denotes scenarios that explore uncertainties in driving forces beyond those of the harmonized scenarios. The number of scenarios developed within each category is shown. For each of the six scenario groups an illustrative scenario (which is always harmonized) is provided. Four illustrative marker scenarios, one for each scenario family, were used in draft form in the 1998 SRES open process and are included in revised form in this report. Two additional illustrative scenarios for the groups A1FI and A1T are also provided and complete a set of six that illustrate all scenario groups. All are equally sound. By 2100 the world will have changed in ways that are difficult to imagine - as difficult as it would have been at the end of the 19th century to imagine the changes of the 100 years since. Each storyline assumes a distinctly different direction for future developments, such that the four storylines differ in increasingly irreversible ways. Together they describe divergent futures that encompass a significant portion of the underlying uncertainties in the main driving forces. They cover a wide range of key "future" characteristics such as demographic change, economic development, and technological change. For this reason, their plausibility or feasibility should years since. Each storyline assumes a distinctly different direction for future developments, such that the four storylines differ in increasingly irreversible ways. Together they describe divergent futures that encompass a significant portion of the underlying uncertainties in the main driving forces. They cover a wide range of key "future" characteristics such as demographic change, economic development, and technological change. For this reason, their plausibility or feasibility should not be considered solely on the basis of an extrapolation of current economic, technological, and social trends. • The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world of very rapid economic growth, global population that peaks in mid-century and declines thereafter, and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying themes are convergence among regions, capacity building, and increased cultural and social interactions, with a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita income. The A1 scenario family develops into three groups that describe alternative directions of technological change in the energy system. The three A1 groups are distinguished by their technological emphasis: fossil intensive (A1FI), non-fossil energy sources (A1T), or a balance across all sources (A1B)3. ^Balanced is defined as not relying too heavily on one particular energy source, on the assumption that similar improvement rates apply to all energy supply and end use technologies. Summary for Policymakers • The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance and preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across regions converge very slowly, which results in continuously increasing global population. Economic development is primarily regionally oriented and per capita economic growth and technological change are more fragmented and slower than in other storylines. • The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a convergent world with the same global population that peaks in mid-century and declines thereafter, as in the A1 storyline, but with rapid changes in economic structures toward a service and information economy, with reductions in material intensity, and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient technologies. The emphasis is on global solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability, including improved equity, but without additional climate initiatives. • The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability. It is a world with continuously increasing global population at a rate lower than A2, intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented toward environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local and regional levels. Within each scenario family two main types of scenarios were developed - those with harmonized assumptions about global population, economic growth, and final energy use and those with alternative quantification of the storyline. Together, 26 scenarios were harmonized by adopting common assumptions on global population and gross domestic product (GDP) development. Thus, the harmonized scenarios in each family are not independent of each other. The remaining 14 scenarios adopted alternative interpretations of the four scenario storylines to explore additional scenario uncertainties beyond differences in methodological approaches. They are also related to each other within each family, even though they do not share common assumptions about some of the driving forces. There are six scenario groups that should be considered equally sound that span a wider range of uncertainty, as required by the Terms of Reference. These encompass four combinations of demographic change, social and economic development, and broad technological developments, corresponding to the four families (A1, A2, B1, B2), each with an illustrative "marker" scenario. Two of the scenario groups of the A1 family (A1FI, A1T) explicitly explore alternative energy technology developments, holding the other driving forces constant, each with an illustrative scenario. Rapid growth leads to high capital turnover rates, which means that early small differences among scenarios can lead to a large divergence by 2100. Therefore the A1 family, which has the highest rates of technological change and economic development, was selected to show this effect. In accordance with a decision of the IPCC Bureau in 1998 to release draft scenarios to climate modelers for their input in the Third Assessment Report, and subsequently to solicit comments during the open process, one marker scenario was chosen from each of four of the scenario groups based on the storylines. The choice of the markers was based on which of the initial quantifications best reflected the storyline, and features of specific models. Marker scenarios are no more or less likely than any other scenarios, but are considered by the SRES writing team as illustrative of a particular storyline. These scenarios have received the closest scrutiny of the entire writing team and via the SRES open process. Scenarios have also been selected to illustrate the other two scenario groups. Hence, this report has an illustrative scenario for each of the six scenario groups. What are the main driving forces of the GHG emissions in the scenarios? This Report reinforces our understanding that the main driving forces of future greenhouse gas trajectories will continue to be demographic change, social and economic development, and the rate and direction of technological change. This finding is consistent with the IPCC 1990, 1992 and 1995 scenario reports. Table SPM-1 (see later) summarizes the demographic, social, and economic driving forces across the scenarios in 2020, 2050, and 2100. The intermediate energy result (shown in table SPM-2, see later) and land use results5 reflect the influences of driving forces. Recent global population projections are generally lower than those in the IS92 scenarios. Three different population trajectories that correspond to socio-economic developments in the storylines were chosen from recently published projections. The A1 and B1 scenario families are based on the low International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) 1996 projection. They share the lowest trajectory, increasing to 8.7 billion by 2050 and declining toward 7 billion by 2100, which combines low fertility with low mortality. The B2 scenario family is based on the long-term UN Medium 1998 population projection of 10.4 billion by 2100. The A2 scenario family is based on a high population growth scenario of 15 billion by 2100 that assumes a significant decline in fertility for most regions and stabilization at above replacement levels. It falls below the long-term 1998 UN High projection of 18 billion. Technological change is not quantified in table SPM-1.5 Because of the impossibility of including the complex way land use is changing between the various land use types, this information is not in the table.6 Summary for Policymakers -3.5 1900 1950 2000 2025 2050 2100 Figure SPM-2: Global CO2 emissions related to energy and industry (Figure SFM-2a) way land use is changing between the various land use types, this information is not in the table. 6 Figure SPM-2: Global CO₂ emissions related to energy and industry (Figure SPM-2a) and land-use changes (Figure SPM-2b) from 1900 to 1990, and for the 40 SRES scenarios from 1990 to 2100, shown as an index (1990 = 1). The dashed time-paths depict individual SRES scenarios and the area shaded in blue the range of scenarios from the literature as documented in the SRES database. The scenarios are classified into six scenario groups drawn from the four scenario families. Six illustrative scenarios are highlighted. The colored vertical bars indicate the range of emissions in 2100. The four black bars on the right of Figure SPM-1a indicate the emission ranges in 2100 for the IS92 scenarios and three ranges of scenarios from the literature, documented in the SRES database. These three ranges indicate those scenarios that include some additional climate initiatives (designated as “intervention” scenarios), those that do not (“non-intervention”), and those that cannot be assigned to either category (“non-classified”). This classification is based on a subjective evaluation of the scenarios in the database and was possible only for energy and industry emissions. SAR, Second Assessment Report. Figure SPM-3: Total global annual CO₂ emissions from all sources (energy, industry, and land-use change) from 1990 to 2100 (in gigatonnes of carbon (GtC/yr) for the families and six scenario groups. The 40 SRES scenarios are presented by the four families (A1, A2, B1, and B2) and six scenario groups: the fossil-intensive A1FI (comprising the high-coal and high-oil-and-gas scenarios), the predominantly non-fossil fuel A1T, the balanced A1B in Figure SPM-3a; A2 in Figure SPM-3b; B1 in Figure SPM-3c, and B2 in Figure SPM-3d. Each colored emission band shows the range of harmonized and non-harmonized scenarios within each group. For each of the six scenario groups an illustrative scenario is provided, including the four illustrative marker scenarios (A1, A2, B1, B2, solid lines) and two illustrative scenarios for A1FI and A1T (dashed lines). All scenarios describe futures that are generally more affluent than today. The scenarios span a wide range of future levels of economic activity, with gross world product rising to 10 times today’s values by 2100 in the lowest to 26-fold in the highest scenarios. A narrowing of income differences among world regions is assumed in many of the SRES scenarios. Two of the scenario families, A1 and B1, explicitly explore alternative pathways that gradually close existing income gaps in relative terms. Technology is at least as important a driving force as demographic change and economic development. These driving forces are related. Within the A1 scenario family, scenarios with common demographic and socio-economic driving forces but different assumptions about technology and resource dynamics illustrate the possibility of very divergent paths for developments in the energy system and land-use patterns. The SRES scenarios cover a wider range of energy structures than the IS92 scenarios. This reflects uncertainties about future fossil resources and technological change. The scenarios cover virtually all the possible directions of change, from high shares of fossil fuels, oil and gas or coal, to high shares of non-fossils. In most scenarios, global forest area continues to decrease for some decades, primarily because of increasing population and income growth. This current trend is eventually reversed in most scenarios with the greatest eventual increase in forest area by 2100 in the B1 and B2 scenario families, as compared to 1990. Associated changes in agricultural land use are driven principally by changing food demands caused by demographic and dietary shifts. Numerous other social, economic, institutional, and technological factors also affect the relative shares of agricultural lands, forests, and other types of land use. Different analytic methods lead to very different results, indicating that future land use change in the scenarios is very model specific. All the above driving forces not only influence CO₂ emissions, but also the emissions of other GHGs. The relationships between the driving forces and non-CO₂ GHG emissions are generally more complex and less studied, and the models used for the scenarios less sophisticated. Hence, the uncertainties in the SRES emissions for non-CO₂ greenhouse gases are generally greater than those for energy CO₂. * Therefore, the ranges of non-CO₂ GHG emissions provided in the Report may not fully reflect the level of uncertainty compared to CO₂, for example only a single model provided the sole value for halocarbon emissions. Scenarios grouped by cumulative emissions Low Medium-Low Medium-High High Cumulative Emission 1990-2100, GtC Figure SPM-4: Total global cumulative CO₂ emissions (GtC) from 1990 to 2100 (SPM-4a) and histogram of their distribution by scenario groups (SPM-4b). No probability of occurrence should be inferred from the distribution of SRES scenarios or those in the literature. Both figures show the ranges of cumulative emissions for the 40 SRES scenarios. Scenarios are also grouped into four cumulative emissions categories; low, medium-low, medium-high, and high emissions. Each category contains one illustrative marker scenario plus alternatives that lead to comparable cumulative emissions, although often through different driving forces. This categorization can guide comparisons using either scenarios with different driving forces yet similar emissions, or scenarios with similar driving forces but different emissions. The cumulative emissions of the IS92 scenarios are also shown. What is the range of GHG emissions in the SRES scenarios and how do they relate to driving forces? The SRES scenarios cover most of the range of carbon dioxide (CO₂; see Figures SPM-2a and SPM-2b), other GHGs, and sulfur emissions found in the recent literature and SRES scenario database. Their spread is similar to that of the IS92 scenarios for CO₂ emissions from energy and industry as well as total emissions but represents a much wider range for land-use change. The six scenario groups cover wide and overlapping emission ranges. The range of GHG emissions in the scenarios widens over time to capture the long-term uncertainties reflected in the literature for many of the driving forces, and after 2050 widens significantly as a result of different socio-economic developments. Table SPM-2b summarizes the emissions across the scenarios in 2020, 2050, and 2100. Figure SPM-3 shows in greater detail the ranges of total emissions for the six scenario groups of scenarios that constitute the four families (the three scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus three groups within the A1 family A1FI, A1T, and A1B). Some SRES s c a result of different socio-economic developments. Table SPM-2b summarizes the emissions across the scenarios in 2020, 2050, and 2100. Figure SPM-3 shows in greater detail the ranges of total emissions for the six scenario groups of scenarios that constitute the four families (the three scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus three groups within the A1 family A1FI, A1T, and A1B). Some SRES scenarios show trend reversals, turning points (i.e., initial emission increases followed by decreases), and crossovers (i.e., initially emissions are higher in one scenario, but later emissions are higher in another scenario). Emission trend reversals (see Figures SPM-2 and SPM-3) depart from historical emission increases. In most of these cases, the upward emissions trend due to income growth is more than compensated by productivity improvements combined with a slowly growing or declining population. In many SRES scenarios CO2 emissions from loss of forest cover peak after several decades and then gradually decline (Figure SPM-1b). This pattern is consistent with scenarios in the literature and can be associated with slowing population growth, followed by a decline in some scenarios, increasing agricultural productivity, and increasing scarcity of forest land. These factors allow for a reversal of the current trend of loss of forest cover in many cases. Emissions decline fastest in the B1 family. Only in the A2 family do net anthropogenic CO2 emissions from land-use change remain positive through 2100. As was the case for energy-related emissions, CO2 emissions related to land-use change in the A1 family cover the widest range. The diversity across these scenarios is amplified through the high economic growth, increasing the range of alternatives, and through the different modeling approaches and their treatment of technology. Total cumulative SRES carbon emissions from all sources through 2100 range from approximately 770 GtC to approximately 2540 GtC. According to the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR), “any eventual stabilised concentration is governed more by the accumulated anthropogenic CO2 emissions from now until the time of stabilisation than by the way emissions change over the period.” Therefore, the scenarios are also grouped in the report according to their cumulative emissions (see Figure SPM-4). The SRES scenarios extend the IS92 range toward higher emissions (SRES maximum of 2538 GtC compared to 2140 GtC for IS92), but not toward lower emissions. The lower bound for both scenario sets is approximately 770 GtC. Total anthropogenic methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions span a wider range by the end of the 21st century (see Figures SPM-5 and SPM-6 derived from Figures 5.5 and 5.7). Emissions of these gases in a number of scenarios begin to decline by 2050. The range of emissions is wider than in the IS92 scenarios due to the multimodel approach, which leads to a better treatment of uncertainties and to a wide range of driving forces. These totals include emissions from land use, energy systems, industry, and waste management. Methane and nitrous oxide emissions from land use are limited in A1 and B1 families by slower population growth followed by a decline, and increased agricultural productivity. After the initial increases, emissions related to land use peak and decline. In the B2 family, emissions continue to grow, albeit very slowly. In the A2 family, both high population growth and less rapid increases in agricultural productivity result in a continuous rapid growth in those emissions related to land use. The range of emissions of HFCs in the SRES scenario is generally lower than in earlier IPCC scenarios. Because of new insights about the availability of alternatives to HFCs as replacements for substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol, initially HFC emissions are generally lower than in previous IPCC scenarios. In the A2 and B2 scenario families HFC emissions increase rapidly in the second half of this century, while in the A1 and B1 scenario families the growth of emissions is significantly slowed down or reversed in that period. Sulfur emissions in the SRES scenarios are generally below the IS92 range, because of structural changes in the energy system as well as concerns about local and regional air pollution. These reflect sulfur control legislation in Europe, North America, Japan, and (more recently) other parts of Asia and other developing regions. The timing and impact of these changes and controls vary across scenarios and regions. After initial increases over the next two to three decades, global sulfur emissions in the SRES scenarios decrease (see Table SPM-1b), consistent with the findings of the 1995 IPCC scenario evaluation and recent peer-reviewed literature. Similar future GHG emissions can result from very different socio-economic developments, and similar developments of driving forces can result in different future emissions. Uncertainties in the future developments of key emission driving forces create large uncertainties in future emissions, even within the same socio-economic development paths. Therefore, emissions from each scenario family overlap substantially with emissions from other scenario families. The overlap implies that a given level of future emissions can arise from very different combinations of driving forces. Figures SPM-1, SPM-2, and SPM-3 show this for CO2. Conver driving forces. Figures SPM-1, SPM-2, and SPM-3 show this for CO2. Convergence of regional per capita incomes can lead to either high or low GHG emissions. Tables SPM-1a and SPM-1b indicate that there are scenarios with high per capita incomes in all regions that lead to high CO2 emissions (e.g., in the high-growth, fossil fuel intensive scenario group A1FI). They also indicate that there are scenarios with high per capita incomes that lead to low emissions (e.g., the A1T scenario group or the B1 scenario family). This suggests that in some cases other driving forces may have a greater influence on GHG emissions than income growth. How can the SRES scenarios be used? It is recommended that a range of SRES scenarios with a variety of assumptions regarding driving forces be used in any analysis. Thus more than one family should be used in most analyses. The six scenario groups - the three scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus three groups within the A1 scenario family, A1B, A1FI, and A1T - and four cumulative emissions categories were developed as the smallest subsets of SRES scenarios that capture the range of uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions. The important uncertainties ranging from driving forces to emissions may be different in different applications - for example climate modeling; assessment of impacts, vulnerability, mitigation, and adaptation options; and policy analysis. Climate modelers may want to cover the range reflected by the cumulative emissions categories. To assess the robustness of options in terms of impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation may require scenarios with similar emissions but different socio-economic characteristics, as reflected by the six scenario groups. For mitigation analysis, variation in both emissions and socio-economic characteristics may be necessary. For analysis at the national or regional scale, the most appropriate scenarios may be those that best reflect specific circumstances and perspectives. There is no single most likely, "central", or "best-guess" scenario, either with respect to SRES scenarios or to the underlying scenario literature. Probabilities or likelihood are not assigned to individual SRES scenarios. None of the SRES scenarios represents an estimate of a central tendency for all driving forces or emissions, such as the mean or median, and none should be interpreted as such. The distribution of the scenarios provides a useful context for understanding the relative position of a scenario but does not represent the likelihood of its occurrence. The driving forces and emissions of each SRES scenario should be used together. To avoid internal inconsistencies, components of SRES scenarios should not be mixed. For example, the GHG emissions from one scenario and the SO2 emissions from another scenario, or the population from one and economic development path from another, should not be combined. While recognizing the inherent uncertainties in long-term projections, the SRES scenarios may provide policy makers with a long-term context for near-term analysis. The modeling tools that have been used to develop these scenarios that focus on the century time scale are less suitable for analysis of near term (a decade or less) developments. When analyzing mitigation and adaptation options, the user should be aware that although no additional climate initiatives are included in the SRES scenarios, various changes have been assumed to occur that would require other interventions, such as those leading to reductions in sulfur emissions and significant penetration of new energy technologies. What future work on emissions scenarios would be useful? • Establishment of a program for on-going evaluations and comparisons of long-term emission scenarios, including a regularly updated scenario database; • Capacity building, particularly in developing countries, in the area of modeling tools and emissions scenarios; • Multiple storyline, multi-model approaches in future scenario analyses; • New research activities to assess future developments in key GHG driving forces in greater regional, subregional, and sectoral detail which allow for a clearer link between emissions scenarios and mitigation options; • Improved specification and data for, and integration of the non-CO2 GHG and non-energy sectors, such as land use, land-use change and forestry, in models, as well as model inter-comparison to improve scenarios and analyses; • Integration into models emissions of particulate, hydrogen, or nitrate aerosol precursors, and processes, such as feedback of climate change on emissions, that may significantly influence scenario results and analyses; • Development of additional gridded emissions for scenarios which would facilitate improved regional assessment; • Assessment of strategies that would address multiple national, regional, or global priorities; • Development of methods for scientifically sound aggregation of emissions data; • More detailed information on assumptions, inputs, and the results of the 40 SRES scenarios should be made available at a web site and on a CD-ROM. Regular maintenance of the SRES web site is needed; • Extension of the SRES web site and production of a CD-ROM to provide, if appropriate, time-dependent geographic distributions of driving forces and emissions, and concentrations of GHGs and sulfate aerosols. • Development of a classification scheme for classifying scenarios as intervention or non-intervention scenarios.   Greenhouse Gases and Sulfur Emissions 36 9.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions 36 9.1.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions and Their Driving Forces 36 9.1.2. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Energy, Industry, and Land Use 36 9.1.3. Scenario Groups and Four Categories of Cumulative Emissions 39 9.2. Other Greenhouse Gases 41 9.2.1. Methane Emissions 42 9.2.2. Nitrous Oxide Emissions 42 9.2.3. Halocarbons and Halogenated Compounds 42 9.3. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions 43 9.4. Other Chemically Active Gases 44 9.4.1. Nitrogen Oxides Emissions 44 9.4.2. Volatile Organic Compounds, Excluding Methane 45 9.4.3. Carbon Monoxide Emissions 45 9.5. Emissions Overview 45 10. Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations 45 References 56 Technical Summary 23 1. Introduction and Background The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) decided at its September 1996 plenary session in Mexico City to develop a new set of emissions scenarios (see Appendix I for the Terms of Reference). This Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) describes the new scenarios and how they were developed. The SRES writing team formulated a set of emissions scenarios. These scenarios cover a wide range of the main driving forces of future emissions, from demographic to technological and economic developments. The scenarios encompass different future developments that might influence greenhouse gas (GHG) sources and sinks, such as alternative structures of energy systems and land-use changes. As required by the Terms of Reference however, none of the scenarios in the set includes any future policies that explicitly address additional climate change initiatives, although GHG emissions are directly affected by non-climate change policies designed for a wide range of other purpose. The set of SRES emissions scenarios is based on an extensive assessment of the literature, six alternative modeling approaches, and an “open process” that solicited wide participation and feedback from many groups and individuals. The set of scenarios includes anthropogenic emissions of all relevant GHG species, sulfur dioxide (SO₂), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOₓ), and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), see Table 1-1 in Chapter 1. It covers most of the range of GHG emissions compared with the published scenario literature. For example, emissions of carbon dioxide (CO₂) in 2100 range from more than 40 to less than 6 giga (or billion) tons of elemental carbon (GtC), that is, from almost a sevenfold increase to roughly the same emissions level as in 1990. Future emissions and the evolution of their underlying driving forces are highly uncertain, as reflected in the very wide range of future emissions paths in the literature that is also captured by the SRES scenarios. The use of scenarios in this report addresses the uncertainties related to known factors. Uncertainties related to unknown increase to roughly the same emissions level as in 1990. Future emissions and the evolution of their underlying driving forces are highly uncertain, as reflected in the very wide range of future emissions paths in the literature that is also captured by the SRES scenarios. The use of scenarios in this report addresses the uncertainties related to known factors. Uncertainties related to unknown factors can of course never be persuasively captured by any approach. As the prediction of future anthropogenic GHG emissions is impossible, alternative GHG emissions scenarios become a major tool for analyzing potential long-range developments of the socio-economic system and corresponding emission sources. Emissions scenarios are a central component of any assessment of climate change. GHG and SO2 emissions are the basic input^ for determining future climate patterns with simple climate models, as well as with complex general circulation models (GCMs). Possible climate change, together with the major driving forces of future emissions, such as demographic patterns, economic development and environmental conditions, provide the basis for the assessment of vulnerability, possible adverse impacts and adaptation strategies and policies to climate change. The major driving forces of future emissions also provide the basis for the assessment of possible mitigation strategies and policies designed to avoid climate change. The new set of emissions scenarios is intended for use in future IPCC assessments and by wider scientific and policymaking communities for analyzing the effects of future GHG emissions and for developing mitigation and adaptation measures and policies. 2. Emissions Scenarios and Their Purposes Scenarios are images of the future, or alternative futures. They are neither predictions nor forecasts. Rather, each scenario is one alternative image of how the future might unfold (see Chapters 1 and 4 for more detail). As such they enhance our understanding of how systems behave, evolve and interact. They are useful tools for scientific assessments, learning about complex systems behavior and for policymaking and assist in climate change analysis, including climate modeling and the assessment of impacts, adaptation and mitigation. Future levels of global GHG emissions are a product of very complex, ill-understood dynamic systems, driven by forces such as population growth, socio-economic development, and technological progress among others, thus making long-term predictions about emissions virtually impossible. However, near-term policies may have profound long-term climate impacts. Consequently, policy makers need a summary of what is understood about possible future GHG emissions, and given the uncertainties in both emissions models and our understanding of key driving forces, scenarios are an appropriate tool for summarizing both current understanding and current uncertainties. GHG emissions scenarios are usually based on an internally consistent and reproducible set of assumptions about the key relationships and driving forces of change, which are derived from our understanding of both history and the current situation. Often these scenarios are formulated with the help of formal models. Sometimes GHG emissions scenarios are less quantitative and more descriptive, and in a few cases they do not involve any formal analysis and are expressed in qualitative terms. The SRES scenarios involve both qualitative and quantitative components; they have a narrative part called “storylines” and a number of corresponding quantitative scenarios for each storyline. SRES scenarios can be viewed as a linking tool that integrates qualitative narratives or stories about the future and quantitative formulations based on different formal modeling approaches. Although no scenarios are value free, the SRES scenarios are descriptive and are not intended to be desirable or undesirable in their own right. They have been built as descriptions of plausible alternative futures, rather than preferred developments. However, developing scenarios for a period of one hundred years is a relatively new field. This is not only because of large scientific uncertainties and data inadequacies. For example, within the 21st century technological discontinuities should be expected, and possibly major shifts in societal values and in the balance of geopolitical power. The study of past trends over such long periods is hampered by the fact that most databases are incomplete if we go back much further than 50 years. Given these gaps in our data, methods, and understanding, scenarios are the best way to integrate demographic, economic, societal, and technological knowledge with our understanding of ecological systems to evaluate sources and sinks of GHG emissions. Scenarios as an integration tool in the assessment of climate change allow a role for intuition, analysis, and synthesis, and thus we turn to scenarios in this report to take advantage of those features to aid the assessment of future climate change, impacts, vulnerabilities, adaptation, and mitigation. Since the scenarios focus on the century time scale, tools have been used that have been developed for this purpose. These tools are less suitable for analysis of near-term developments and this report does not intend to provide reliable projections for the near term. 3. Review of Past IPCC Emissions Scenarios The IPCC developed sets of emissions scenarios in 1990 and 1992. The six IS92 scenarios developed in 1992 (Leggett et al., 1992; Pepper et al., 1992), have been used very widely in climate change assessments. In 1995 the IPCC formally evaluated the 1992 scenarios and found that they were innovative at the time of their publication, path-breaking in their coverage of the full range of GHG emissions and useful for the purpose of driving atmospheric and climate models (Alcamo et al., 1995). Specifically, their global carbon emissions spanned most of the range of other scenarios identified in the literature at that time. The review also identified a number of weaknesses. These included the limited range of carbon intensities of energy (carbon emissions per unit energy) and the absence of any scenario with significant closure in the income gap between developed and developing countries, even after a full century (Parikh, 1992). Furthermore, rapid growth of sulfur emissions in the IS92 scenarios had been questioned on the basis that they did not reflect recent legislation in Japan, Europe, and North America and that in general regional and local air quality concerns might prompt limits on future sulfur emissions. An important recommendation of the 1995 IPCC review was that, given the degree of uncertainty about future climate change, analysts should use the full range of IS92 emissions as input to climate models rather than a single scenario. This is in stark contrast to the actual use of one scenario from the set, the IS92a scenario, as the reference scenario in numerous studies. The review concluded that the mere fact of the IS92a being an intermediate, or central, CO2 emissions scenario at the global level at that time does not equate it with being the most likely scenario. Indeed, the conclusion was that there was no objective basis on which to assign likelihood to any of the scenarios. Furthermore, the IS92a scenario was shown to be “central” for only a few of its salient characteristics such as global population growth, global economic development and global CO2 emissions. In other ways, IS92a was found not to be central with respect to the published literature, particularly in some of its regional assumptions and emissions. The same is the case with the new set of SRES scenarios, as is shown below. The new set of SRES scenarios presented here is designed to respond to the IS92 weaknesses identified in the 1995 IPCC scenario evaluation and to incorporate advances in the state of the art since 1992. As in the case of the IS92 scenario series, also in this new set of SRES scenarios there is no single central case with respect to all characteristics that are relevant for different uses of emissions scenarios and there is no objective way to assign likelihood to any of the scenarios. Hence there is no “best guess” or “business-as-usual” scenario. 4. SRES Writing Team, Approach, and Process IPCC Working Group III (WGIII) appointed the SRES writing team in January 1997. After some adjustments, it eventually came to include more than 50 members from 18 countries. Together they represent a broad range of scientific disciplines, regional backgrounds, and non-governmental organizations. In particular, the team includes representatives of six scenario modeling groups and a number of lead authors from all three earlier IPCC scenario activities: the 1990 and 1992 scenarios and the 1995 scenario evaluation. Their expertise and familiarity with earlier IPCC emissions scenario work assured continuity and allowed the SRES effort to build efficiently upon prior work. The SRES team worked in close collaboration with colleagues on the IPCC Task Group on Climate Scenarios for Impact Assessment (TGCIA) and with colleagues from all three IPCC Working Groups (WGs) of the Third Assessment Report (TAR). Appendix II lists the members of the writing team and their affiliations and Chapter 1 gives a more detailed description of the SRES approach and process. Taking the above audiences and purposes into account, the following more precise specifications for the new SRES scenarios were developed. The new scenarios should: • cover the full range of radiatively important gases, which include direct and indirect GHGs and SO2, • have sufficient spatial resolution to allow regional assessments of climate change in the global context; • cover a wide spectrum of alternative futures to reflect relevant uncertainties and knowledge gaps; • use a variety of models to reflect methodological pluralism and uncertainty; • incorporate input from a wide range of scientific disciplines and expertise from non-academic sources through an open process; • exclude additional initiatives and policies specifically designed to reduce climate change; • cover and describe to the extent possible a range of policies that could affect climate change although they are targeted at other issues, for example, reductions in SO2 emissions to limit acid rain; • cover as much as possible of the range of major underlying driving forces of emission scenarios identified in the open literature; • be transparent with input assumptions, modeling approaches, and results open to external review; • to the extent possible a range of policies that could affect climate change although they are targeted at other issues, for example, reductions in SO₂ emissions to limit acid rain; • cover as much as possible of the range of major underlying driving forces of emission scenarios identified in the open literature; • be transparent with input assumptions, modeling approaches, and results open to external review; • be reproducible - document data and methodology adequately enough to allow other researchers to reproduce the scenarios; and • be internally consistent - the various input assumptions and data of the scenarios are internally consistent to the extent possible. The writing team agreed that the scenario formulation process would consist of five major components: • review of existing scenarios in the literature; • analysis of their main characteristics and driving forces; • formulation of narrative "storylines" to describe alternative futures; • quantification of storylines with different modeling approaches; and • "open" review process of emissions scenarios and their assumptions As is evident from the components of the work program, there was agreement that the process be an open one with no single "official" model and no exclusive "expert teams." In 1997 the IPCC advertised in a number of relevant scientific journals and other publications to solicit wide participation in the process. To facilitate participation and improve the usefulness of the new scenarios, the SRES web site (www.sres.ciesin) was created. In addition, members of the writing team published much of the background work used for formulating SRES scenarios in the peer-reviewed literature^ and on web sites (see Appendix IV). Finally, the revised set of scenarios, the web sites, and the draft of this report have been evaluated through the IPCC expert and government review processes. This^ Alcamo and Nakicenovic, 1998; Alcamo and Swart, 1998; Anderson, 1998; Gaffin, 1998; Gregory, 1998; Gregory and Rogner, 1998; Grübler, 1998; Michaelis, 1998; Morita and Lee, 1998; Nakicenovic et al., 1998; Price et al., 1998; de Vries et al., 2000; Fenhann, 2000; Jiang et al., 2000; Jung et al., 2000; Kram et al., 2000; Mori, 2000; Nakicenovic, 2000; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000; Roehrl and Riahi, 2000; Sankovski et al., 2000. process resulted in numerous changes and revisions of the report. In particular, during the approval process of the Summary for Policymakers (SPM) in March 2000 at the 5th Session of the WG III in Katmandu changes in this SPM were agreed that necessitated some changes in the underlying document, including this Technical Summary. These changes have been implemented in agreement with the Lead Authors. 5. Scenario Literature Review and Analysis The first step in the formulation of the SRES scenarios was the review and the analysis of the published literature and the development of the database with more than 400 emissions scenarios that is accessible through the web site (www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html); 190 of these extend to 2100 and are considered in the comparison with the SRES scenarios in the subsequent Figures. Chapters 2 and 3 give a more detailed description of the literature review and analysis. Figure TS-1 shows the global energy-related and industrial CO₂ emission paths from the database as "spaghetti" curves for the period to 2100 against the background of the historical emissions from 1900 to 1990. These curves are plotted against an index on the vertical axis rather than as absolute values because of the large differences and discrepancies for the values assumed for the base year 1990. These sometimes arise from genuine differences among the scenarios (e.g., different data sources, definitions) and sometimes from different base years assumed in the analysis or from alternative calibrations.^ The differences among the scenarios in the specification of the base year illustrate the large genuine scientific and data uncertainty that surrounds emissions and their main driving forces captured in the scenarios. The literature includes scenarios with additional climate polices, which are sometimes referred to as mitigation or intervention scenarios. There are many ambiguities associated with the classification of emissions scenarios into those that include additional climate initiatives and those that do not. Many cannot be classified in this way on the basis of the information available from the database. Figure TS-1 indicates the ranges of emissions in 2100 from scenarios that apparently include additional climate initiatives (designated as "intervention" emissions range), those that do not ("non-intervention") and those that cannot be assigned to either of these two categories ("non-classified"). This classification is based on the subjective evaluation of the scenarios in the database by the members of the writing team and is explained in Chapter 2. The range of the whole sample of scenarios has significant ^ The 1990 emissions from energy production and use are estimated by Marland et al. (1994) at 5.9 GtC excluding cement production. The 1990 base year values in the scenarios reviewed range from 4.8 (CETA/EMF14, Scenario MAGICO CO₂) to 6.4 GtC (ICAM2/EMF14), see Dowlatabadi et al., 1995; Peck and Teisberg, 1995. Technical Summary 26 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 Figure TS-1: Global energy-related and industrial emissions - historical development and future scenarios, shown as an index (1990 = 1). The median (50th), the 5th, and 95th percentiles of the frequency distribution are also shown. The statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence (e.g., the frequency distribution of the scenarios may be influenced by the use of IS92a as a reference for many subsequent studies). The emissions paths indicate a wide range of future emissions. The range is also large in the base year 1990 and is indicated by an "error" bar. To separate the variation due to base-year specification from different future paths, emissions are indexed for the year 1990, when actual global energy-related and industrial CO₂ emissions were about 6 GtC. The coverage of CO₂ emissions sources may vary across the 256 different scenarios from the database included in the figure. The scenario samples used vary across the time steps (for 1990 256 scenarios, for 2020 and 2030 247, for 2050 211, and for 2100 190 scenarios). Also shown, as vertical bars on the right of the figure, are the ranges of emissions in 2100 of IS92 scenarios and for scenarios from the literature that apparently include additional climate initiatives (designated as "intervention" scenarios emissions range), those that do not ("non-intervention"), and those that cannot be assigned to either of these two categories ("non-classified"). This classification is based on the subjective evaluation of the scenarios in the database by the members of the writing team and is explained in Chapter 2. Data sources: Morita and Lee, 1998a, 1998b; Nakicenovic et al., 1998. overlap with the range of those that cannot be classified and they share virtually the same median (15.7 and 15.2 GtC in 2100, respectively), but the non-classified scenarios do not cover the high part of the range. Also, the range of the scenarios that apparently do not include climate polices (non-intervention) has considerable overlap with the other two ranges (the lower bound of non-intervention scenarios is higher than the lower bounds of the intervention and non-classified scenarios), but with a significantly higher median (of 21.3 GtC in 2100). Historically, gross anthropogenic CO₂ emissions have increased at an average rate of about 1.7% per year since 1900 (Nakicenovic et al., 1996); if that historical trend continues global emissions would double during the next three to four decades and increase more than sixfold by 2100. Many scenarios in the database describe such a development. However, the range is very large around this historical trend so that the highest scenarios envisage about a tenfold increase of global emissions by 2100 as compared with 1990, while the lowest have emissions lower than today. The median and the average of the scenarios lead to about a threefold emissions increase over the same time period or to about 16 GtC by 2100. This is lower than the median of the IS92 set and is lower than the IS92a scenario, often considered as the "central" scenario with respect to some of its tendencies. However, the distribution of emissions is asymmetric. The thin emissions "tail" that extends above the 95th percentile (i.e., between the six- and tenfold increase of emissions by 2100 compared to 1990) includes only a few scenarios. The range of other emissions and the main scenario driving forces (such as population growth, economic development and energy production, conversion and end use) for the scenarios documented in the database is also large and comparable to the variation of CO₂ emissions. Statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence or likelihood of the scenarios. The frequency distribution of the database may be influenced by the use of IS92a as a reference Technical Summary 27 for scenario studies and by the fact that many scenarios in the database share common assumptions prescribed for the purpose of model comparisons with similar scenario driving forces. One of the recommendations of the writing team is that IPCC or a similar international institution should maintain such a database thereby ensuring continuity of knowledge and scientific progress in any future assessments of GHG scenarios. An equivalent database for documenting narrative and other qualitative scenarios is considered to be also very useful for future climate-change assessments. One difficulty encountered in the analysis of the emissions scenarios is that the distinction between climate policies and non-climate policy scenarios and other scenarios appeared to be to a degree arbitrary and often impossible to make. Therefore, the writing team recommends that an effort should be made in the future to develop an appropriate emissions scenario classification scheme. 6. Narrative Scenarios and Storylines Given these large ranges of future emissions and their driving forces, there is an infinite number of possible alternative futures to explore. The SRES scenarios cover a finite, albeit a very wide range, of future emissions. The approach involved the development of a set of four alternative scenario "families" comprising 40 SRES scenarios subdivided into seven scenario groups. During the approval process of the SPM in March 2000 at the 5th Session of WGIII in Katmandu, it was decided to combine two of these groups into one, resulting in six groups. To facilitate the futures to explore. The SRES scenarios cover a finite, albeit a very wide range, of future emissions. The approach involved the development of a set of four alternative scenario "families" comprising 40 SRES scenarios subdivided into seven scenario groups. During the approval process of the SPM in March 2000 at the 5th Session of WGIII in Katmandu, it was decided to combine two of these groups into one, resulting in six groups. To facilitate the process of identifying and describing alternative future developments, each scenario family includes a coherent narrative part called a "storyline," and a number of alternative interpretations and quantifications of each storyline developed by six different modeling approaches. All the interpretations and quantifications of one storyline together are called a scenario family (see also Box 1-1 in Chapter 1 on terminology). Each storyline describes a demographic, social, economic, technological, environmental, and policy future for one of these scenario families. Storylines were formulated by the writing team in a process which identified driving forces, key uncertainties, possible scenario families, and their logic. Within each family different scenarios explore variations of global and regional developments and their implications for GHG and sulfur emissions. Each of these scenarios is consistent with the broad framework of that scenario family as specified by the storyline. Consequently, each scenario family and scenario group is equally sound. Chapters 4 and 5 give a more detailed description of the storylines, their quantifications, and the resultant 40 emissions scenarios. The main reasons for formulating storylines are: • to help the writing team to think more coherently about the complex interplay among scenario driving forces within each and across alternative scenarios; • to make it easier to explain the scenarios to the various user communities by providing a narrative description of alternative futures that goes beyond quantitative scenario features; • to make the scenarios more useful, in particular to analysts who contribute to IPCC WGII and WGIII; the social, political, and technological context described in the scenario storylines is all-important in analyzing the effects of policies either to adapt to climate change or to reduce GHG emissions; and • to provide a guide for additional assumptions to be made in detailed climate impact and mitigation analyses, because at present no single model or scenario can possibly respond to the wide variety of informational and data needs of the different user communities of long-term emissions scenarios. The SRES writing team reached broad agreement that there could be no "best guess" scenarios; that the future is inherently unpredictable and that views will differ on which of the storylines could be more likely. The writing team decided on four storylines: an even number helps to avoid the impression that there is a "central" or "most likely" case. The team wanted more than two in order to help illustrate that the future depends on many different underlying dynamics; the team did not want more than four, as they wanted to avoid complicating the process by too many alternatives. There is no "business-as-usual" scenario. Nor should the scenarios be taken as policy recommendations. The storylines represent the playing out of certain social, economic, technological, and environmental paradigms, which will be viewed positively by some people and negatively by others. The scenarios cover a wide range, but not all possible futures. In particular, it was decided that possible "surprises" would not be considered and that there would be no "disaster" scenarios that are difficult to quantify with the aid of formal models. The titles of the storylines have been kept simple: A1, A2, B1, and B2. There is no particular order among the storylines; Box TS-1 lists them in alphabetic order. Figure TS-2 schematically illustrates the four storylines and scenario families. Each is based on a common specification of the main driving forces. They are shown, very simplistically, as branches of a two-dimensional tree. The two dimensions shown indicate the global-regional and the development-environmental orientation, respectively. In reality, the four scenario families share a space of a much higher dimensionality given the numerous driving forces and other assumptions needed to define any given scenario in a particular modeling approach. The team decided to carry out sensitivity tests within some of the storylines by considering alternative scenarios with different fossil-fuel reserves, rates of economic growth, or rates of technical change within a given scenario family. For example, four scenario "groups" within the A1 scenario family were explored. As mentioned, two of these four groups that explore fossil-intensive developments in the energy system were merged in the SPM. Together with the other three scenario families this results in seven groups of scenarios that share common assumptions of some of the key driving forces and are thus not independent of each other. All four storylines and scenario families describe future worlds that are generally more affluent compared to the current situation. They range from very rapid economic growth and technological change to high levels of environmental protection, from low to high global populations, and from high to low GHG emissions. What is perhaps even more important is that all the storylines describe dynamic changes and transitions in generally different directions. Although they do not include additional climate initiatives, none of them are policy free. As time progresses, the storylines diverge from each other in many of their characteristic features. In this way they allow us to span the relevant range of GHG emissions and different combinations of their main sources. 7. Quantitative Scenarios and Modeling Approaches The storylines were essentially complete by January 1998. After determining the basic features and driving forces for each of the four storylines, the six modeling groups represented on the writing team (on a voluntary basis) began quantifying them. The six modeling groups that quantified the storylines are listed in Box TS-2. Each model quantification of a storyline constitutes a scenario, and all scenarios derived from one storyline constitute a scenario family. The six models are representative of different approaches to modeling emissions scenarios and different integrated assessment (IA) frameworks in the literature and include so-called top-down and bottom-up models. The writing team recommends that IPCC or a similar international institution should assure participation of modeling groups around the world and especially from developing countries in any future scenario development and assessment efforts. Clearly, this would also require resources specifically from one storyline constitute a scenario family. The six models are representative of different approaches to modeling emissions scenarios and different integrated assessment (IA) frameworks in the literature and include so-called top-down and bottom-up models. The writing team recommends that IPCC or a similar international institution should assure participation of modeling groups around the world and especially from developing countries in any future scenario development and assessment efforts. Clearly, this would also require resources specifically directed at assisting modeling groups from developing countries. Indeed, a concerted effort was made to engage modeling groups and experts from developing countries in SRES as a direct response to the recommendations of the last IPCC scenario evaluation (Alcamo et al., 1995). The six models have different regional aggregations. The writing team decided to group the various global regions into four “macro-regions” common to all the different regional aggregations across the six models. Box TS-3 indicates that the four macro-regions (see Appendix III) are broadly consistent with the allocation of countries in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1992), although the correspondence is not exact because of changes in the countries listed in Annex I of UNFCCC (1997). All the qualitative and quantitative features of scenarios belonging to the same family were set to conform to the corresponding features of the underlying storyline. Together, 26 scenarios were “harmonized” to share agreed common assumptions about global population and GDP (gross domestic product) development (a few that also share common population, GDP, and final energy trajectories at the level of the four SRES macro-regions are called “fully harmonized,” see Section 4.1. in Chapter 4). Thus, the harmonized scenarios are not independent within each of the four families. However, scenarios within each family vary quite substantially in such characteristics as the assumptions about availability of fossil-fuel resources, the rate of energy-efficiency improvements, the extent of renewable-energy development, and, hence, resultant GHG emissions. Thus, after the modeling teams had quantified the key driving forces and made an effort to harmonize them with the storylines by adjusting control parameters, there still remained diversity in the assumptions about the driving forces and in the resultant emissions (see Chapter 4). The remaining 14 scenarios adopted alternative interpretations of the four scenario storylines to explore additional scenario uncertainties beyond differences in methodological approaches, such as different rates of economic growth and variations in population projections. These variations reflect the “modeling teams’ choice” of alternative but plausible global and regional development compared to “harmonized” scenarios and also stem from the differences in the underlying modeling approaches. Each of the 40 quantifications of one of the storylines constitutes a SRES scenario. This approach generated a large variation and richness in different scenario quantifications, often with overlapping ranges of main driving forces and GHG emissions across the four families. In addition, the A1 scenario family branched out into four distinct scenario groups. They are based on four alternative technological developments in future energy systems, from carbon-intensive development to decarbonization. Similar storyline variations were considered for other scenario families, but they did not result in genuine scenario groupings within the respective families. This further increased richness in different GHG and SO2 emissions paths, because this variation in the structure of the future energy systems in itself resulted in a range of emissions almost as large as that generated through the variation of other main driving forces such as population and economic development. It should be noted that future energy systems variations could be applied to the other storylines, but they may evolve differently from those in A1. They have been introduced into the A1 storyline because of its “high growth with high technology” nature, where differences in alternative technology developments translate into large differences in future GHG emission levels. Altogether the 40 SRES scenarios fall into seven groups: the three scenario families, A2, B1, and B2, plus four groups within the A1 scenario. In the SPM, two of these groups, the coal and gas and oil intensive groups, were merged into one fossil-intensive group, leading to six groups. As in the case of the storylines, no single scenario – whether it represents a modeler’s choice or harmonized assumptions – was treated as being more or less “probable” than the others belonging to the same family. Initially, for each storyline, one modeling group was given principal responsibility, and the quantification produced by that group is referred to as the “marker” scenario for that storyline. The four preliminary marker scenarios were used in 1998 to solicit comments during the “open process” and as input for climate modelers in accordance with a decision of the IPCC Bureau in 1998. The four marker scenarios were posted on the SRES web site (www.sres.ciesin) in June 1998 and were subsequently revised to account for comments and suggestions received through this open scenario review process that lasted until January 1999. In addition to many revisions, the marker scenarios were also harmonized along with the other 26 scenarios that adopted common assumptions for the main driving forces within the four respective families. The choice of the markers was based on extensive discussion of: • range of emissions across all of marker scenarios; • which of the initial quantifications (by the modelers) reflected the storyline best; • preference of some of the modeling teams and features of specific models; • use of four different models for the four markers. As a result the markers were not intended to be the median or mean scenarios from their respective families. Indeed, in general it proved impossible to develop scenarios in which all relevant characteristics match mean or median values. Thus, marker scenarios are no more or less likely than any other scenarios, but are those scenarios considered by the SRES writing team as illustrative of a particular storyline. These scenarios have received the closest scrutiny of the entire writing team and via the SRES open process compared to other scenario quantifications. The marker scenarios are also those SRES scenarios that have been most intensively tested in terms of reproducibility. As a rule, different modeling teams have attempted to replicate the model quantification of marker scenarios. Available time and resources have not allowed a similar exercise to be conducted for all SRES scenarios, although some effort was devoted to reproduce the four scenario groups (merged into three in the SPM) that constitute different interpretations of the A1 storyline with different models. Additional scenarios using the same harmonized assumptions as the marker scenarios developed by different modeling teams and other scenarios that give alternative quantitative interpretations of the four storylines constitute the final set of 40 SRES scenarios. This also means that the 40 scenarios are not independent of each other as they are all based on four storylines and subdivided into seven scenario groups (after merging two groups, six in the SPM) that share many common assumptions. In addition to many revisions of the marker and other harmonized scenarios, other alternative scenarios were formulated by the six modeling teams within each of the four the final set of 40 SRES scenarios. This also means that the 40 scenarios are not independent of each other as they are all based on four storylines and subdivided into seven scenario groups (after merging two groups, six in the SPM) that share many common assumptions. In addition to many revisions of the marker and other harmonized scenarios, other alternative scenarios were formulated by the six modeling teams within each of the four scenario families. The result is a more complete, refined set of 40 emissions scenarios that reflects the broad spectrum of modeling approaches and regional perspectives. However, differences in modeling approaches have meant that not all of the scenarios provide estimates for all the direct and indirect GHG emissions for all the sources and sectors. In addition to the marker scenarios, two scenarios were also selected in the SPM to illustrate the alternative energy systems developments in the A1 family. Hence, this report has an illustrative scenario for each of the six scenario groups in the SPM. The four SRES marker scenarios and the two illustrative scenarios (selected in the SPM) cover all the relevant gas species and emission categories comprehensively and thus constitute the smallest set of independent and fully documented SRES scenarios. The scenario groups and cumulative emissions categories were developed as the smallest subsets of SRES scenarios that capture the range of uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions. Together, the four markers and the two additional illustrative scenarios selected in the SPM from the A1 scenario groups constitute the set of SRES scenarios that reflects the uncertainty ranges in the emissions and their driving forces. Furthermore, the writing team recommends that, to the extent possible, these scenarios, but at least the four markers and the two additional illustrative scenarios selected in the SPM, should always be used together, and that, in general, no individual scenario should be singled out for any purpose. Multiple baselines and overlapping emissions ranges have important implications for making policy analysis, e.g., similar policies might have different impacts in different scenarios. Combination of policies might shape the future development in the direction of certain scenarios. 8. Main Scenario Driving Forces Based on the Literature The scenarios cover a wide range of driving forces, from demographic to social and economic developments. This section summarizes the assumptions on important scenario drivers. For simplicity, only three of these are presented separately here following the exposition in Chapters 2, 3, and 4. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind that the future evolution of these and other main driving forces is interrelated in the SRES scenarios (see Tables TS-2 and TS-3 for a summary of the ranges of the main driving forces across the scenario groups in 2100). The SRES scenarios span a wide range of assumptions for the most salient scenario drivers, and thus reflect the uncertainty of the future. Evidently, views of the future are a time-specific phenomenon, and this report and its scenarios are no exception. However, it is important to emphasize that this is an explicit part of the Terms of Reference for the SRES writing team – to reflect a range of views, based on current knowledge and the most recently available literature (see Appendix I). The scenario quantification results reflect well the literature range, except for extreme scenarios. 8.1. Population Projections Three different population trajectories were chosen for SRES scenarios to reflect future demographic uncertainties based on published population projections (Lutz, 1996; UN, 1998; see Chapter 3). The population projections are exogenous input to all the models used to develop the SRES scenarios. The models used do not develop population from other assumptions within the model. Figure TS-3 shows the three population projections in comparison with the three population projections used in the IS92 scenarios. Global population ranges between seven and 15 billion people by 2100 across the scenarios, depending on the rate and extent of the demographic transition. The insert in Figure TS-3 shows population development in the developed (industrialized) regions. The range of future populations is smaller than in the IS92 scenarios, particularly in the developed (industrialized) regions, for which the lowest scenario indicates a very modest population decline compared to IS92 scenarios. The greatest uncertainty about future growth lies in the developing regions across all scenarios in the literature. An equally pervasive trend across all scenarios is urbanization (see Chapter 3). Altogether, three different population projections were used in the 26 harmonized scenarios. Other scenarios explored alternative population projections consistent with the storylines. The lowest population trajectory is assumed for the A1 and B1 scenario families and is based on the low population projection in Lutz (1996), which combines low fertility with low mortality and central migration rate assumptions. After peaking at 8.7 billion in the middle of the 21st century, world population declines to 7.1 billion by the year 2100. As discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, this population development is somewhat higher than the previous low population used in the IS92 scenarios. The B2 scenario family is based on the UN median 1998 population projection (UN, 1998). The global population increases to about 9.4 billion people by 2050 and to about 10.4 billion by 2100. This population scenario is characteristic of recent median global population projections, which describe a continuation of historical trends toward a completion of the demographic transition that would lead to a constant global population, and is consistent with recent faster fertility declines in the world together with declining mortality rates. Hence, the population is somewhat lower than previous UN median projections, as used in the IS92 scenarios. This median scenario projects very low population growth in today's industrialized countries, with stabilization of growth in Asia in the second half of the 21st century and in the rest of the world towards the end of the 21st century. The A2 scenario family is based on the high population growth of 15 billion by 2100 reported in Lutz (1996), which assumes a significant decline in fertility for most regions and a stabilization at above replacement levels. It falls below the long-term 1998 UN high projection of 18 billion. It is also lower than in the highest IS92 scenario (17.6 billion by 2100). Nevertheless, this scenario represents very high population growth compared with that in current demographic literature. Some demographers attach a probability of more than 90% that actual population will be lower than the trajectory adopted in the A2 scenario family (Lutz et al., 1997). A more detailed discussion of the population projections used to quantify the four scenario families is given in Chapters 3 and 4. 8.2. Economic Development The SRES scenarios span a wide range of future levels of economic activity (expressed in gross world product). The A1 scenario family with a "harmonized" gross world product of US$529 trillion (all values in 1990 US dollars unless otherwise indicated) in 2100 delineates the SRES upper bound, whereas B2 with "harmonized" US$235 trillion in 2100 represents its lower bound. The range of gross world product across all scenarios is even higher, from US$197 to 550 by 2100. Although the SRES scenarios span a wide range, still lower and higher gross world product levels can be found in the literature (see Chapters 2, 3, and 4). Uncertainties in future gross world product levels are governed by the pace of future productivity growth and population growth, especially in developing regions. Different assumptions on conditions and possibilities for development "catch-up" and for narrowing per capita income gaps in particular explain the wide range in projected future gross world product levels. Given a qualitatively negative relationship between population growth and per capita income growth discussed in 19.5 16.1 18.0 22.6 * The two additional illustrative scenarios A1FI and A1T share similar assumptions with A1B. See also Appendix VII for more details. Possibilities for development “catch-up” and for narrowing per capita income gaps in particular explain the wide range in projected future gross world product levels. Given a qualitatively negative relationship between population growth and per capita income growth discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, uncertainties in future population growth rates tend to narrow the range of associated gross world product projections. High population growth would, ceteris paribus, lower per capita income growth, whereas low population growth would tend to increase it. This relationship is evident in empiric data – high per capita income countries are generally also those that have completed their demographic transition. The affluent live long and generally have few children. (Exceptions are some countries with small populations, high birth rates, and significant income from commodity exports.) This relationship between affluence and longevity again identifies development as one of the most important indicators of human well being. Yet even assuming this relationship holds for an extended time into the future, its quantification is subject to considerable theoretic and empiric uncertainties (Alcamo et al., 1995). Two of the SRES scenario families, A1 and B1, explicitly explore alternative pathways to gradually close existing income gaps. As a reflection of uncertainty, development catch-up diverges in terms of geographically distinct economic growth patterns across the four SRES scenario families. Table TS-1 summarizes per capita income for SRES and IS92 scenarios for the four SRES world regions. SRES scenarios indicate a smaller difference between the now industrialized and developing countries compared with the IS92 scenarios. This tendency toward a substantially narrower income “gap” compared with the IS92 scenarios overcomes one of the major shortcomings of the previous IPCC scenarios cited in the literature (Parikh, 1992). 8.3. Structural and Technological Change In this brief summary of the SRES scenarios, structural and technological changes are illustrated by using energy and land use as examples. These examples are characteristic for the driving forces of emissions because the energy system and land use are the major sources of GHG and sulfur emission. Technical Summary Renewables/Nuclear Figure TS-4: Global primary energy structure, shares (%) of oil and gas, coal, and non-fossil (zero-carbon) energy sources – historical development from 1850 to 1990 and in SRES scenarios. Each corner of the triangle corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which all primary energy is supplied by a single source – oil and gas on the top, coal to the left, and non-fossil sources (renewables and nuclear) to the right. Constant market shares of these energies are denoted by their respective isoshare lines. Historical data from 1850 to 1990 are based on Nakicenovic et al. (1998). For 1990 to 2100, alternative trajectories show the changes in the energy systems structures across SRES scenarios. They are grouped by shaded areas for the scenario families A1B, A2, B1, and B2 with respective markers shown as lines. In addition, the four scenario groups within the A1 family A1B, A1C, A1G, and A1T, which explore different technological developments in the energy systems, are shaded individually. In the SPM, A1C and A1G are combined into one fossil-intensive group A1FI. For comparison the IS92 scenario series are also shown, clustering along two trajectories (IS92c,d and IS92a,b,e,f). For model results that do not include non-commercial energies, the corresponding estimates from the emulations of the various marker scenarios by the MESSAGE model were added to the original model outputs. Chapter 4 gives a more detailed treatment of the full range of emissions driving forces across the SRES scenarios. Figure TS-4 illustrates that the change of world primary energy structure diverges over time. It shows the contributions of individual primary energy sources – the percentage supplied by coal, that by oil and gas, and that by all non-fossil sources taken together (for simplicity of presentation and because not all models distinguish between renewables and nuclear energy). Each corner of the triangle corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which all primary energy is supplied by a single source – oil and gas at the top, coal to the left, and non-fossil sources (renewables and nuclear) to the right. Historically, the primary energy structure has evolved clockwise according to the two “grand transitions” (discussed in Chapter 3) that are shown by the two segments of the “thick black” curve. From 1850 to 1920 the first transition can be characterized as the substitution of traditional (non-fossil) energy sources by coal. The share of coal increased from 20% to about 70%, while the share of non-fossils declined from 80% to about 20%. The second transition, from 1920 to 1990, can be characterized as the replacement of coal by oil and gas (while the share of non-fossils remained essentially constant). The share of oil and gas increased to about 50% and the share of coal declined to about 30%. Figure TS-4 gives an overview of the divergent evolution of global primary energy structures between 1990 and 2100, regrouped into their respective scenario families and four A1 scenarios groups (three in the SPM) that explore different technological developments in the energy systems. The SRES scenarios cover a wider range of energy structures than the previous IS92 scenario series, which reflects advances in knowledge on the uncertainty ranges of future fossil resource availability and technological change. In a clockwise direction, A1B, A1T, and B1 scenario groups map the structural transitions toward higher shares of non-fossil energy in the future, which almost closes the historical “loop” that started in 1850. The B2 scenarios indicate a more “moderate” direction of change with about half of the energy coming from non-fossil sources and the other half shared by coal on one side and oil and gas on the other. Finally, the A2 scenario group marks a stark transition back to coal. Shares of oil and gas decline while non-fossils increase moderately. What is perhaps more significant than the diverging developments in these three marker scenarios is that the whole set of 40 scenarios covers virtually all possible directions of change, from high shares of oil and gas to high shares of coal and non-fossils. In particular, the A1 scenario family covers basically the same range of structural change as all the other scenarios together. In contrast, the IS92 scenarios cluster into two groups, one of which contains IS92c and IS92d and the other the four others. In all of these the share of oil and gas declines, and the main structural change occurs between coal on the one hand and non-fossils on the other. This divergent nature in the structural change of the energy system and in the underlying technological base of the SRES results in a wide span of future GHG and sulfur emissions. 20% 40% Cropland + Energy Biomass 20% Other (incl. grasslands) Figure TS-5: Global land-use patterns, shares (%) of croplands and energy biomass, forests, and other categories including grasslands – historical development from 1970 to 1990 (based on B1-IMAGE) and in SRES scenarios. As for the energy triangle in Figure 6-3, each corner corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which land use is dedicated to a much greater extent than today to one category – 60% to cropland and energy biomass at the top, 80% to forests to the left, and 80% to other categories (including grasslands) to the right. Constant shares in total land area of cropland and energy biomass, forests, and other categories are denoted by their respective isoshare lines. For 1990 to 2100, alternative trajectories are shown for the SRES scenarios. The three marker scenarios A1B, B1, and B2 are shown as thick colored lines, and other SRES scenarios as thin colored lines. The ASF model used to develop the A2 marker scenario projects only land-use change related GHG emissions. Comparable data on land cover changes are therefore not available. The trajectories appear to be largely model specific and illustrate the different views and interpretations of future land-use patterns across the scenarios (e.g. the scenario trajectories on the right that illustrate larger increases in grasslands and decreases in cropland are MiniCAM results). Technical Summary Figure TS-5 illustrates that land-use patterns are also diverging over time. It shows the main land-use categories – the percentages of total land area use that constitute the forests, the joint shares of cropland and energy biomass, and all the other categories including grasslands. As for the energy triangle in Figure TS-4, in Figure TS-5 each corner corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which land use is dedicated to a much greater extent than today to two of the three land-use categories – 40% to cropland and energy biomass and 20% to forests at the top, 60% to forests and 40% to other categories (including grasslands) to the left, and 80% to other categories (including grasslands) to the right. In most scenarios, the current trend of shrinking forests is eventually reversed because of slower population growth and increased agricultural productivity. Reversals of deforestation trends are strongest in the B1 and A1 families. In the B1 family pasture lands decrease significantly because of increased productivity in livestock management and dietary shifts away from meat, thus illustrating the importance of both technological and social developments. The main driving forces for land-use changes are related to increasing demands for food because of a growing population and changing diets. In addition, numerous other social, economic, and institutional factors govern land-use changes such as deforestation, expansion of cropland areas, or their reconversion back to forest cover (see Chapter 3). Global food production can be increased, either through intensification (by multi-cropping, raising cropping intensity, applying fertilizers, new seeds, improved farming technology) or through land expansion (cultivating land, converting land-use changes are related to increasing demands for food because of a growing population and changing diets. In addition, numerous other social, economic, and institutional factors govern land-use changes such as deforestation, expansion of cropland areas, or their reconversion back to forest cover (see Chapter 3). Global food production can be increased, either through intensification (by multi-cropping, raising cropping intensity, applying fertilizers, new seeds, improved farming technology) or through land expansion (cultivating land, converting forests). Especially in developing countries, there are many examples of the potential to intensify food production in a more or less ecological way (e.g. multi-cropping; agroforestry) that may not lead to higher GHG emissions. Different assumptions on these processes translate into alternative scenarios of future land-use changes and GHG emissions, most notably CO2, methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O). A distinguishing characteristic of several models (e.g., AIM, IMAGE, MARIA, and MiniCAM) used in SRES is the explicit modeling of land-use changes caused by expanding biomass uses and hence exploration of possible land-use conflicts between energy and agricultural sectors. The corresponding scenarios of land-use changes are illustrated in Figure TS-5 for all SRES scenarios. In some contrast to the structural changes in energy systems shown in Figure TS-4, different land-use scenarios in Figure TS-5 appear to be rather model specific, following the general trends as indicated by the respective marker scenario developed with a particular model. 9. Greenhouse Gases and Sulfur Emissions The SRES scenarios generally cover the full range of GHG and sulfur emissions consistent with the storylines and the underlying range of driving forces from studies in the literature, as documented in the SRES database. This section summarizes the emissions of CO2, CH4, and SO2. For simplicity, only these three important gases are presented separately, following the more detailed exposition in Chapter 5 (see Table TS-4 for a summary of the ranges of emissions across the scenario groups). 9.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions 9.1.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions and Their Driving Forces Figure TS-6 illustrates the CO2 emissions across the SRES scenarios in relation to each of the three main scenario driving forces – global population, gross world product and primary energy requirements. The general tendencies across the driving forces are consistent with the underlying literature. All else being equal, the higher future global populations, higher gross world product, or higher primary energy requirements would be associated with higher emissions. However, it is important to note that the range of emissions is large across the whole range of driving forces considered in SRES, indicating the magnitude of the uncertainty associated with emission scenarios. For instance, emissions can range widely for any given level of future population (e.g. between 5 to 20 GtC in case of a low population scenario of seven billion by 2100). Conversely, emissions in the range of 20 GtC are possible with global population levels ranging from seven to 15 billion by 2100. While the SRES scenarios do not map all possibilities, they do indicate general tendencies, with an uncertainty range consistent with the underlying literature. This emphasizes an important SRES conclusion: alternative combinations of main scenario driving forces can lead to similar levels of GHGs emissions by the end of the 21st century. Alternatively, similar future worlds with respect to socio-economic developments can result in wide differences in future GHGs emissions, primarily as a result of alternative technological developments. This suggests that technology is at least as important a driving force of future GHG emissions as population and economic development across the set of 40 SRES scenarios. 9.1.2. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Energy, Industry, and Land Use Figure TS-7 illustrates the range of CO2 emissions of the SRES scenarios against the background of all the IS92 scenarios and other emissions scenarios from the literature documented in the SRES scenario database (blue shaded area). The range of future emissions is very large so that the highest scenarios envisage a tenfold increase of global emissions by 2100 while the lowest have emissions lower than today. The literature includes scenarios with additional climate initiatives and policies, which are also referred to as mitigation or intervention scenarios. As shown in Chapter 2, many ambiguities are associated with the classification of emissions scenarios into those that include additional climate initiatives and those that do not. Many cannot be classified in this way on the basis of the information available from the SRES scenario database and the published literature. Figure TS-7a indicates the ranges of emissions in 2100 from scenarios that apparently include additional climate initiatives (designated as “intervention” emissions range), those that do not (“non-intervention”), and those that cannot be assigned to either of these two categories (“non-classified”). This classification is based on the subjective evaluation of the scenarios in the database by the members of the writing team and is explained in Section 5 and in Chapter 2 in greater detail. It should be noted that the distributions of emissions of scenarios from the literature is asymmetric (see the emissions histogram in Figure 6-5 in Chapter 6) and that the thin tail that extends above 30 GtC by 2100 includes only a few scenarios. Figure TS-7a shows the ranges of emissions of the four families (vertical bars next to each of the four marker scenarios), which illustrate that the scenario groups by themselves cover a large portion of the overall scenario distribution. Together, of emissions of scenarios from the literature is asymmetric (see the emissions histogram in Figure 6-5 in Chapter 6) and that the thin tail that extends above 30 GtC by 2100 includes only a few scenarios. Figure TS-7a shows the ranges of emissions of the four families (vertical bars next to each of the four marker scenarios), which illustrate that the scenario groups by themselves cover a large portion of the overall scenario distribution. Together, they cover much of the range of future emissions, both with respect to the scenarios in the literature and all SRES scenarios. Adding all other scenarios increases the covered range. For example, the SRES scenarios span jointly from the 95th percentile to just above the 5th percentile of the distribution of energy and industry emissions scenarios from the literature. This illustrates again that they only exclude the most extreme emissions scenarios found in the literature that are situated out in the tails of the distribution. What is perhaps more important is that each of the four scenario families covers a substantial part of this distribution. This leads to a substantial overlap in the emissions ranges of the four scenario families. In other words, a similar quantification of driving forces can lead to a wide range of future emissions and a given level of future emissions can result from different combinations of driving forces. This result is of fundamental importance for the assessments of climate change impacts and possible mitigation and adaptation strategies. Thus, it warrants some further discussion. Another interpretation is that a given combination of the main driving forces, such as the population and economic growth, is not sufficient to determine the future emissions paths. Different modeling approaches and different specifications of other scenario assumptions overshadow the influence of the main driving forces. A particular combination of driving forces, such as specified in the A1 scenario family, is associated with a whole range of possible emission paths from energy and industry. The nature of climate change impacts and adaptation and mitigation strategies would be fundamentally different depending on whether emissions are high or low, given a particular combination of scenario driving forces. Thus, the implication is that the whole range needs to be considered in the assessments of climate change, from high emissions and driving forces to low ones. The A1 scenario family explored variations in energy systems most explicitly and hence covers the largest part of the scenario distribution shown in Figure TS-7a, from the 95th to just above the 10th percentile. The A1 scenario family includes four groups of scenarios that explore different structures of future energy systems, from carbon-intensive development paths to high rates of decarbonization. Two of the fossil-intensive groups were merged into one group, as in SPM, resulting in three A1 groups. All A1 groups otherwise share the same assumptions about the main driving forces (see Chapter 6 and for further detail Chapters 4 and 5). This indicates that different structures of the energy system can lead to basically the same variation in future emissions as generated by different combinations of the other main driving forces – population, economic activities, and energy consumption levels. The implication is that decarbonization of energy systems – the shift from carbon-intensive to less carbon-intensive and carbon-free sources of energy – is of similar importance in determining the future emissions paths as other driving forces. Sustained decarbonization requires the development and successful diffusion of new technologies. Thus investments in new technologies during the coming decades might have the same order of influence on future emissions as population growth, economic development, and levels of energy consumption taken together. Figure TS-7b shows that CO2 emissions from deforestation peak in many SRES scenarios after several decades and subsequently gradually decline. This pattern is consistent with many scenarios in the literature and can be associated with slowing population growth and increasing agricultural productivity. These allow a reversal of current deforestation trends, leading to eventual CO2 sequestration. Emissions decline fastest in the B1 family. Only in the A2 family do net anthropogenic CO2 emissions from land use remain positive through to 2100. As was the case for energy-related emissions, CO2 emissions related to land-use in the A1 family cover the widest range. The range of land-use emissions across the IS92 scenarios is narrower in comparison. 9.1.3. Scenario Groups and Four Categories of Cumulative Emissions This comparison of SRES scenario characteristics implies that similar future emissions can result from very different socio-economic developments, and similar developments of driving forces can result in different future emissions. Uncertainties in the future development of key emission driving forces create large uncertainties in future emissions even within the same socio-economic development paths. Therefore, emissions from each scenario family overlap substantially with emissions from other scenario families. To facilitate comparisons of emissions and their driving forces across the scenarios, the writing team grouped them into four categories of cumulative emissions between 1990 and 2100. However, any categorization of scenarios based on emissions of multiple gases is quite difficult. Figure TS-8 shows total CO2 emissions from all sources (from Figures TS-7a and b). The 40 scenarios are shown aggregated into six groups, three for the A1 family (that result by merging the two fossil-intensive groups A1C and A1G into one A1FI group as in the SPM). The scenarios that remain outside the six groups adopted alternative interpretations of the four scenario storylines. The emission trajectories ("bands") of the scenario groups display different dynamics, from monotonic increases to non-linear trajectories in which there is a subsequent decline from a maximum. The dynamics of the individual scenarios are also different across gases, sectors, or world regions. This particularly diminishes the significance of focusing scenario categorization on any given year, such as 2100. In addition, all gases that contribute to radiative forcing should be considered, but methods of combining gases such as the use of global warming potentials (GWPs) are appropriate only for near-term GHG inventories. In particular, in the IPCC WGI Second Assessment Report (SAR) GWPs are calculated for constant concentrations (Houghton et al., 1996). In long-term scenarios, concentrations may change significantly, as do GWP values. It is unclear how to apply GWPs to long-term scenarios in a meaningful manner. In addition, the GWP approach is not applicable to gases such as SO2 and ozone precursors. In light of these difficulties, the classification approach presented here uses cumulative CO2 emissions between 1990 and 2100. CO2 is the dominant GHG and cumulative CO2 emissions are expected to be roughly proportional to CO2 radiative forcing over the time scale of a century. According to the IPCC SAR, "any eventual stabilized concentration is governed more by the accumulated anthropogenic CO2 emissions from now until the time of stabilization than by the way emissions change over the period" (Houghton et al., 1996). Therefore, the writing team also grouped the scenarios according to their cumulative emissions. Cumulative SRES carbon emissions through to 2100 range from less than 800 GtC to more than 2500 GtC with a median of about 1500 GtC. To represent this range, the scenario classification uses four intervals as follows: less than 1100 GtC (low), between 1100 and 1450 GtC (medium-low), between 1450 and 1800 GtC (medium-high), and greater than 1800 GtC (high). Each CO2 interval contains multiple scenarios and scenarios from more than one family. Each category also includes one of the four marker scenarios. Figure TS-9 shows how cumulative carbon emissions from the 40 SRES scenarios fit within the selected emission intervals (see Chapter 4 for further details). The 40 SRES scenarios extend the IS92 range toward higher emissions (SRES maximum of 2570 GtC compared to 2140 GtC for IS92), but not toward lower emissions. The lower bound for both scenario sets is just below 800 GtC. This categorization can guide comparisons using either scenarios with different driving forces yet similar emissions, or scenarios with similar driving forces but different emissions. This characteristic of SRES scenarios also has very important implications for the assessment of climate-change impacts, mitigation, and adaptation strategies. Two future worlds with fundamentally different characteristic features, such as 2140 GtC for IS92), but not toward lower emissions. The lower bound for both scenario sets is just below 800 GtC. This categorization can guide comparisons using either scenarios with different driving forces yet similar emissions, or scenarios with similar driving forces but different emissions. This characteristic of SRES scenarios also has very important implications for the assessment of climate-change impacts, mitigation, and adaptation strategies. Two future worlds with fundamentally different characteristic features, such as the A1B and B2 marker scenarios, also have different cumulative CO2 emissions and radiative forcing, but very similar CO2 emissions in 2100. In contrast, scenarios that are in the same category of cumulative emissions can have fundamentally different driving forces and different CO2 emissions in 2100, but very similar cumulative emissions and radiative forcing. Presumably, adverse impacts and effective adaptation measures would vary among the scenarios from different families that share similar cumulative emissions but have different demographic, socio-economic, and technological driving forces. This is another reason for considering the entire range of emissions in future assessments of climate change. 9.2. Other Greenhouse Gases Of the GHGs, CO2 is the main contributor to anthropogenic radiative forcing because of changes in concentrations from pre-industrial times. According to Houghton et al. (1996) well-mixed GHGs (CO2, CH4, N2O, and the halocarbons) induced additional radiative forcing of around 2.5 W/m^2 on a global and annually averaged basis. CO2 accounted for 60% of the total, which indicates that the other GHGs are significant as well. Whereas CO2 emissions are by-and-large attributable to two major sources, energy consumption and land-use change, other emissions arise from many different sources and a large number of sectors and applications (e.g. see Table 5-3 in Chapter 5). The SRES emissions scenarios also have different emissions for other GHGs and chemically active species such as CO, NOx, nitrogen oxides, and NMVOCs. The uncertainties that surround the emissions sources of the other GHGs, and the more complex set of driving forces behind them are considerable and unresolved. Therefore, the models and approaches employed for the SRES analyses cannot produce unambiguous and generally approved estimates for different sources and world regions over a century. Keeping these caveats above in mind, Table TS-4 (see later) shows the emissions of all relevant direct and indirect GHGs for the four marker scenarios and, in brackets, the range of the other scenarios in the same family (or scenario groups for the A1 family). Chapter 5 gives further detail about the full range of GHG emissions across the SRES scenarios. The emissions of other gases follow dynamic patterns much like those shown in Figures TS-7 and TS-8 for carbon dioxide emissions. A summary of GHG emissions is given in Chapter 6 and further details in Chapter 5. 9.2.1. Methane Emissions Anthropogenic CH4 emissions arise from a variety of activities, dominated by biologic processes, each associated with considerable uncertainty. The future CH4 emissions in the scenarios depend in part on the consumption of fossil fuels, adjusted for assumed changes in technology and operational practices, but more strongly on scenario-specific, regional demographic and affluence developments, together with assumptions on preferred diets and agricultural practices. The writing team recommends further research into the sources and modeling approaches to capture large uncertainties surrounding future CH4 emissions. The resultant CH4 emission trajectories for the four SRES scenario families portray complex patterns (as displayed in Figure 5-5 in Chapter 5). For example, the emissions in A2 and B2 marker scenarios increase throughout the whole time horizon to the year 2100. Increases are most pronounced in the high population A2 scenarios where emissions rise to between 549 and 1069 (A2 marker: 900) MtCH4 by 2100, compared to 310 MtCH4 in 1990. The emissions range by 2100 in the B2 scenarios is between 465 and 613 (B2 marker: 600) MtCH4. In the A1B and B1 marker scenarios, the CH4 emissions level off and subsequently decline sooner or later in the 21st century. This phenomenon is most pronounced in the A1B marker, in which the fastest growth in the first few decades is followed by the steepest decline; the 2100 level ends up slightly below the current emission of 310 MtCH4. The range of emissions in Table TS-4 indicates that alternative developments in energy technologies and resources could yield a higher range in CH4 emissions compared to the “balanced” technology A1B scenario group that includes the A1B marker scenario discussed above. In the fossil-intensive A1FI group (combined from A1C and A1G groups, as in the SPM), CH4 emissions could reach some 735 MtCH4 by 2100, whereas in the post-fossil A1T scenario group emissions are correspondingly lower (some 300 MtCH4 in 2100). Interestingly, the A1 scenarios generally have comparatively low CH4 emissions from non-energy sources because of a combination of low population growth and rapid advances in agricultural productivity. Hence the SRES scenarios extend the uncertainty range of the IS92 scenario series somewhat toward lower emissions. However, both scenario sets indicate an upper bound of emissions of some 1000 MtCH4 by 2100. 9.2.2. Nitrous Oxide Emissions Even more than for CH4, the assumed future food supply will be a key determinant of future emissions. Size, age structure, and regional spread of the global population will be reflected in the emission trajectories, together with assumptions on diets and improvements in agricultural practices. Other things being equal, N2O emissions are generally highest in the high population scenario family A2. Importantly, as the largest anthropogenic source of N2O (cultivated soils) is already very uncertain in the base year, all future emission trajectories are affected by large uncertainties, especially if calculated with different models as is the case in this SRES report. Therefore, the writing team recommends further research into the sources and modeling of long-term N2O emissions. Uncertainty ranges are correspondingly large, and are sometimes asymmetric. For example, while the range in 2100 reported in all A1 scenarios is between 5 and 10 MtN (7 MtN in the A1B marker), the A2 marker reports 17 MtN in 2100. Other A2 scenarios report emissions that fall within the range reported for A1 (from 8 to 19 MtN in 2100). Thus, different model representations of processes that lead to N2O emissions and uncertainties in source strength can outweigh easily any underlying differences between individual scenarios in terms of population growth, economic development, etc. Different assumptions with respect to future crop productivity, agricultural practices, and associated emission factors, especially in the very populous regions of the world, explain the very different global emission levels even for otherwise shared main scenario drivers. Hence, the SRES scenarios extend the uncertainty range of future emissions significantly toward higher emissions (4.8 to 20.2 MtN by 2100 in SRES compared to 5.4 to 10.8 MtN in the IS92 scenarios. (Note that natural sources are excluded in this comparison.) 9.2.3. Halocarbons and Halogenated Compounds The emissions of halocarbons (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), halons, methylbromide, and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)) and other halogenated compounds (polyfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)) across the SRES scenarios are described in detail on a substance-by-substance basis in Chapter 5 and Fenhann (2000). However, none of the six SRES models has its own projections for emissions of ozone depleting substances (ODSs), their detailed driving forces, and their substitutes. Hence, a different approach for scenario generation was adopted. First, for ODSs, an external scenario, the Montreal Protocol scenario (A3, maximum allowed production) from WMO/UNEP (1998) is used as direct input to SRES. In this scenario corresponding emissions decline to zero by 2100 as a result of international environmental agreements, a development not yet anticipated in some of the IS92 scenarios (Pepper et al., 1992). For the other gas species, most notably for CFC and HCFC substitutes, a simple methodology of developing different emission trajectories consistent with aggregate SRES scenario driving force assumptions (population, GDP, etc.) was developed. Scenarios are further differentiated as to assumed future technological change and control rates for these gases, varied across the scenarios consistently with the interpretation of the SRES storylines presented in Chapter 4 as well as the most recent literature. Second, different assumptions about CFC applications as well as substitute candidates were developed. These were initially based on Kroeze and Reijnders (1992) and information given in Midgley and McCulloch (1999), but updated with the most recent information from the Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs (WMO/UNEP, 1999). An important assumption, on the basis of the latest information from the industry, is that relatively few Montreal gases will be replaced fully by HFCs. Current indications are that substitution rates of CFCs by HFCs will be less than 50% (McCulloch and Midgley, 1998). In Fenhann (2000) a further technological development is assumed that would result in about 25% of the CFCs ultimately being substituted by HFCs (see Table 5-9 in Chapter 5). This low percentage not only reflects the introduction of non-HFC substitutes, but also the notion that smaller amounts of halocarbons will be used in many applications when changing to HFCs (efficiency gains with technological change). A general assumption is that the present trend, not to substitute with high GWP substances (including PFCs and SF6) will continue. As a result of this assumption, the emissions reported here may be underestimates. This substitution approach is used in all four scenarios, and the technological options adopted are those known at present. Further substitution away from HFCs is assumed to require a climate policy and is therefore not considered in SRES scenarios. The range of emissions of HFCs in the SRES scenario is initially generally lower than in earlier IPCC scenarios because of new insights about the availability of this assumption, the emissions reported here may be underestimates. This substitution approach is used in all four scenarios, and the technological options adopted are those known at present. Further substitution away from HFCs is assumed to require a climate policy and is therefore not considered in SRES scenarios. The range of emissions of HFCs in the SRES scenario is initially generally lower than in earlier IPCC scenarios because of new insights about the availability of alternatives to HFCs as replacements for substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol. In two of the four scenarios in the report, HFC emissions increase rapidly in the second half of the next century, while in two others the growth of emissions is significantly slowed down or reversed in that period. Aggregating all the different halocarbons (CFCs, HCFCs, HFCs) as well as halogenated compounds (PFCs and SF6) into MtC-equivalents (using GWPs from IPCC SAR, notwithstanding the caveats given in footnote 6) indicates a range between 386 and 1096 MtC-equivalent by 2100 for the SRES scenarios. This compares with a range of 746 to 875 MtC-equivalent for IS92 (which, however, does not include PFCs and SF6). (The comparable SRES range excluding PFCs and SF6 is between 299 and 753 MtC-equivalent by 2100.) The scenarios presented here indicate a wider range of uncertainty compared to IS92, particularly toward lower emissions (because of the technological and substitution reasons discussed above). The effect on climate of each of the substances aggregated to MtC-equivalents given in Table TS-4 varies greatly, because of differences in both atmospheric lifetime and the radiative effect per molecule of each gas. The net effect on climate of these substances is best determined by a calculation of their radiative forcing – which is the amount by which these gases enhance the anthropogenic greenhouse effect. The radiative forcing will be addressed in IPCC TAR and is thus not discussed in this report. 9.3. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Emissions of sulfur portray even more dynamic patterns in time and space than the CO2 emissions shown in Figures TS-7 and TS-8. Factors other than climate change (namely regional and local air quality, and transformations in the structure of the energy system and end use) intervene to limit future emissions. Figure TS-10 shows the range of global sulfur emissions for all SRES scenarios and the four markers against the emissions range of the IS92 scenarios, more than 80 scenarios from the literature, and the historical development. A detailed review of long-term global and regional sulfur emission scenarios is given in Grübler (1998) and summarized in Chapter 3. The most important new finding from the scenario literature is recognition of the significant adverse impacts of sulfur emissions on human health, food production, and ecosystems. As a result, scenarios published since 1995 generally assume various degrees of sulfur controls to be implemented in the future, and thus have projections substantially lower than previous ones, including the IS92 scenario series. Of these, only the two low-demand scenarios IS92c and IS92d fall within the range of more recent long-term sulfur emission scenarios. A related reason for lower sulfur emission projections is the recent tightening of sulfur-control policies in the OECD countries, such as the Amendments of the Clean Air Act in the USA and the implementation of the Second European Sulfur Protocol. Such legislative changes were not reflected in previous long-term emission scenarios, as noted in Alcamo et al. (1995) and Houghton et al. (1995). Similar sulfur control initiatives due to local air quality concerns are beginning to impact sulfur emissions also in a number of developing countries in Asia and Latin America (see IEA, 1999; La Rovere and Americano, 1998; Streets and Waldhoff, 2000; for a more detailed discussion see Chapter 3). As a result, even the highest range of recent sulfur-control scenarios is significantly below that of comparable, high-demand IS92 scenarios (IS92a, IS92b, IS92e, and IS92f). The scenarios with the lowest ranges project stringent sulfur-control levels that lead to a substantial decline in long-term emissions and a return to emission levels that prevailed at the beginnings of the 20th century. The SRES scenario set brackets global anthropogenic sulfur emissions of between 27 and 169 MtS by 2050 and between 11 and 93 MtS by 2100 (see Table TS-4). In contrast, the range of the IS92 scenarios (Pepper et al., 1992) is substantially higher starting at 80 MtS and extending all the way to 200 MtS by 2050 and from 55 to 230 MtS by 2100. Reflecting recent developments and the literature, it is assumed that sulfur emissions in the SRES scenarios will also be controlled increasingly outside the OECD. As a result, both long-term trends and regional patterns of sulfur emissions evolve differently from carbon emissions in the SRES scenarios. As a general pattern, global sulfur emissions do not rise substantially, and eventually decline even in absolute terms during the second half of the 21st century, as indicated by the median of all scenarios in Figure TS-10 (see also Chapters 2 and 3). The spatial distribution of emissions changes markedly. Figure TS-10: Global anthropogenic SO2 emissions (MtS/yr) – historical development from 1930 to 1990 and (standardized) in the SRES scenarios. The dashed colored time-paths depict individual SRES scenarios, the solid colored lines the four marker scenarios, the solid thin curves the six IS92 scenarios, the shaded areas the range of 81 scenarios from the literature, the gray shaded area the sulfur-control and the blue shaded area the range of sulfur-non-control scenarios or “non-classified” scenarios from the literature that exceeds the range of sulfur control scenarios. The colored vertical bars indicate the range of the SRES scenario families in 2100. For details of the two additional illustrative A1 scenarios see Appendix VII. Database source: Grübler (1998). Emissions in the OECD countries continue their recent declining trend (reflecting the tightening of control measures). Emissions outside the OECD rise initially, most notably in Asia, which compensates for the declining OECD emissions. Over the long term, however, sulfur emissions decline throughout the world, but the timing and magnitude vary across the scenarios. It should be noted that SRES scenarios assume sulfur controls only and do not assume any additional climate policy measures. Nevertheless, one important implication of this varying pattern of sulfur emissions is that the historically important, but uncertain, negative radiative forcing of sulfate aerosols may decline in the very long run. This view is also confirmed by the model calculations reported in Subak et al. (1997) and Nakicenovic et al. (1998) based on recent long-term GHG and sulfur emission scenarios. 9.4. Other Chemically Active Gases The SRES emissions scenarios also have different emissions for other GHGs and chemically active species such as CO, NOx, and volatile organic compounds. The uncertainties that surround the emissions sources of these gases, and the more complex set of driving forces behind them are considerable and unresolved. Hence, model projections of these gases are particularly uncertain and the scenarios presented here are no exception. Improved inventories and studies linking driving forces to changing emissions in order to improve the representation of these gases in global and regional emission models remain an important future research task. The emissions of other gases follow dynamic patterns much like those shown in Figure TS-7 for carbon dioxide emissions. Further details about GHG emissions are given in Chapter 5. 9.4.1. Nitrogen Oxides Emissions Some models of the six SRES models do not provide a comprehensive description of NOx emissions or include only specific sectors (e.g., energy-related sources) and have adopted other source categories from corresponding model runs derived from other models. Even with a simplified model representation, future NOx emission levels are mainly determined by two set of variables: levels of fossil energy use (see Chapter 4), and level and timing of emission controls, inspired by local air quality concerns. As a result the spread of NOx emissions is largest within the A1 scenario family (28 to 151 MtN/yr by 2100), almost as large as the range across all 40 SRES scenarios (see Table TS-4). Only in the highest emission scenarios (the fossil fuel intensive scenarios within the A1 scenario family and the high population, coal intensive A2 scenario family) do emissions rise continuously throughout the 21st century. In the A1B (“balanced”) scenario group and in the B2 scenario family, NOx emission levels rise less. NOx emissions tend to increase up to 2050 and stabilize thereafter, the result of a gradual substitution of fossil fuels by alternatives as well as of the increasing diffusion of NOx control technologies. Low emission futures are described by various B1 family scenarios, as well as in the A1T scenario group, that describe futures in which NOx emissions are controlled because of either local air quality concerns or rapid technological change away from conventional fossil technologies. Overall, the SRES scenarios describe a similar upper range of NOx emissions as the previous IS92 scenarios (151 MtN versus 134 MtN, respectively, by 2100), but extend the IS92 uncertainty range toward lower emission levels (16 versus 54 MtN by 2100 in the SRES and IS92 scenarios, respectively). 9.4.2. Volatile Organic Compounds, Excluding Methane NMVOCs arise from fossil fuel combustion (as with NOx, wide ranges of emission factors are typical for internal combustion engines), and also from industrial processes, fuel storage (fugitive emissions), use of solvents (e.g., in paint and cleaners), and a variety of other activities. In this report NMVOCs are discussed as one group. As for NOx emissions, not all models include the NMVOCs emissions category or all of its sources. A relatively robust trend across all 40 scenarios (see Chapter 5) is a gradual increase in NMVOC emissions up to about 2050, with a range between 190 and 260 include the NMVOCs emissions category or all of its sources. A relatively robust trend across all 40 scenarios (see Chapter 5) is a gradual increase in NMVOC emissions up to about 2050, with a range between 190 and 260 Mt. Beyond 2050, uncertainties increase with respect to both emission levels and trends. By 2100, the range is between 58 and 552 Mt, which extends the IS92 scenario range of 136 to 403 Mt by 2100 toward both higher and lower emissions (see Table TS-4). As for NOx emissions, the upper bounds of NMVOC emissions are formed by the fossil fuel intensive scenarios within the A1 scenario family, and the lower bounds by the scenarios within the B1 scenario family. Characteristic ranges are between 60 and 90 Mt NMVOC by 2100 in the low emissions cluster and between 370 and 550 Mt NMVOC in the high emissions cluster. All other scenario families and individual scenarios fall between these two emissions clusters; the B2 marker scenario (B2-MESSAGE) closely tracks the median of global NMVOC emissions from all the SRES scenarios (see Chapter 5). 9.4.3. Carbon Monoxide Emissions The same caveats as stated above for NOx and NMVOC emissions also apply to CO emissions - the number of models that represent all the emission source categories is limited and modeling and data uncertainties, such as emission factors, are considerable. As a result, CO emission estimates across scenarios are highly model specific and future emission levels overlap considerably between the four SRES scenario families (see Table TS-4). Generally, emissions are highest in the high growth fossil fuel intensive scenarios within the A1 scenario family. Lowest emission levels are generally associated with the B1 and B2 scenario families. By 2100, emissions range between 363 and 3766 Mt CO, a considerably larger uncertainty range, particularly toward higher emissions, than in IS92, for which the 2100 emission range was between 450 and 929 Mt CO (see Table TS-4). 9.5. Emissions Overview Table TS-4 (see later) summarizes the emissions of GHGs, sulfur dioxide and other radiatively active species by 2100 for the four markers and the ranges for other 36 scenarios. Combined with Tables TS-2 and TS-3, the tables provide a concise summary of the new SRES scenarios. Data are given for both the harmonized and all scenarios. 10. Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations In summary, the SRES scenarios lead to the following findings: • Alternative combinations of driving forces can lead to similar levels and structure of energy and land-use patterns, as illustrated by different scenarios and groups. Hence, even for a given scenario outcome (e.g., in terms of GHG emissions) there are alternative combinations of driving forces and pathways that could lead to that outcome. For instance, significant global changes could result from a scenario of high population growth, even if per capita incomes rise only modestly, as well as from a scenario in which a rapid demographic transition (to low population levels) coincides with high rates of income growth and affluence. • Important possibilities for further bifurcations in future development trends exist within one scenario family, even when particular values are adopted for the important scenario driving force variables to illustrate a particular development path. The technology scenario groups in the A1 family illustrate such alternative development paths with similar quantifications of the main driving forces. • Emissions profiles are dynamic across the range of SRES scenarios. They portray trend reversals and indicate possible emissions crossover among different scenarios. They do not represent mere extensions of continuous increase of GHGs and SO2 emissions into the future. This more complex pattern of future emissions across the range of SRES scenarios, time periods, world regions, and sectors reflects recent scenario literature. • Describing potential future developments involves inherent ambiguities and uncertainties. One and only one possible development path (as alluded to, for instance, in concepts such as "business-as-usual scenario") simply does not exist alone. And even for each alternative development path described by any given scenario, there are numerous combinations of driving forces and numeric values that can be consistent with a particular scenario description. The numeric precision of any model result should not distract from the basic fact that uncertainty abounds. However, the multi-model approach increases the value of the SRES scenario set, since uncertainties in the choice of model input assumptions can be separated more explicitly from the specific model behavior and related modeling uncertainties. • Any scenario has subjective elements and is open to various interpretations. While the writing team as a whole has no preference for any of the scenarios, and has no judgment as to the probability or desirability of different scenarios, the open process and initial reactions to draft versions of this report show that individuals and interest groups do have such judgments. The writing team hopes that this will stimulate an open discussion in the policymaking arena about potential futures and choices that can be made in the context of climate change response. For the scientific community, the SRES scenario exercise has led to the identification of a number of recommendations for future research that can further increase the understanding of potential developments of socio-economic driving forces and their interactions, and the associated GHG emissions. A summary of the main findings and recommendations for potential users of the SRES scenarios is given in Boxes TS-4 and Box TS-5. The writing teams' suggestions for consideration by the IPCC are summarized in Box TS-6. • Finally, the writing team believes that the SRES scenarios largely fulfill all specifications set out in Chapter 1. To support reproducibility, more detailed information than can be included in this report will be made available by individual modeling groups and members of the writing team through other means, such as web sites, peer-reviewed literature, or background documentation, if additional resources can be made available. In conclusion, Tables TS-2, TS-3, and TS-4 summarize the main characteristics of the scenario groups that constitute the four families, both for the harmonized and for all scenarios. Tables TS-2 and TS-3 summarize the ranges of the primary and secondary scenario driving forces, respectively. Table TS-4 summarizes the emissions of GHGs, SO2, and ozone precursor emissions. Together, the three tables provide a concise summary of the new SRES scenarios. Box TS-4: Main Findings and Implications of SRES Scenarios • The four scenario families each have a narrative storyline and consist of 40 scenarios developed by six modeling groups. • The 40 scenarios cover the full range of GHGs and SO2 emissions consistent with the underlying range of driving forces from scenario literature. • The 40 SRES scenarios fall into various groups - the three scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus different groups within the A1 scenario family. The A1 groups are distinguished by their technological emphasis - on coal (A1C), oil and gas (A1G), non-fossil energy sources (A1T), or a balance across all sources (A1B). In the SPM, the A1C and A1G scenario groups are combined into one fossil intensive group A1FI. All scenario groups are equally sound. • The scenarios are also grouped into four categories of cumulative CO2 emissions, which indicate that scenarios with different driving forces can lead to similar cumulative emissions and those with similar driving forces can branch out into different categories of cumulative emissions. • Four from 40 scenarios are designated as marker scenarios that are characteristic of the four scenarios families. Together with the two additional illustrative scenarios selected from the scenario groups in the A1 family, they capture most of the emissions and driving forces spanned by the full set of the scenarios. • There is no single central or "best guess" scenario, and probabilities or likelihood are not assigned to individual scenarios. Instead, the writing team recommends that the smallest set of scenarios used should include the four designated marker scenarios and the two additional illustrative scenarios selected from the scenario groups in the A1 family. • Distinction between scenarios that envisage stringent environmental policies and those that include direct climate policies was very difficult to make, a difficulty associated with many definitional and other ambiguities. • All scenarios describe futures that are generally more affluent than today. Many of the scenarios envisage a more rapid convergence in per capita income ratios in the world compared to the IS92 scenarios while, at the same time, they jointly cover a wide range of GHGs and SO2 emissions. • Emissions profiles are more dynamic than the IS92 scenarios, which reflects changes in future emissions trends for some scenarios and GHG species. • The levels of GHG emissions are generally lower than the IS92 levels, especially toward the end of the 21st century, while emissions of SO2, which have a cooling effect on the atmosphere, are significantly lower than in IS92. • Alternative combinations of main scenario driving forces can lead to similar levels of GHG emissions by the end of the 21st century. Scenarios with different underlying assumptions can result in very similar climate changes. • Technology is at least as important a driving force of GHG emissions as population and economic development across the set of 40 SRES scenarios. Box TS-5: Recommendations for Consideration by the User Communities The writing team recommends that the SRES scenarios be the main basis for the assessment of future emissions and their driving forces in the TAR. Accordingly, the SRES writing team makes the following recommendations regarding the emissions scenarios to be used in the atmosphere/ocean general circulation models (A/O GCMs) simulations for WGI, for the models that will be used in the assessment of climate change impacts by WGII, and for the mitigation and stabilization assessments by WGIII: • It is recommended that a range of SRES scenarios from more than one family be used in emissions scenarios to be used in the atmosphere/ocean general circulation models (A/O GCMs) simulations for WGI, for the models that will be used in the assessment of climate change impacts by WGII, and for the mitigation and stabilization assessments by WGIII: • It is recommended that a range of SRES scenarios from more than one family be used in any analysis. The scenario groups – the three scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus the groups within the A1 scenario family, A1B, A1C & A1G (combined into A1FI in the SPM), and A1T – and four cumulative emissions categories were developed as the smallest subsets of SRES scenarios that capture the range of uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions. • The important uncertainties may be different in different applications – for example climate modeling; assessment of impacts, vulnerability, mitigation, and adaptation options; and policy analysis. Climate modelers may want to cover the range reflected by the cumulative emissions categories. To assess the robustness of options in terms of impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation may require scenarios with similar emissions but different socio-economic characteristics, as reflected by the seven groups. For mitigation analysis, variation in both emissions and socio-economic characteristics may be necessary. For analysis at the national or regional scale, the most appropriate scenarios may be those that best reflect specific circumstances and perspectives. • There is no single most likely “central” or “best-guess” scenario, either with respect to other SRES scenarios or to the underlying scenario literature. Probabilities or likelihoods are not assigned to individual SRES scenarios. None of the SRES scenarios represents an estimate of a central tendency for all driving forces and emissions, such as the mean or median, and none should be interpreted as such. The statistics associated with the frequency distributions of SRES scenarios do not represent the likelihood of their occurrence. The writing team cautions against constructing a central, “best-estimate” scenario from the SRES scenarios; instead it recommends use of the SRES scenarios as they are. • Concerning large-scale climate models, the writing team recommends that the minimum set of SRES scenarios should include the four designated marker scenarios and the two additional illustrative scenarios selected in the SPM from the scenario groups in the A1 family. At the minimum (a) a simulation for one and the same SRES marker scenario should be performed by every TAR climate model for a given stabilization ceiling, and (b) the set of simulations performed by the TAR climate models and stabilization runs for a given ceiling should include all four of the SRES marker scenarios and the two additional illustrative scenarios selected in SPM from the scenario groups in the A1 family. • The driving forces and emissions of each SRES scenario should be used together. To avoid internal inconsistencies, components of SRES scenarios should not be mixed. For example, the GHG emissions from one scenario and the SO2 emissions from another scenario, or the population from one and economic development path from another, should not be combined. • The SRES scenarios can provide policy makers with a long-term context for near-term decisions. This implies that they are not necessarily well suited for the analysis of near-term developments. When analyzing mitigation and adaptation options, the user should be aware that although no additional climate initiatives are included in the SRES scenarios, various changes have been assumed to occur that would require other policy interventions. • All 40 SRES emissions scenarios, their main driving forces, and underlying assumptions should be made widely available. Depending on resources available the scenario documentation should, e.g., be placed on the web and made available on a CD-ROM. In addition, the time-dependent geographic distributions of the concentrations of GHGs and sulfate aerosol burden, together with their corresponding radiative forcings, should also be placed on the web. Box TS-6: Recommendations for Consideration by the IPCC • Assure that the SRES scenarios, their main assumptions, and modeling approaches are widely available through a web site or a CD-ROM. • Establish a long-term facility for documentation and comparison of emissions scenarios to succeed the SRES open process. This should include a scenario database and analytic evaluation capabilities and should be regularly maintained. • An effort should be made in the future to develop an appropriate emissions scenario classification scheme. • Identify resources for capacity building in the area of emissions scenarios and modeling tools, with a particular emphasis to involve strong participation from developing countries. • Promote activities within and outside the IPCC to extend the SRES multi-baseline and multi-model approach in future assessments of climate change impacts, adaptation, and mitigation. • Initiate new programs to assess GHG emissions from land use and sources of emissions other than energy-related CO2 emissions, to go beyond the effort of SRES, which was limited by time and resources. • Initiate new programs to assess future developments of driving forces and GHG emissions for different regions and for different sectors (taking the set of SRES scenarios as reference for overall global and regional developments) to provide more regional and sectoral detail than time and resources allowed SRES to achieve.   and R. Leemans (eds.), 1998: Global Change Scenarios of the 21st Century. Results from the IMAGE 2.1 model. Elseviers Science, London. Alcamo, Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 3, Nos. 2-4. Alcamo, J., and R. Swart, 1998: Future trends of land-use emissions of major greenhouse gases. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 343-381. Anderson, D., 1998: On the effects of social and economic policies on future carbon emissions. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 419-453. De Jong, A. and G. Zalm, 1991: Scanning the future; a long-term scenario study of the world economy 1990-2015. In: Long-term Prospects of the World Economy. OECD, Paris, France, pp. 27-74. Demeny, P., 1990: Population. In The Earth As Transformed by Human Action. B.L. Turner II et al., (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 41-54. De Vries, H.J.M., J.G.J. Olivier, R.A. van den Wijngaart, G.J.J. Kreileman, and A.M.C. Toet, 1994: Model for calculating regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air, Soil Pollution, 76, 79-131. De Vries, B., M. Janssen, and A. Beusen, 1999: Perspectives on global energy futures - simulations with the TIME model. Energy Policy, 27, 477-494. De Vries, B., J. Bollen, L. Bouwman, M. den Elzen, M. Janssen, and E. Kreileman, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in an equity-, environment- and service-oriented world; An IMAGE-based scenario for the next century. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press.) Dowlatabadi, H., and M. Kandlikar, 1995: Key Uncertainties in Climate Change Policy: Results from ICAM-2. Proceedings of the 6th Global Warming Conference, San Francisco, CA. Durand, J.D., 1967: The modern expansion of world population. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 111(3), 136-159. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, and C. MacCracken, 1994: Advanced energy technologies and climate change. An Analysis Using the Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM). PNL-9798, UC-402, Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, H. Pitcher, R. Richels, T. Wigley, and C. MacCracken, 1996a: An integrated assessment of climate change and the accelerated introduction of advanced energy technologies; An application of MiniCAM 1.0. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1(4), 311-339. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, R. Sands, R. Brown, and H. Kheshgi, 1996b: Agriculture, land-use, and commercial biomass energy. A Preliminary integrated analysis of the potential role of Biomass Energy for Reducing Future Greenhouse Related Emissions. PNNL-11155, Pacific Northwest National Laboratories, Washington, DC. Fenhann, J., 2000: Industrial non-energy, non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press.) Gaffin, S.R., 1998: World population projections for greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 133-170. Gregory, K., 1998: Factors affecting future emissions of methane from non-land-use sources. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 321-341. Gregory, K., and H.-H. Rogner, 1998: Energy resources and conversion technologies for the 21st century. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 171-229. Grübler, A., 1998: A review of global and regional sulfur emission scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 383-418. Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1995: Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emissions Scenarios. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 339 pp. Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1996: Climate Change 1995. The Science of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1999: Non-OECD Coal-Fired Power Generation - Trends in the 1990s. IEA Coal Research, London. Jiang, K., T. Masui, T. Morita, and Y. Matsuoka, 2000: Long-term GHG emission scenarios of Asia-Pacific and the world. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press.) Jung, T.-Y., E.L. La Rovere, H. Gaj, P.R. Shukla, and D. Zhou, 2000: Structural changes in developing countries and their implication to energy-related CO2 emissions. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press.) Kram, T., K. Riahi, R.A. Roehrl, S. van Rooijen, T. Morita, and B. de Vries, 2000: Global and regional greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, The Science of Total Environment, 112, 291-314. La Rovere, E.L., and B. Americano, 1998: Environmental Impacts of Privatising the Brazilian Power Sector. Proceedings of the International Association of Impact Assessment Annual Meeting, April 1998, Christchurch, New Zealand. Lashof, D., and Tirpak, D.A., 1990: Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate. 21P-2003. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. Leggett, J., W.J. Pepper, and R.J. Swart, 1992: Emissions scenarios for IPCC; An update. In Climate Change 1992. Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander, S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 69-95. Lutz, W. (ed.), 1996: The Future Population of the World: What can we assume today? 2nd Edition. Earthscan, London. Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov, 1997: Doubling of world population unlikely. Nature, 387(6635), 803-805. Marland, G., R.J. Andres, and T.A. Boden, 1994: Global, regional, and national CO₂ emissions. In Trends '93: A Compendium of Data on Global Change. ORNL/CDIAC-65, T.A. Boden, D.P. Kaiser, R.J. Sepanski, and F.W. Sloss (eds.), Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, pp. 505-584. McCulloch, A., and P.M. Midgley, 1998: Estimated historic emissions of fluorocarbons from the European Union, Atmospheric Environment, 32(9), 1571-1580. Messner, S., and M. Strubegger, 1995: Users Guide for MESSAGE III. WP-95-69, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 155 pp. Michaelis, L., 1998: Economic and technological development in climate scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 231-261. Midgley, P.M., and A. McCulloch, 1999: Properties and applications of industrial halocarbons. In Reactive Halogen Compounds in the Atmosphere, 4, P. Fabian, and O.N. Singh (eds.), The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg. Mori, S., and M. Takahashi, 1999: An integrated assessment model for the evaluation of new energy technologies and food productivity. International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 11(1-4), 1-18. Mori, S., 2000: The development of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios using an extension of the MARIA model for the assessment of resource and energy technologies. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press.) Morita, T., Y. Matsuoka, I. Penna, and M. Kainuma, 1994: Global Carbon Dioxide Emission Scenarios and their Basic Assumptions: 1994 Survey. CGER-1011-94, Center for Global Environmental Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. Morita, T., and H.-C. Lee, 1998a: Appendix to emissions scenarios database and review of scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 121-131. Morita, T., and H.-C. Lee, 1998b: IPCC SRES Database, Version 0.1, Emission Scenario Database prepared for IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (http://www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, H. Ishitani, T. Johansson, G. Marland, J.R. Moreira, and H.-H. Rogner, 1996: Energy primer. In Climate Change 1995. Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. R. Watson, M.C. Zinyowera, R. Moss (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 75-92. Nakicenovic, N., N. Victor, and T. Morita, 1998: Emissions scenarios database and review of scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 95-120. Nakicenovic, N., 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 65(3). (In press.) Parikh, J.K., 1992: IPCC strategies unfair to the south. Nature, 360, 507-508. Pepper, W.J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992: Emissions scenarios for the IPCC. An update; Assumptions, methodology, and results; Support Document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callandar, S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pepper, W.J., Barbour, W., Sankovski, A., and Braaz, B., 1998: No-policy greenhouse gas emission scenarios; revisiting IPCC 1992. Environmental Science & Policy, 1, 289-312. Price, L., L. Michaelis, E. Worell, and M. Khrushch, 1998: Sectoral trends and driving forces of global energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 263-319. Riahi, K., and R.A. Roehrl, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in a dynamics-as-usual scenario of economic and energy development. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press.) Roehrl, R.A., and K. Riahi, 2000: Technology dynamics and greenhouse gas emissions mitigation - a cost assessment. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press.) Sankovski, A., W. Barbour, and W. Pepper, 2000: Quantification of the 1999 emission scenario storylines using the atmospheric stabilization framework (ASF). Technological Forecasting & Social Change. Waldhoff, 2000; Present and future emissions of air pollutants in China; SO2, NOx, and CO. Atmospheric Environment, 34(3), 363-374. (In press). Subak, S., M. Hulme, and L. Bohn, 1997: The Implications of FCCC Protocol Proposals for Future Global Temperature: Results Considering Alternative Sulfur Forcing. CSERGE Working Paper GEC-97-19, CSERGE University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK. UN (United Nations), 1998; World Population Projections to 2150. UN Department of Economics and Social Affairs (Population Division), United Nations, New York, NY. UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1992; United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Convention text, UNEP/WMO Information Unit of Climate Change (IUCC) on behalf of the Interim Secretariat of the Convention. IUCC, Geneva. UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1997; Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, FCCC/CP/17/Add. 1, 10 December 1997. UN, New York, NY. WMO/UNEP (World Meteorological Organisation and United Nations Environment Programme), 1998; Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1998. WMO Global Ozone Research & Monitoring Project, December 1998, WMO, Geneva. WMO/UNEP (World Meteorological Organisation), 1999; Proceedings of the Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs, Petten, the Netherlands, 26-28 May 1999. World Bank, 1999; 1999 World Development Indicators. World Bank, Washington, DC. 1 Background and Overview CONTENTS 1.1. Introduction 61 1.2. What are Scenarios? 62 1.3. Purposes and Uses of SRES Emissions Scenarios 64 1.4. Review of Past IPCC Emissions Scenarios 65 1.5. Why New IPCC Emissions Scenarios? 66 1.6. SRES Approach and Process 67 1.7. SRES Emissions Scenarios 68 1.7.1. Literature Review and Analysis 68 1.7.2. Narrative Storylines and Scenario Quantifications 69 1.7.3. The Range of SRES Emissions and their Implications 71 1.8. Structure of the Report 74 References 75 Background and Overview 1.1. Introduction The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) decided at its September 1996 plenary session in Mexico City to develop a new set of emissions scenarios (see Appendix I for the Terms of Reference). This Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) describes the new scenarios and how they were developed. The SRES writing team formulated a set of emissions scenarios. These scenarios cover a wide range of the main driving forces of future emissions, from demographic to technological and economic developments. The scenarios encompass different future developments that might influence greenhouse gas (GHG) sources and sinks, such as alternative structures of energy systems and land-use changes. As required by the terms of reference however, none of the scenarios in the set includes any future policies that explicitly address additional climate change initiatives^ although all necessarily encompass various assumed future policies of other types that may indirectly influence GHGs sources and sinks. The set of SRES emissions scenarios is based on an extensive assessment of the literature, six alternative modeling approaches, and an "open process" that solicited wide participation and feedback from many groups and individuals. The set of scenarios includes anthropogenic emissions of all relevant GHG species and sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx) and non-methane volatile organic hydrocarbons (VOCs), as shown in Table 1-1. It covers most of the range of GHG emissions compared with the published scenario literature. For example, in the SRES scenarios, emissions of CO2 in 2100 range from more than 40 to less than 6 giga (or billion) tons of elemental carbon (GtC), that is, from almost a sevenfold increase to roughly the same emissions level as in 1990. Emissions scenarios are a central component of any assessment of climate change. Scenarios facilitate the assessment of future developments in complex systems that are either inherently unpredictable or have high scientific uncertainties, and the assessment of future emissions is an essential component of the overall assessment of global climate change by the IPCC. Emissions of GHGs and SO2 are the basic input for determining future climate patterns with simple climate models, as well as with complex general circulation models (GCMs). Possible climate changes together with the major driving forces of future emissions, such as demographic patterns, economic development and environmental conditions, provide the basis for the assessment of vulnerability, possible adverse impacts and adaptation strategies and policies to climate change. The major driving forces of future emissions also provide the basis for the assessment of possible mitigation strategies and policies designed to avoid climate change. Future emissions and the evolution of their underlying driving forces are highly uncertain, as reflected in the very wide range of future emissions paths in the literature. Of the many ways that uncertainties have been classified in the literature (see Box 1-1 in Section 1.2 below), this introduction uses the three categories of Funtowicz and Ravetz (1990): "data uncertainties," "modeling uncertainties" and "completeness uncertainties." This categorization has the advantages of a small number of categories and of clear descriptive titles. Data uncertainties reflect the reality that most historical and base year data sets are neither fully complete nor fully reliable. This is certainly true for data on population, energy consumption, energy efficiency, gross world product, energy resources and reserves, and probably true for every parameter mentioned in this report. Modeling uncertainties refer both to the approximations necessary in any model of complex phenomena like GHG emissions, and to the range of plausible but different modeling approaches, each with its own strengths and weaknesses. Completeness uncertainties encompass, first, relevant factors that can be identified but are nonetheless excluded from an analysis - for example exclusion of criteria other than cost minimization in an energy model, such as energy security, the protection of domestic industries, and free trade. Second, they also include factors that may be relevant but are as essentially unknown to us as jet airplanes were to Thomas Malthus or 3-D seismic techniques in oil exploration were to John D. Rockefeller. The use of scenarios and storylines in this report partially addresses completeness uncertainties related to known factors. Completeness uncertainties related to unknown factors can, of course, never be persuasively captured by any approach. The IPCC developed sets of emissions scenarios in 1990 (Houghton et al., 1990) and 1992 (Leggett et al., 1992; Pepper et al., 1992). In 1994 the IPCC formally evaluated the 1992 scenario set (Alcamo et completeness uncertainties related to known factors. Completeness uncertainties related to unknown factors can, of course, never be persuasively captured by any approach. The IPCC developed sets of emissions scenarios in 1990 (Houghton et al., 1990) and 1992 (Leggett et al., 1992; Pepper et al., 1992). In 1994 the IPCC formally evaluated the 1992 scenario set (Alcamo et al., 1995) and, in 1996, it initiated the background and overview effort described in this report. The new set of emissions scenarios is intended for use in future IPCC assessments and by wider scientific and policymaking communities who analyze the effects of future GHG emissions and develop mitigation and adaptation measures and policies. The emissions profiles of the new scenarios can provide inputs for GCMs and simplified models of climate change. The new scenarios also contain information, such as the level of economic activity, rates of technological change and demographic developments in different world regions, required to assess climate-change impacts and vulnerabilities, adaptation strategies and policies. The same kind of information, in conjunction with emissions trajectories, can serve as a benchmark for the evaluation of alternative mitigation measures and policies. Finally, the new set of scenarios may provide a common basis and an integrative element for the Third Assessment Report (TAR). IPCC Working Group III (WGIII) appointed the SRES writing team in January 1997. After some adjustments it eventually included more than 50 scientists. Together they represent a broad range of scientific disciplines, regional backgrounds and non-governmental organizations. In particular the team includes representatives of six leading groups with extensive expertise in modeling alternative emissions scenarios. It also includes a number of members who were convening and lead authors in all three earlier IPCC scenario activities (see above). Their expertise and familiarity with earlier IPCC emissions scenario work assured continuity and allowed the SRES effort to build efficiently upon prior work. Appendix II lists the members of the writing team and their affiliations. The writing team reached a consensus concerning the overall work program. It was agreed that the scenario development process would consist of four major components. • First, a review of existing global and regional emissions scenarios from the published literature and development of a unique database of 416 global and regional scenarios (accessible at a web site: www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). • Second, an analysis of the range of the scenarios’ main characteristics, their relationships, and their “driving forces” (such as population, economic development, energy consumption, rates of technological change and GHG emissions) and the documentation of the results, some of which are published in the peer-reviewed literature.^ • Third, a formulation of narrative “storylines” to describe the main scenario characteristics, the development of quantitative prototype scenarios by six leading groups representing the main modeling approaches from around the world, and the publication of the prototype scenarios on a specially developed IPCC web site (sres.ciesin.org), on web sites of the modeling teams,^ and in the peer-reviewed literature.^ • Fourth, an “open” process through the IPCC web site (sres.ciesin.org) that involves feedback from modeling groups and experts worldwide, followed by the IPCC expert and government reviews that were coordinated by four review editors. Most of the background material and findings of the assessments conducted by the writing team have been documented in this report and in a series of publications including two special issues of international scientific journals, Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change^ and Technological Forecasting and Social Change.^ 1.2. What are Scenarios? Scenarios are images of the future, or alternative futures. They are neither predictions nor forecasts. Rather, each scenario is one alternative image of how the future might unfold. A set of scenarios assists in the understanding of possible future developments of complex systems. Some systems, those that are well understood and for which complete information is available, can be modeled with some certainty, as is frequently the case in the physical sciences, and their future states predicted. However, many physical and social systems are poorly understood, and information on the relevant variables is so incomplete that they can be appreciated only through intuition and are best communicated by images and stories. Prediction is not possible in such cases (see Box 1-1 on uncertainties inherent in scenario analysis). Scenarios can be viewed as a linking tool that integrates qualitative narratives or stories about the future and quantitative formulations based on formal modeling. As such they enhance our understanding of how systems work, behave and evolve. Scenarios are useful tools for scientific assessments, for learning about complex systems behavior and for policy making (Jefferson, 1983; Davis, 1999). In scientific assessments, scenarios are usually based on an internally consistent and reproducible set of assumptions or theories about the key relationships and driving forces of change, which are derived from our understanding of both history and the current situation. Often scenarios are formulated with the help of numeric or analytic formal models. Future levels of global GHG emissions are the products of a very complex, ill-understood dynamic system, driven by forces e.g., www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html; www.iiasa.ac.at. 3 Anderson, 1998; Alcamo and Swart, 1998; Gaffin, 1998; Gregory, 1998; Gregory and Rogner, 1998; Grübler, 1998; Michaels, 1998; Morita and Lee, 1998a; Nakicenovic et al., 1998; Price et al., 1998. ^ de Vries et al., 2000; Fenhann, 2000; Jiang et al., 2000; Jung et al., 2000; Kram et al., 2000; Mori, 2000; Nakicenovic, 2000; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000; Roehrl and Riahi, 2000; Sankovski et al., 2000. Box 1-1: Uncertainties and Scenario Analysis In general, there are three types of uncertainty: uncertainty in quantities, uncertainty about model structure and uncertainties that arise from disagreements among experts about the value of quantities or the functional form of the model (Morgan and Henrion, 1990). Sources of uncertainty could be statistical variation, subjective judgment (systematic error), imperfect definition (linguistic imprecision), natural variability, disagreement among experts and approximation (Morgan and Henrion, 1990). Others (Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1990) distinguish three main sources of uncertainty: “data uncertainties,” “modeling uncertainties” and “completeness uncertainties.” Data uncertainties arise from the quality or appropriateness of the data used as inputs to models. Modeling uncertainties arise from an incomplete understanding of the modeled phenomena, or from approximations that are used in formal representation of the processes. Completeness uncertainties refer to all omissions due to lack of knowledge. They are, in principle, non-quantifiable and irreducible. Scenarios help in the assessment of future developments in complex systems that are either inherently unpredictable, or that have high scientific uncertainties. In all stages of the scenario-building process, uncertainties of different nature are encountered. A large uncertainty surrounds future emissions and the possible evolution of their underlying driving forces, as reflected in a wide range of future emissions paths in the literature. The uncertainty is further compounded in going from emissions paths to climate change, from climate change to possible impacts and finally from these driving forces to formulating adaptation and mitigation measures and policies. The uncertainties range from inadequate scientific understanding of the problems, data gaps and general lack of data to inherent uncertainties of future events in general. Hence the use of alternative scenarios to describe the range of possible future emissions. For the current SRES scenarios, the following sources of uncertainties are identified: Choice of Storylines. Freedom in choice of qualitative scenario parameter combinations, such as low population combined with high gross domestic product (GDP), contributes to scenario uncertainty. Authors’ Interpretation of Storylines. Uncertainty in the individual modeler’s translation of narrative scenario storyline text in quantitative scenario drivers. Two kinds of parameters can be distinguished: • Harmonized drivers such as population, GDP, and final energy (see Section 4.1 in Chapter 4). Inter-scenario uncertainty is reduced in the harmonized runs as the modeling teams decided to keep population and GDP within certain agreed boundaries. • Other assumed parameters were chosen freely by the modelers, consistent with the storylines. Translation of the Understanding of Linkages between Driving Forces into Quantitative Inputs for Scenario Analysis. Often the understanding of the linkages is incomplete or qualitative only. This makes it difficult for modelers to implement these linkages in a consistent manner. Methodological Differences. • Uncertainty induced by conceptual and structural differences in the way models work (model approaches) and in the ways models are parameterized. • Uncertainty in the assumptions that underlie the relationships between scenario drivers and output, such as the relationship between average income and diet change. Different Sources of Data. Data differ from a variety of well-acknowledged scientific studies, since “measurements” always provide ranges and not exact values. Therefore, modelers can only choose from ranges of input parameters. For example: • Base year data. • Historical development trajectories. • Current investment requirements. Inherent Uncertainties always provide ranges and not exact values. Therefore, modelers can only choose from ranges of input parameters. For example: • Base year data. • Historical development trajectories. • Current investment requirements. Inherent Uncertainties. These uncertainties stem from the fact that unexpected “rare” events or events that a majority of researchers currently consider to be “rare future events” might nevertheless occur and produce outcomes that are fundamentally different from those produced by SRES model runs. Such as population growth, socio-economic development, and technological progress; thus to predict emissions accurately is virtually impossible. However, near-term policies may have profound long-term climate impacts. Consequently, policy-makers need a summary of what is understood about possible future GHG emissions, and given the uncertainties in both emissions models and our understanding of key driving forces, scenarios are an appropriate tool for summarizing both current understanding and current uncertainties. For such scenarios to be useful for climate models, impact assessments and the design of mitigation and adaptation policies, both the main outputs of the SRES scenarios (emissions) and the main inputs or driving forces (population growth, economic growth, technological, e.g., as it affects energy and land-use) are equally important. GHG emissions scenarios are usually based on an internally consistent and reproducible set of assumptions about the key relationships and driving forces of change, which are derived from our understanding of both history and the current situation. Often these scenarios are formulated with the help of formal models. Such scenarios specify the future emissions of GHGs in quantitative terms and, if fully documented, they are also reproducible. Sometimes GHG emissions scenarios are less quantitative and more descriptive, and in a few cases they do not involve any formal analysis and are expressed in qualitative terms. The SRES scenarios involve both qualitative and quantitative components; they have a narrative part called “storylines” and a number of corresponding quantitative scenarios for each storyline. Figure 1-1 illustrates the interrelated nature of these alternative scenario formulations. Although no scenarios are value free, it is often useful to distinguish between normative and descriptive scenarios. Normative (or prescriptive) scenarios are explicitly values-based and teleologic, exploring the routes to desired or undesired endpoints (utopias or dystopias). Descriptive scenarios are evolutionary and open-ended, exploring paths into the future. The SRES scenarios are descriptive and should not be construed as desirable or undesirable in their own right. They are built as descriptions of possible, rather than preferred, developments. They represent pertinent, plausible, alternative futures. Their pertinence is derived from the need for policy makers and climate-change modelers to have a basis for assessing the implications of future possible paths for GHG and SO2 emissions, and the possible response strategies. Their plausibility is based on an extensive review of the emissions scenarios available in the literature, and has been tested by alternative modeling approaches, by peer review (including the “open process” through the IPCC web site), and by the IPCC review and approval processes. Good scenarios are challenging and court controversy, since not everybody is comfortable with every scenario, but used intelligently they allow policies and strategies to be designed in a more robust way. Figure 1-1: Schematic illustration of alternative scenario formulations, from narrative storylines to quantitative formal models. 1.3. Purposes and Uses of SRES Emissions Scenarios The assessment of climate change dictates a global perspective and a very long time horizon that covers periods of at least a century. As the prediction of future anthropogenic GHG emissions is impossible, alternative GHG emissions scenarios become a major tool for the analysis of potential long-range developments of the socio-economic system and corresponding emission sources. However, to develop scenarios for a period of 100 years is a relatively new field. Difficulties arise not only from large scientific uncertainties and data inadequacies, but also because people are not trained to think in such time-spans. We are educated in narrow disciplines, and our ability to model complex systems, at the global level, is still in its infancy. For example, within the next century technological discontinuities should be expected, and possibly major shifts in societal values and in the balance of geopolitical power. The study of past trends over such long periods is hampered because most databases are incomplete if more than 50 years old. Given these gaps in our data, methods and understanding, scenarios are the best way to integrate our demographic, economic, societal and technological knowledge with our understanding of ecologic systems to evaluate sources and sinks of GHG emissions. Scenarios as an integration tool in the assessment of climate change allow a role for intuition, analysis and synthesis, and thus we turn to scenarios to take advantage of these features and aid the assessment of future climate change, impacts, vulnerabilities, adaptation and mitigation. Since the scenarios focus on the century time scale, tools are used that have been developed for this purpose. These tools are less suitable for the analysis of near-term developments, so this report does not intend to provide reliable projections for the near term. The IPCC’s 1994 evaluation of its 1992 emissions scenarios identified four principal uses (Alcamo et al., 1995): • To provide input for evaluating climatic and environmental consequences of alternative future GHG emissions in the absence of specific measures to reduce such emissions or enhance GHG sinks. • To provide similar input for cases with specific alternative policy interventions to reduce GHG emissions and enhance sinks. • To provide input for assessing mitigation and adaptation possibilities, and their costs, in different regions and economic sectors. • To provide input to negotiations of possible agreements to reduce GHG emissions. The SRES emissions scenarios are intended for the first, third and fourth uses. They do not include any additional (explicit) policies or measures directed at reducing GHG sources and enhancing sinks. Thus, they cannot be directly applied to the second purpose of emissions scenarios. Instead, they could be used as reference cases for the introduction of specific policy interventions and measures in new model runs that share the same specifications for the other principal driving forces of future emissions. However, the SRES emissions scenarios include a host of other policies and measures that are not directed at reducing sources and increasing sinks of GHGs, but that nevertheless have an indirect effect on future emissions. For example, policies directed at achieving greater environmental protection may also lead to lower emissions of GHGs. Moreover, afforestation and reforestation measures increase CO2 sinks, and a shift to renewable energy sources reduces the sources of emissions. Within three of the broad objectives listed above, the new SRES emissions scenarios are also intended to meet the specific needs of three main IPCC user communities: • Working Group I (WGI), which includes climate modelers who need future emission trajectories for GHGs and aerosol precursors as inputs for the GCMs used to develop climate change scenarios. • Working Group II (WGII), which analyzes climate impacts and adaptation policies, first need the climate-change scenarios produced by WGI’s climate modelers. Second, analysts need to know the socio-economic changes associated with specific emissions scenarios, as impacts of climate change on ecosystems and people depend on many factors. Among these are whether the people are numerous or few, rich or poor, free to move or relatively immobile, and included or excluded from world markets in technologies, food, etc. • WGIII, which analyzes potential mitigation policies for climate change, also needs to know the socio-economic settings against which policy options are to be evaluated. Are markets open or protected? Are technological options and economic resources plentiful or scarce? Are people vulnerable or adaptable? The interests of these three user groups create certain requirements that the SRES scenarios attempt to fulfill. For example, climate modelers and those who analyze climate impacts need scenarios on the order of 100 years because of the long response time of the climate system. At the same time adaptation-policy analysis tends to be focused more on the medium-term, around 20 to 50 years. The SRES scenarios attempt to include enough information and specific details to be useful to these groups. Spatially explicit emissions and socio-economic variables are required for slightly different reasons. Some emissions, such as the SO2 emissions that contribute to sulfate aerosols, have impacts that vary depending on where they are emitted. Climate modelers therefore need spatially explicit emission estimates. Similarly, impacts depend on the geographic patterns of changing temperatures, rainfall, humidity and cloud cover, and how these compare to evolving socio-economic patterns in specific scenarios. Impact modelers therefore need spatially explicit estimates of, in particular, population growth, migration, and the economic variables that reflect the expected adaptability or vulnerability of different populations and regional economies to different regional climate changes. Taking the above audiences and purposes into account, the following more precise specifications for the new SRES scenarios were developed. The new scenarios should: • cover the full range of radiatively important gases, which include direct and indirect GHGs and SO2; • have sufficient spatial resolution to allow regional assessments of climate change in the global context; • cover a wide spectrum of alternative futures to reflect relevant uncertainties and knowledge gaps; • use a variety of models to reflect methodological pluralism and uncertainty; • incorporate input from a wide range of scientific disciplines and expertise from non-academic sources through an open process; • exclude additional initiatives and policies specifically designed to reduce climate change; • cover and describe to the extent possible a range of policies that could affect climate change although they are targeted at other issues, for example, reductions in SO2 emissions to limit acid rain; • cover as much as possible of the range of major underlying “driving forces” of emissions scenarios identified in the open literature; • be transparent with input assumptions, exclude additional initiatives and policies specifically designed to reduce climate change; • cover and describe to the extent possible a range of policies that could affect climate change although they are targeted at other issues, for example, reductions in SO2 emissions to limit acid rain; • cover as much as possible of the range of major underlying "driving forces" of emissions scenarios identified in the open literature; • be transparent with input assumptions, modeling approaches and results open to external review; • be reproducible – input data and methodology are documented adequately enough to allow other researchers to reproduce the scenarios; and • be internally consistent – the various input assumptions and data of the scenarios are internally consistent to the extent possible. 1.4. Review of Past IPCC Emissions Scenarios The 1994 IPCC evaluation of the usefulness of the IPCC 1992 (IS92) scenarios found that for the purposes of driving atmospheric and climate models, the CO2 emissions trajectories in these provided a reasonable reflection of variations found in the open literature. Specifically, their global CO2 emissions spanned most of the range of other scenarios identified in the literature. Figure 1-2 shows the global, energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions of the IS92 scenarios ranging from very high emissions of 35.8 GtC to very low emissions of 4.6 GtC by 2100 (corresponding to a sixfold increase and a decline by a third compared to 1990 levels, respectively). The shaded area in Figure 1-2 indicates the coverage of the IS92 scenarios while the "spaghetti-like" curves indicate other energy-related emissions scenarios found by the IPCC review to be representative of the scenarios available in the open literature at that time (Alcamo et al., 1995). In the open literature, emissions trajectories for other gases were extremely thin in many instances, but the IS92 cases were not dissimilar to these. Another important recommendation of the 1994 IPCC review was that, given the degree of uncertainty about future climate change, analysts should use the full range of IS92 emissions as input to climate models rather than a single scenario. This is in stark contrast to the actual use of one particular scenario in the set, the IS92a scenario, as the reference case in numerous studies. In fact, the IS92a scenario is often referred to in climate change modeling and impact studies as the "business-as-usual" scenario and used as the only reference emissions trajectory. The review concluded that the mere fact of the IS92a being an intermediate, or central, CO2 emissions scenario at the global level does not equate it with being the most likely scenario. Indeed, the conclusion was that there was no objective basis on which to assign likelihood to any of the scenarios. Furthermore, the IS92a scenario was shown to be "central" for only a few of its salient characteristics such as global population growth, global economic development and global CO2 emissions. In other ways, IS92a was found not to be central with respect to the published literature, particularly in some of its regional input assumptions. The same is the case with the new set of SRES scenarios, as is shown below. No single scenario can be central with respect to all the characteristics relevant for different uses of emissions scenarios and there is no objective way to assign likelihood to any of the scenarios. 1.5. Why New IPCC Emissions Scenarios? The 1994 IPCC evaluation of the IS92 scenarios found that the scenarios were innovative at the time of their publication and path-breaking in their coverage of the full range of GHG and SO2 emissions, on both a global and a regional basis. The review also identified a number of weaknesses. These included the limited range of CO2 intensities of energy (CO2 emissions per unit energy) reflected in the six scenarios and the absence of any scenario with significant closure in the income gap between developed and developing countries, even after a full century (Parikh, 1992). Across all six scenarios the per capita income in the developing countries grows only to a share of 17% to 26% of that of the industrial countries, compared to 6% today. Furthermore, since the development of the IS92 scenarios much has changed in our understanding of both the possible future GHG emissions and the climate impacts that might result. The most straightforward change arises because the IS92 scenarios had to estimate data for the base year 1990 (actual data were unavailable at the time); 1990 is no longer a forecast year and actual data can be used. But other changes are at least as important. It is now recognized that in some regions SO2 emissions may be as important to climate change as all non-CO2 greenhouse related gases combined – at least in the near-term. As a result the rapid growth of SO2 emissions in the IS92 scenarios has been questioned. The 1994 evaluation of the IS92 scenario series (Alcamo et al., 1995) concluded, for instance, that projected emissions in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries did not reflect recent legislative changes such as the Amendments of the Clean Air Act in the US or the Second European Sulfur Protocol. Thus, factors other than climate change, namely regional and local air quality, may well prompt limits on future SO2 emissions independent of global warming concerns. Restructuring in Eastern and Central Europe and the Newly Independent States of the former Soviet Union has powerfully affected economic activity, with reductions in CO2 emissions unforeseen in the IS92 scenarios. The advent of integrated assessment (IA) models has also made it possible now to construct internally consistent emissions scenarios that jointly consider the interactions among energy use, the economy, and land-use change. Some IA models account for interactions in both directions between driving forces of GHG and SO2 emissions and possible impacts of climate change. Progress has also been made in achieving greater consistency among scenario characteristics such as the rates of technological change in different sectors. Owing to these advances, the 1994 IPCC review of the IS92 scenarios concluded that new scenarios, if developed, should include these improvements: • estimation of emissions baselines and future non-CO2 emissions, particularly from land use; • incorporation of the latest information on economic restructuring throughout the world; • expand the range of economic-development pathways, including a narrowing of the income gap between developing and industrialized countries; • examine different trends in and rates of technological change; • evaluate possible consequences of trade and market liberalization and privatization; and • reflect current emission commitments in connection with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1997). However, the Terms of Reference for SRES explicitly preclude additional initiatives, measures and policies specifically designed to reduce climate change (see Appendix I). 1.6. SRES Approach and Process The 1994 IPCC review also offered recommendations about the process by which a new set of scenarios might be prepared. It recommended that the IPCC or another suitable organization act as an "umbrella" under which different groups could develop comparable, comprehensive emissions scenarios. They further recommended that the process for developing scenarios should draw on increasing experience in scenario harmonization and model calculations, and that it should emphasize: • openness to broad participation by the research (and stakeholder) community, particularly from developing countries and countries with economies in transition; • extensive documentation of modeling assumptions, inputs and outputs; • pluralism and diversity of groups, approaches and methods, although the final set of scenarios should be harmonized; • comparability across the scenarios that necessitates standardized reporting conventions for model inputs and outputs; and • harmonization of emission scenarios in the set to provide common benchmarks for scenarios from different modeling groups. Further recommendations included wide dissemination of the scenarios to countries, international organizations, non-governmental organizations and the scientific community. As part of this effort, a central archive should be established to make available the results of new scenarios to any group. The archive should also make available some aspects of the models and input assumptions used to derive the scenarios. In addition, special efforts are needed to improve the capabilities of researchers to analyze and develop scenarios, especially in developing countries and countries with economies in transition. As described at the beginning of this chapter, IPCC WGIII appointed the SRES writing team in January 1997, and the team reached early consensus on the four major components of an overall work program (outlined in Section 1.1). The SRES team worked in close collaboration with colleagues on the IPCC Task Group on Climate Scenarios for Impact Assessment (TGCIA) and with colleagues from all three IPCC working groups. As is evident from the four components of the work program, it was agreed that the process be an open one with no "official" model and no exclusive "expert teams." High priority was given to wide participation so that any research group capable of preparing scenarios for any region could participate. In 1997 the IPCC advertised in a number of relevant scientific journals and other publications to solicit wide participation in the process. All global modeling teams and regional modelers were invited and encouraged to participate. In this way, researchers with local expertise from both developing and developed regions could contribute to the global exercise even if their own research was exclusively regional. To facilitate participation and improve the usefulness of the new scenarios, the open-process web site mentioned above was created. The open process provided a wide access to preliminary marker (see below) SRES scenario results and greatly facilitated coordination. teams and regional modelers were invited and encouraged to participate. In this way, researchers with local expertise from both developing and developed regions could contribute to the global exercise even if their own research was exclusively regional. To facilitate participation and improve the usefulness of the new scenarios, the open-process web site mentioned above was created. The open process provided a wide access to preliminary marker (see below) SRES scenario results and greatly facilitated coordination among the writing team. It also provided feedback about the needs of those who would use the final scenarios, and suggestions for improvements. The open process also served to document all relevant results and associated assumptions for the preliminary scenarios developed by the participating modeling groups. Four storylines were developed by the whole writing team in an iterative process that identified driving forces, key uncertainties, and quantitative scenario families. The team was fortunate to have a number of skilled practitioners in scenario building. The process of quantifying the four storylines deserves some elaboration. The storylines were essentially complete by January 1998, at which time the modeling groups represented on the writing team began to quantify them. For each storyline, one modeling group was given principal responsibility, and the quantification produced by that group is referred to as the "marker scenario" for that storyline. The four preliminary marker scenarios were posted on the web site of the open process. The choice of the markers was based on extensive discussion of: • range of emissions across all of marker scenarios; • which of the initial quantifications (by the modelers) reflected the storyline; • preference of some of the modeling teams and features of specific models; • use of different models for the four markers. As a result the markers are not necessarily the median or mean of the scenario family, but are those scenarios considered by the SRES writing team as illustrative of a particular storyline. These scenarios have received the closest scrutiny of the entire writing team and via the SRES open process compared to other scenario quantifications. The marker scenarios are also those SRES scenarios that have been most intensively tested in terms of reproducibility. As a rule, different modeling teams have attempted to replicate the model quantification of a particular marker scenario. Available time and resources have not allowed a similar exercise to be conducted for all SRES scenarios, although some effort was devoted to reproduce the four scenario groups^ that constitute different interpretations of one of the four storylines (see Figure 1-4) with different models. Additional versions of the preliminary marker scenarios by different modeling teams and other scenarios that give alternative quantitative interpretations of the four storylines constitute the final set of 40 SRES scenarios. This also means that the 40 scenarios are not independent of each other as they are all based on four storylines. However, differences in modeling approaches have meant that not all of the scenarios provide estimates for all the direct and indirect GHG emissions for all the sources and sectors. The four SRES marker scenarios cover all the relevant gas species and emission categories comprehensively. The four marker scenarios were posted on the IPCC web site (sres.ciesin.org) in June 1998, and the open scenario review process through the IPCC web site lasted until January 1999. The submissions invited through the open process and web site fell into three categories (see Appendix VI): • additional scenarios published in the reviewed literature that had not been included in the scenario database (see Appendix V); • new scenarios based on the SRES marker scenarios; and • general suggestions to improve the work of the SRES writing team as posted on the web site (preferably based on referenced literature). The submissions were used to revise the marker scenarios and to develop additional alternatives within each of the four scenario families. The result is a more complete, refined set of 40 new scenarios that reflects the broad spectrum of modeling approaches and regional perspectives. The preliminary marker scenarios posted on the web site were provided also to climate modelers, with the approval of the IPCC Bureau. 1.7. SRES Emissions Scenarios 1.7.1. Literature Review and Analysis The first step in formulation of the SRES emissions scenarios was to review both the published scenario literature and the development of the scenario database accessible through the web site (www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). Chapters 2 and 3 give a more detailed description of the literature review and analysis. Figure 1-3 shows the global energy-related CO2 emission paths from the database as "spaghetti" curves for the period to 2100 against the background of the historical emissions from 1900 to 1990. These curves are plotted against an index on the vertical axis rather than as absolute values because of the large differences and discrepancies for the values assumed for the base year 1990. These sometimes arise from genuine differences among the scenarios (e.g., different data sources, definitions) and sometimes from different base years assumed in the analysis or in alternative calibrations. The differences among the scenarios in the specification of the base year illustrate the large genuine scientific and data uncertainty that surrounds emissions and their main driving forces captured in the scenarios. The literature includes scenarios with additional climate polices, which are sometimes referred to as mitigation or intervention scenarios. There are many ambiguities associated with the classification of emissions scenarios into those that include additional climate initiatives and those that do not. Many cannot be classified in this way on basis of the information available from the database. Figure 1-3 indicates the ranges of emissions in 2100 from scenarios that apparently include additional climate initiatives (designated as intervention emissions range), those that do not (non-intervention) and those that cannot be assigned to either of these two categories (non-classified). This classification is based on the subjective evaluation of the scenarios in the database by the members of the writing team and is explained in Chapter 2. The range of the whole sample of scenarios has significant overlap with the range of those that cannot be classified and they share virtually the same median (15.7 and 15.2 GtC in 2100, respectively) but the non-classified scenarios do not cover the high part of the range. Also, the range of the scenarios that apparently do not include climate polices (non-intervention) has considerable overlap with the other two ranges (lower bound is higher) but with a significantly higher median (of 21.3 GtC in 2100). ^ The 1990 emissions from energy production and use are estimated by Marland et al. (1994) at 5.9 GtC excluding cement production. The 1990 base year values in the scenarios reviewed range from 4.8 (CETA/EMF14, Scenario MAGICC CO2) to 6.4 GtC (ICAM2/EMF14); see Dowlatabadi and Kandlikar 1995; Peck and Teisberg, 1995. 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 Figure 1-3: Global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions - historical development and future scenarios, shown as an index (1990 = 1). The median (50th), the 5th, 25th, 75th and 95th percentiles of the frequency distribution are shown. The statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence (e.g., the frequency distribution of the scenarios may be influenced by the use of IS92a as a reference for many subsequent studies). The emissions paths indicate a wide range of future emissions. The range is also large in the base year 1990 and is indicated by an "error" bar. To separate the variation due to base-year specification from different future paths, emissions are indexed for the year 1990, when actual global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions were about 6 GtC. The coverage of CO2 emissions sources may vary across the 256 different scenarios from the database included in the figure. The scenario samples used vary across the time steps (for 1990 256 scenarios, for 2020 and 2030 247, for 2050 220, and for 2100 190 scenarios). Also shown, as vertical bars on the right of the figure, are the ranges of emissions in 2100 for scenarios from the literature that apparently include additional climate initiatives (designated as "intervention" scenarios emissions range), those that do not ("non-intervention"), and those that cannot be assigned to either of these two categories ("non-classified"). This classification is based on the subjective evaluation of the scenarios in the database by the members of the writing team and is explained in Chapter 2. Data sources: Morita and Lee, 1998a, 1998b; Nakicenovic et al., 1998. Historically, gross CO2 emissions have increased at an average rate of about 1.7% per year since 1900 (Nakicenovic et al., 1996); if that historical trend continues global emissions would double during the next three to four decades and increase more than sixfold by 2100. Many scenarios in the database describe such a development. However, the range is very large around this historical trend so that the highest scenarios envisage more than a sevenfold increase of global emissions by 2100 as compared with 1990, while the lowest have emissions lower than those of today. The median and the average of the scenarios lead to about a threefold emissions increase over the same time period or to about 16 GtC. This is lower than the median of the IS92 set and is lower than the IS92a scenario, often considered as the "central" scenario with respect to some of its tendencies. However, the distribution of emissions is asymmetric. The thin emissions "tail" that extends above the 95th percentile (i.e., between the six and tenfold increase of emissions by 2100 compared to 1990) includes only a few scenarios. The range of other emissions and the main scenario driving forces (such as population growth, economic development and energy production, conversion and end use) for the scenarios documented in the database is also large and comparable to the variation of CO2 emissions. Statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence or likelihood between the six and tenfold increase of emissions by 2100 compared to 1990) includes only a few scenarios. The range of other emissions and the main scenario driving forces (such as population growth, economic development and energy production, conversion and end use) for the scenarios documented in the database is also large and comparable to the variation of CO2 emissions. Statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence or likelihood of the scenarios. The frequency distribution of the database may be influenced by the use of IS92a as a reference for scenario studies. 1.7.2. Narrative Storylines and Scenario Quantifications Given these large ranges of future emissions and their driving forces, there are an infinite number of possible alternative futures to explore. The SRES scenarios cover a finite, albeit a very wide, range of future emissions. To facilitate the process of identifying alternative future developments, the writing team decided to describe their scenarios coherently by narrative storylines. The storylines describe developments in many different economic, technical, environmental and social dimensions. The main reasons for formulating storylines are to: • help the writing team to think more coherently about the complex interplay between scenario driving forces within each and across alternative scenarios; • make it easier to explain the scenarios to the various user communities by providing a narrative description of alternative futures that goes beyond quantitative scenario features; • make the scenarios more useful, in particular to analysts who contribute to IPCC WGII and WGIII; the social, political and technological context described in the scenario storylines is all-important in analyzing the effects of policies either to adapt to climate change or to reduce GHG emissions; and • provide a guide for additional assumptions to be made in detailed climate impact and mitigation analyses, because at present no single model or scenario can possibly respond to the wide variety of informational and data needs of the different user communities of long-term emissions scenarios. The writing team consciously applied the principle of Occam's Razor (i.e., the economy of thought, Eatwell et al., 1998). They sought the minimum number of scenarios that could still serve as an adequate basis to assess climate change and that would still challenge policy makers to test possible response strategies against a significant range of plausible futures. The team decided on four storylines, as an even number helps to avoid the impression that there is a "central" or "most likely" case. The writing team wanted more than two storylines to help to illustrate that the future depends on many different underlying dynamics; the team did not want more than four, as it wanted to avoid complicating the process by too many alternatives. The scenarios would cover a wide range of - but not all possible - futures. In particular, there would be no "disaster" scenarios. None of the scenarios include new explicit climate policies. The team decided to carry out sensitivity tests within some of the storylines by considering alternative scenarios with different fossil-fuel reserves, rates of economic growth, or rates of technical change. The storylines describe developments in many different social, economic, technological, environmental and policy dimensions. The titles of the storylines have been kept simple: A1, A2, B1 and B2. There is no particular order among the storylines; they are listed in the alphabetic and numeric order: • The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world of very rapid economic growth, low population growth, and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying themes are convergence among regions, capacity building and increased cultural and social interactions, with a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita income. The A1 scenario family develops into four groups that describe alternative directions of technological change in the energy system.** ^ Please note that in the Summary for Policymakers, two of these groups were merged into one. See also the endnote in Box 1-2. • The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance and preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across regions converge very slowly, which results in high population growth. Economic development is primarily regionally oriented and per capita economic growth and technological change are more fragmented and slower than in other storylines. • The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a convergent world with the same low population growth as in the A1 storyline, but with rapid changes in economic structures toward a service and information economy, with reductions in material intensity, and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient technologies. The emphasis is on global solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability, including improved equity, but without additional climate initiatives. • The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability. It is a world with moderate population growth, intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented toward environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local and regional levels. Figure 1-4 schematically illustrates the SRES scenarios. It shows that the scenarios build on the main driving forces of GHG emissions. Each scenario family is based on a common specification of the main driving forces. The four scenario families are illustrated, very simplistically, as branches of a two-dimensional tree. The two dimensions indicate global and regional scenario orientation and development and environmental orientation, respectively. In reality, the four scenarios share a space of a much higher dimensionality given the numerous driving forces and other assumptions needed to define any given scenario in a particular modeling approach. After determining the basic features and driving forces for each of the four storylines, the teams began to model and quantify them. This resulted in 40 scenarios, each constituting an alternative interpretation and quantification of a storyline. All the interpretations and quantifications associated with a single storyline are called a scenario "family" (see also Box 1-2 on terminology and Chapter 4 for further details). In all, six models were used to generate the 40 scenarios: • Asian Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) from the National Institute of Environmental Studies in Japan (Morita et al., 1994); • Atmospheric Stabilization Framework Model (ASF) from ICF Consulting in the USA (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990; Pepper et al., 1992, 1998; Sankovski et al., 2000); • Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect (IMAGE) from the National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) (Alcamo et al., 1998; de Vries et al., 1994, 1999, 2000), used in connection with the Dutch Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) WorldScan model (de Jong and Zalm, 1991), the Netherlands; • Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation (MARIA) from the Science University of Tokyo in Japan (Mori and Takahashi, 1999; Mori, 2000); • Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (MESSAGE) from the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria (Messner and Strubegger, 1995; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000); and the • Mini Climate Assessment Model (MiniCAM) from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) in the USA (Edmonds et al., 1994, 1996a, 1996b). These six models are representative of emissions scenario modeling approaches and different IA frameworks in the literature and include so-called top-down and bottom-up models. The six models have different regional aggregations. The writing team decided to group the various global regions into four "macro-regions" common to all different regional aggregations across the six models. The four macro-regions (see Appendix III) are broadly consistent with the allocation of the countries in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1997), although the correspondence is not exact because of changes in the countries listed in Annex I of the UNFCCC: • The OECD90 region groups together all countries that belong to the OECD as of 1990, the base year of the participating models, and corresponds to Annex II countries under UNFCCC (1992). • The REF region comprises those countries undergoing economic reform and groups together the East European countries and the Newly Independent States of the former Soviet Union. It includes Annex I countries outside Annex II as defined in UNFCCC (1992). • The ASIA region stands for all developing (non-Annex I) countries in Asia. • The ALM region stands for rest of the world and includes all developing (non-Annex I) countries in Africa, Latin America and the Middle East. In other words, the OECD90 and REF regions together correspond to the developed (i.e., industrialized) countries while the ASIA and ALM regions together correspond to the developing countries. The OECD90 and REF regions are consistent with the Annex I countries in the Framework Convention on Climate Change, while the ASIA and ALM regions correspond to the non-Annex I countries. 1.7.3. The Range of SRES Emissions and their Implications The 40 SRES scenarios cover the full range of GHG and SO2 emissions consistent with the storylines and underlying ranges of driving forces from studies in the literature as documented in the SRES database. The four marker scenarios are characteristic of the four scenario families and jointly capture of SRES Emissions and their Implications The 40 SRES scenarios cover the full range of GHG and SO2 emissions consistent with the storylines and underlying ranges of driving forces from studies in the literature as documented in the SRES database. The four marker scenarios are characteristic of the four scenario families and jointly capture most of the ranges of emissions and driving forces spanned by the full set of scenarios. Figure 1-6 illustrates the range of global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions for the 40 SRES scenarios against the background of all the emissions scenarios in the SRES scenario database shown in Figure 1-3. Figure 1-6 also shows a range of emissions of the four scenario families. Figure 1-6 shows that the SRES scenarios cover most of the range of global energy-related CO2 emissions from the literature, from the 95th percentile at the high end of the distribution down to low emissions just above the 5th percentile of the distribution. Thus, they only exclude the most extreme emissions scenarios found in the literature - those situated in the tails of the distribution. What is perhaps more important is that each of the four scenario families covers a sizable part of this distribution, which implies that a similar quantification of driving forces can lead to a wide range of future emissions. More specifically, a given combination of the main driving forces is not sufficient to uniquely determine a future emissions path. There are too many uncertainties. The fact that each of the scenario families covers a substantial part of the literature range also leads to an overlap in the emissions ranges of the four families. This implies that a given level of future emissions can arise from very different combinations of driving forces. This result is of fundamental importance for the assessment of climate-change impacts and possible mitigation and adaptation strategies. Thus, it warrants some further discussion. The emissions paths of the A1 and B2 scenario families perhaps best illustrate these implications. The A1 scenario family has explored variations in energy systems most explicitly and hence covers the largest part of the scenario distribution shown in Figure 1-6, from the 95th to just above the 10th percentile. The A1 marker (A1B) scenario represents a structure of the future energy mix, balanced in the sense that it does not rely too heavily on one particular energy source. The A1 scenario family includes different groups of scenarios that explore different specific structures of future energy systems, from carbon-intensive development paths to high rates of decarbonization as captured by the two illustrative scenarios that span most of the emissions range for the A1 family. All groups otherwise share the same assumptions about the main driving forces. This indicates that different structures of the energy system can lead to basically the same variation in future emissions as can be generated by different combinations of the other main driving forces - population, economic activities and energy consumption levels. The implication is that decarbonization of energy systems - the shift from carbon-intensive to less carbon-intensive and carbon-free sources of energy - is of similar importance in determining the future emissions paths as other driving forces. Sustained decarbonization requires the development and successful diffusion of new technologies. Thus investments in new technologies during the coming decades might have the same order of influence on future emissions as population growth, economic development and levels of energy consumption taken together. For example, the comparison of the A1B and B2 marker scenarios indicates that they have similar emissions of about 13.5 and 13.7 GtC by 2100, respectively. The dynamics of the paths are different so that they have different cumulative CO2 emissions. To facilitate such comparisons, the scenarios were grouped into four categories of cumulative emissions between 1990 and 2100. This categorization can guide comparisons using either scenarios with different driving forces yet similar emissions, or scenarios with similar driving forces but different emissions. This characteristic of SRES scenarios also has very important implications for the assessment of climate-change impacts, mitigation and adaptation strategies. Two future worlds with fundamentally different characteristic features, such as A1B and B2 marker scenarios, also have different cumulative CO2 emissions and radiative forcing, but very similar CO2 emissions in 2100. In contrast, scenarios that are in the same category of cumulative emissions can have fundamentally different driving forces and different CO2 emissions in 2100, but very similar cumulative emissions and radiative forcing. Presumably, adverse impacts and effective adaptation measures would vary among the scenarios from different families that share similar cumulative emissions but have different very similar CO2 emissions in 2100. In contrast, scenarios that are in the same category of cumulative emissions can have fundamentally different driving forces and different CO2 emissions in 2100, but very similar cumulative emissions and radiative forcing. Presumably, adverse impacts and effective adaptation measures would vary among the scenarios from different families that share similar cumulative emissions but have different demographic, socio-economic and technological driving forces. This is another reason for considering the entire range of future emissions in future assessments of climate change. There is no single "best guess" or central scenario. The SRES emissions scenarios also have different emissions for other GHGs and chemically active species such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and volatile organic hydrocarbons. The emissions of other gases follow dynamic patterns much like those shown in Figure 1-6 for emissions. Further details about GHG emissions are given in Chapter 5. Emissions of sulfur aerosol precursors portray even more dynamic patterns in time and space than the CO2 emissions shown in Figure 1-6. Factors other than climate change, namely regional and local air quality, and transformations in the structure of the energy system and end use intervene to limit future emissions. In view of the significant adverse impacts, SO2 emissions in the scenarios are increasingly controlled outside countries of the OECD. As such the SRES scenarios reflect both recent legislation in North America and in Europe and recent policy initiatives in a number of developing countries aimed at reducing SO2 emissions (reviewed in more detail in Chapters 3 and 5). As a result, in the second half of the 21st century both the trends and regional patterns of SO2 emissions evolve differently from those of CO2 emissions in the SRES scenarios. Emissions outside OECD90 rise initially, most notably in ASIA, and compensate for declining OECD90 emissions. Over the long term, however, SO2 emissions decline throughout the world, but the timing and magnitude vary across the scenarios. One important implication of this varying pattern of SO2 emissions is that the historically important, but uncertain negative radiative forcing of sulfate aerosols may decline in the very long run. An important feature of the SRES scenarios is their implications for radiative forcing. A vigorous increase of global SO2 emissions during the next few decades across most of the scenarios followed by a decline thereafter will lead to a cooling effect that will differ from the effect that results from the continuously increasing SO2 emissions in the IS92 scenarios. On one hand, the reduction in global SO2 emissions reduces the role of sulfate aerosols in determining future climate toward the end of the 21st century and therefore reduces one aspect of uncertainty about future climate change (because the precise forcing effect of sulfate aerosols is highly uncertain). On the other hand, uncertainty increases because of the diversity in spatial patterns of SO2 emissions in the scenarios. Future assessments of possible climate change need to account for these different spatial and temporal dynamics of GHG and SO2 emissions, and they need to cover the whole range of radiative forcing associated with the scenarios. 1.8. Structure of the Report The report consists of six chapters and 11 appendices. After this introductory chapter, Chapters 2 and 3 present the scenario literature review and analysis. Chapters 4 and 5 describe the new SRES scenarios. Chapter 6 summarizes the main findings, and the appendices present the methodological approach and statistical background material. Chapter 2 presents the assessment of anthropogenic GHG emissions scenarios and their main driving forces based on an extensive literature review. It describes the unique scenario database developed for this study, which contains over 400 global and regional scenarios. The chapter presents the range of emissions from the scenarios in the literature with associated statistics such as medians, percentiles and histograms. The main scenario driving forces are analyzed in the same way, from population and economic development to energy. Chapter 3 reviews the main driving forces of past and possible future anthropogenic GHG emissions. These include demographic, economic and social development, changes in resources and technology, agriculture and land-use change, and policy issues other than those related to climate. The relationships and possible interactions among the driving forces are highly complex and heterogeneous. The focus of the chapter is to provide an overview of the main driving forces and their possible relationships that are particularly relevant for the SRES scenarios. Chapter 4 presents the narrative scenario storylines and the quantification of the main scenario driving forces with the six SRES IA models. First, an overview of the four storylines is given which describes their main characteristics, relationships and implications. Then, the 40 scenario quantifications of the four storylines with the six models are presented. For each storyline one scenario is designated as a representative marker scenario. Together the 40 scenarios span the range of scenario driving forces and their relationships presented in the previous two chapters. Chapter 5 documents anthropogenic GHG and SO2 emissions for the 40 SRES scenarios highlighting the four marker scenarios. First, CO2 emissions are presented, followed by other GHGs, and by the assessment of indirect effects and aerosols. Together the 40 scenarios span the emissions ranges from the literature and the four marker scenarios jointly characterize both the dynamics of emissions patterns and their ranges. Chapter 6 summarizes the main characteristics of the SRES scenarios and findings and compares the new scenarios with the IS92 set as well as with other scenarios from the literature. The chapter addresses possible implications of the new scenarios for future assessments of climate change and concludes with recommendations from the writing team for user communities. Finally, 11 appendices conclude the report. They include for example the SRES Terms of Reference, a technical appendix that describes the six modeling approaches used to formulate the 40 scenarios, the scenario database and tables with further statistics that describe the new scenarios. References: Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grübler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios. In Climate Change 1994. Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios. J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 233-304. Alcamo, J., R. Leemans, and E. Kreileman (eds.) 1998: Global Change Scenarios of the 21st Century. Results from the IMAGE 2.1 model. Elsevier Science, London. Alcamo, J., and R. Swart, 1998: Future trends of land-use emissions of major greenhouse gases. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 343-381. Anderson, D., 1998: On the effects of social and economic policies on future carbon emissions. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 419-453. Davis, G.R., 1999: Foreseeing a refracted future. Scenario & Strategy Planning, 1(1), 13-15. De Jong, A., and G. Zalm, 1991: Scanning the future: A long-term scenario study of the world economy 1990-2015. In Long-term Prospects of the World Economy. OECD, Paris, pp. 27-74. De Vries, H.J.M., J.G.J. Olivier, R.A. van den Wijngaart, G.J.J. Kreileman, and A.M.C. Toet, 1994: Model for calculating regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 76, 79-131. De Vries, B., M. Janssen, and A. Beusen, 1999: Perspectives on global energy futures - simulations with the TIME model. Energy Policy, 27, 477-494. De Vries, B., J. Bollen, L. Bouwman, M. den Elzen, M. Janssen, and E. Kreileman, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in an equity-, environment- and service-oriented world: An IMAGE-based scenario for the next century. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Dowlatabadi, H., and M. Kandlikar, 1995: Key Uncertainties in Climate Change Policy: Results from ICAM-2. Proceedings of the 6th Global Warming Conference, San Francisco, CA. Eatwell, J., New Palgrave. A Dictionary of Economics, 3. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, and C. MacCracken, 1994; Advanced energy technologies and climate change. An Analysis Using the Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM). PNL-9798, UC-402, Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, H. Pitcher, R. Richels, T. Wigley, and C. MacCracken, 1996a; An integrated assessment of climate change and the accelerated introduction of advanced energy technologies: An application of MiniCAM 1.0. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1(4), 311-339. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, R. Sands, R. Brown, and H. Kheshgi, 1996b; Agriculture, land-use, and commercial biomass energy. A Preliminary integrated analysis of the potential role of Biomass Energy for Reducing Future Greenhouse Related Emissions. PNNL-11155, Pacific Northwest National Laboratories, Washington, DC. Fenhann, J., 2000: Industrial non-energy, non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Funtowicz, S.O., and J.R. Ravetz, 1990; Uncertainty and Quality in Science for Policy. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, the Netherlands. Gaffin, S.R., 1998: World population projections for greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 133-170. Gregory, K., 1998: Factors affecting future emissions of methane from non-land-use sources. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 321-341. Gregory, K., and H.-H. Rogner, 1998: Energy resources and conversion technologies for the 21st century. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 171-229. Grübler, A., 1998: A review of global and regional sulfur emission scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 383-418. Houghton, J.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), 1990; Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 365 pp. Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1996; Climate Change 1995. The Science of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group 1 to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Jefferson, M., 1983; Economic uncertainty and business decision-making. In Beyond Positive Economics? J. Wiseman (ed.), Macmillan Press, London, pp. 122-159. Jiang, K., T. Masui, T. Morita, and Y. Matsuoka, 2000; Long-term GHG emission scenarios of Asia-Pacific and the world. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Jung, T.-Y., E.L. La Rovere, H. Gaj, P.R. Shukla, and D. Zhou, 2000; Structural changes in developing countries and their implication to energy-related CO2 emissions. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Kram, T., K. Riahi, R.A. Roehrl, S. van Rooijen, T. Morita, and B. de Vries, 2000: Global and regional greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Lashof, D., and D.A. Tirpak, 1990; Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate. 2IP-2003. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. Leggett, J., W.J. Pepper, and R.J. Swart, 1992; Emissions Scenarios for IPCC: An Update. In: Climate Change 1992. The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 69-95. Marland, G., R.J. Andres, and T.A. Boden, 1994; Global, regional, and national CO2 emissions, pp. 505-584. In Trends '93: A Compendium of Data on Global Change. ORNL/CDIAC-65. T.A. Boden, D.R. Kaiser, R.J. Sepanski, and F.W. Stoss (eds.), Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, pp. 505-584. Messner, S., and M. Strubegger, 1995; User's Guide for MESSAGE III. WP-95-69, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 155 pp. Michaelis, L., 1998; Economic and technological development in climate scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 231-261. Morgan, M.G., and M. Henrion, 1990: Uncertainty: A Guide to Dealing with Uncertainty in Quantitative Risk and Policy Analysis. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Mori, S., and M. Takahashi, 1999; An integrated assessment model for the evaluation of new energy technologies and food productivity. International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 11(1-4), 1-18. Mori, S., 2000; The development of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios using an extension of the MARIA model for the assessment of resource and energy technologies. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Morita, T., Y. Matsuoka, I. Penna, and M. Kainuma, 1994: Global Carbon Dioxide Emission Scenar Morita, T., and H.-C. Lee, 1998a: Appendix to Emissions Scenarios Database and Review of Scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 121-131. Morita, T., and H.-C. Lee, 1998b: IPCC SRES Database, Version 0.1, Emission Scenario Database prepared for IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (http:www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, H. Ishitani, T. Johansson, G. Marland, J.R. Moreira, and H.-H. Rogner, 1996: Energy primer. In Climate Change 1995. Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. R. Watson, M.C. Zinyowera, R. Moss (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 75-92. Nakicenovic, N., N. Victor, and T. Morita, 1998: Emissions Scenarios Database and Review of Scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 95-120. Nakicenovic, N., 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 65(3). (In press). Parikh, J.K., 1992: IPCC strategies unfair to the south. Nature, 360, 507-508. Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg, 1995: International CO2 emissions control - An analysis using CETA. Energy Policy, 23(4), 297-308. Pepper, W.J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992: Emissions scenarios for the IPCC. An update: Assumptions, methodology, and results. Support document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callandar, S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pepper, W.J., Barbour, W., Sankovski, A., and Braaz, B., 1998: No-policy greenhouse gas emission scenarios: revisiting IPCC 1992. Environmental Science & Policy, 1, 289-312. Price, L., L. Michaels, E. Worell and M. Khrushch, 1998: Sectoral trends and driving forces of global energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 263-319. Riahi, K., and R.A. Roehrl, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in a dynamics-as-usual scenario of economic and energy development. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Roehrl, R.A., and K. Riahi, 2000: Technology dynamics and greenhouse gas emissions mitigation - a cost assessment. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). Sankovski, A., W. Barbour, and W. Pepper, 2000: Quantification of the IS99 emission scenario storylines using the atmospheric stabilization framework (ASF). Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press). UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1992: Convention Text, UNFCCC, Geneva. UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1997: Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. FCCC/CP/L7/Add.1, 10 December 1997, UN, New York, NY. Wigley, T.M.L., and S.C.B. Raper, 1992: Implications for climate and sea level of revised IPCC emissions scenarios. Nature, 357, 293-300. Wigley, T.M.L., et al., 1994: Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse-gas Induced Climate Change Version 1.2. Climate Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK. 2 An Overview of the Scenario Literature CONTENTS 2.1. Introduction 79 2.2. General Overview of Scenarios 80 2.3. Emissions Scenario Database 81 2.4. Analysis of Literature 83 2.4.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions Ranges 84 2.4.2. Carbon Dioxide Emissions Histograms 89 2.4.3. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions 91 2.4.4. Population Projection Ranges 91 2.4.5. Gross World Product 92 2.4.6. Gross World Product Histograms 93 2.4.7. Population and Gross World Product Relationships 95 2.4.8. Primary Energy Consumption Ranges 95 2.4.9. Primary Energy Consumption Histograms 96 2.4.10. Relationships between Primary Energy and Gross World Product 97 2.4.11. Carbon Intensity and Decarbonization 98 2.4.12. Comparison of Indicators 100 2.5. Conclusions 100 References 101 An Overview of the Scenario Literature 79 2.1. Introduction Presented in this chapter is the assessment of more than 400 global and regional greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions scenarios based on an extensive literature review. Emissions scenarios provide an important input for the assessment of future climate change. Future anthropogenic GHG emissions depend on numerous driving forces, including population growth, economic development, energy supply and use, land-use patterns, and a host of other human activities. These main driving forces that determine the emissions trajectories in the scenarios often also provide input to assess possible emissions mitigation strategies and possible impacts of unabated emissions. In view of the many different uses, it is not surprising that numerous emissions scenarios are presented in the literature and that the number of regional and global emissions scenarios is growing. An important characteristic of the scenarios in this Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) is that they reflect the underlying uncertainty, part of which derives from the range of emissions in the literature. The objective was to encompass the variation within the most important scenario driving forces and emissions, the complexity of possible relationships between driving forces and emissions, and the associated uncertainties that characterize alternative future developments. The SRES scenarios cover most of the range of the GHG emissions scenarios found in the literature, including the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 1992 Scenarios (IS92) series (Leggett et al., 1992). The writing team considered the literature in creating a new set of scenarios. Importantly, however, the literature on existing scenarios provides only a general framework to aid analysis; it is informative, but not determinative. The literature review consists of four parts: • documentation of as many as possible of the quantitative global and regional emissions scenarios available both in the open literature and from international activities that involve documentation of submitted scenarios; • development of a scenario database to document the more than 400 emissions scenarios collected during the literature review; • evaluation of the ranges and relationships of the main scenario driving forces and the resultant emissions for the scenarios documented in the database; and • assessment of the scenario submissions received through the SRES "open process." These four components of the literature review are well suited to document and assess the (quantitative) scenarios that assign numeric values to describe the future evolution of driving forces and emissions. Central to this assessment of emissions scenarios and their main driving forces is a unique scenario database developed by the National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) in Japan for SRES (Morita and Lee, 1998). The database version of 3 April 1998, which is assessed in this chapter, includes 416 different scenarios. The current database to document and assess the (quantitative) scenarios that assign numeric values to describe the future evolution of driving forces and emissions. Central to this assessment of emissions scenarios and their main driving forces is a unique scenario database developed by the National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) in Japan for SRES (Morita and Lee, 1998). The database version of 3 April 1998, which is assessed in this chapter, includes 416 different scenarios. The current database version can be accessed through an ftp-site (www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). It is the most comprehensive collection of emissions scenarios in the publicly available literature. It includes most of the recent global and regional scenarios and all of the scenarios used in the latest IPCC evaluation of emissions scenarios (Alcamo et al., 1995). Therefore, the emissions scenarios documented in the database are representative of the literature in general. However, there are a number of ways in which the coverage of the scenarios in the database could be extended in the future. For example, inclusion of long-term emissions scenarios for individual countries, when available, would improve the regional coverage (e.g., Parikh, 1996; Murthy et al., 1997). Also, a large majority of the scenarios report only energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions (230 scenarios), while only some report non-energy CO2 and other GHG emissions. This shortcoming of the emissions scenarios in the literature was identified in the last IPCC evaluation (Alcamo et al., 1995). The scenarios in the database were collected from 171 different literature sources and other scenario-evaluation activities, such as the Energy Modeling Forum (EMF; see Weyant, 1993) and the International Energy Workshop (IEW; see Manne and Schrattenholzer, 1996, 1997). The scenarios span a wide range of assumptions about demographic trends, levels of economic development, energy consumption and efficiency patterns, and other factors. The aim of this chapter is to show how the database can be utilized for the analysis of GHG emissions ranges and their main driving forces. Part of this assessment of the emissions scenarios is based on an earlier publication on the analysis of scenarios documented in the SRES database (Nakicenovic et al., 1998a). The scenarios in the database display a large range of future GHG emissions. Part of the range can be attributed to the different methods and models used to formulate the scenarios, which include simple spreadsheet models, economic models, and systems-engineering models. However, most of the range results from differences in the input assumptions of the scenarios, in particular those of the main scenario driving forces. In addition, simply to compare alternative emissions levels across different scenarios is not sufficient to shed light on internal consistency, plausibility, and comparability of the assumptions behind the scenarios. Analysis of the underlying driving forces is thus also an important part of the evaluation. This chapter provides an analysis of the main driving forces, such as population growth, economic growth, energy consumption, and energy and carbon intensities. Some of these driving forces are specified as model inputs, and some are derived from model outputs, so it is necessary to determine the assumed relationships among the main driving forces. Although the scenario database is well suited for the documentation of quantitative scenarios, there is also a significant literature on narrative scenarios. Both scenario types have in common that they are generally carefully constructed descriptions of possible future developments within the bounds of explicit assumptions and circumstances (see Chapter 1 for a more detailed discussion about scenarios). The difference is that the quantitative scenarios are usually developed with the help of formal models so as to assign internally consistent values to the various scenario characteristics. The SRES scenarios employ both approaches – a storyline that gives a broad, narrative, and qualitative scenario description plus a number of quantifications of each storyline with six different models. Thus, even though both narrative stories and quantitative scenarios are an integral part of the SRES emissions scenarios, the literature review focused on the documentation and the assessment of quantitative scenarios, for two reasons. First, it was not possible to devise a classification system that would allow the documentation of many different forms of narrative scenarios. Second, the SRES objective was to develop a set of numeric emissions scenarios for use in the IPCC and other assessments of climate change. Therefore, in this chapter the focus is only on the literature review of quantitative scenarios. A more detailed discussion of narrative scenarios is given in Chapter 4; it deals with the four SRES storylines and how they are related to recent work in the area of qualitative scenarios. The literature on quantitative scenarios is large indeed. This assessment is focused on the scenarios that extend at least to 2020, but about 10 scenarios with a shorter time horizon of 2010 are also included in the database. In addition, most of the scenarios have a global coverage, although a few regional scenarios are included to enhance the coverage of some parts of the world. These criteria narrowed considerably the number of global and regional GHG emissions scenarios with sufficient information to be included in the scenario literature review. This scenario literature review and evaluation is the second undertaken by the IPCC. The first was conducted to evaluate the IS92 set of scenarios in comparison to other GHG emissions scenarios found in the literature (Alcamo et al., 1995). It was completed in 1994 and included a comprehensive evaluation of GHG emissions and their main driving forces. This second review and evaluation builds upon and extends the earlier IPCC assessment. Consequently, an effort was made in the present review to include especially the GHG emissions scenarios published since the presentation of the IS92 scenarios. 2.2. General Overview of Scenarios The construction of scenarios to investigate alternative future developments under a set of assumed conditions dates far back. Scenarios are one of the main tools used to address the complexity and uncertainty of future challenges. The first scenarios were probably designed to help plan military operations, often called "war games." Today, scenarios are used regularly by military organizations around the world for training and planning purposes. Military strategists and teachers often use very sophisticated computer models to develop scenarios for a multitude of different purposes. Scenarios are also increasingly used by enterprises around the world for many commercial purposes. Perhaps the most famous example is that of the Shell Group in the wake of the so-called oil crisis, which used scenarios to plan the corporate response strategies (Jefferson, 1983; Schwartz, 1991). Today, the use of scenarios is quite widespread. Many scenarios, particularly those developed for enterprises in the energy sector, are quantitative and include GHG emissions. Recently, the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) presented a set of scenarios developed in collaboration with 35 major corporations (WBCSD, 1998). The SRES scenario database documents a number of such scenarios that are in the public domain and have been published. During the past three decades many global studies have used scenarios as a tool to assess future CO2 (and in a few cases also other GHG) emissions. One of the first such global studies was Energy in a Finite World, conducted by the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) during the late 1970s (Hafele et al., 1981). Another influential series of scenarios that included the assessment of CO2 emissions was developed by the World Energy Council (WEC, 1993). Recently, IIASA and WEC jointly presented a set of global and regional scenarios that were developed with a set of integrated assessment models and then reviewed and revised through 11 regional expert groups (Nakicenovic et al., 1998b). Another recent set of three scenarios, based on elaborate narrative stories that described alternative futures, was developed by the Global Scenario Group (Raskin et al., 1998) and received considerable attention. Scenarios of future emissions played an important role from the beginning of the IPCC work. In 1990, the IPCC initiated the development of its first set of GHG emissions scenarios designed to serve as inputs to general circulation models (GCMs) and facilitate the assessments of climate-change impacts (Houghton et al., 1990). Two years later, in 1992, the IPCC approved six new emissions scenarios (IS92) that provided alternative emissions trajectories for the years 1990 through 2100 for such radiatively active gases as CO2, carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and sulfur dioxide (SO2) (Leggett et al., 1992). They were widely used by atmospheric and climate scientists in the preparation of scenarios of atmospheric composition and climate change (Alcamo et al., 1995). In many ways, the IS92 scenarios were pathbreaking. They were the first global scenarios to provide estimates of the full suite of GHGs and at the time were the only scenarios to provide emissions trajectories for SO2. The IS92 scenarios are marked for reference in many of the illustrations herein that show the variation of emissions and their driving forces across the scenarios in the SRES database. An important group of emissions scenarios included in this literature review was compiled from two international scenario and model comparison activities. This first group is from the IEW and involves structured comparisons of energy and emissions scenarios since 1981 (Manne and Schrattenholzer, 1996, 1997). The participating groups provide information for a standardized scenario poll from which the ranges and other sample statistics are reported for the main driving forces and emissions. The other group is the EMF (Weyant, 1993) and also involves regular scenario comparisons, in addition to standardized input assumptions, such as the international oil price or carbon emissions taxes. Both of these international scenario comparison activities provide a and Schrattenholzer, 1996, 1997). The participating groups provide information for a standardized scenario poll from which the ranges and other sample statistics are reported for the main driving forces and emissions. The other group is the EMF (Weyant, 1993) and also involves regular scenario comparisons, in addition to standardized input assumptions, such as the international oil price or carbon emissions taxes. Both of these international scenario comparison activities provide a large share of the data for this scenario review and comparison. They include most of the global and regional emissions scenarios developed by formal modeling approaches. A large part of these activities is based on the use of scenarios for the purpose of climate-change research. A third scientific effort that involves scenario comparisons is the Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ETSAP; Kram, 1993) supported by the International Energy Agency (IEA). The ETSAP work involves scenario analysis by more than 40 scientific groups from about 20 countries using the same modeling approach. In addition to the many scientific, governmental, and private organizations throughout the world engaged in scenario-building, some international governmental organizations regularly develop global and regional scenarios that include GHG emissions. For example, the IEA regularly publishes global energy scenarios that include CO2 emissions (IEA, 1998). Most of these scenarios are of shorter term and so are not suitable for the requirements of IPCC (see Chapter 1 for further details). Nevertheless, they are included in this assessment to facilitate a more comprehensive evaluation of emissions and their driving forces during the next few decades. Some studies consider scenarios that involve explicit policies and measures to reduce emissions of GHGs or adapt to climate change. Such climate change intervention, control, or mitigation scenarios are an important tool for the assessment of policies and measures that would be required to reduce future GHG emissions. In this report, we use the terminology from the most recent IPCC evaluation of emissions scenarios (Alcamo et al., 1995). Those scenarios that include some form of policy intervention are referred to as intervention scenarios, while those that do not assume any climate policy measures, such as the 40 SRES scenarios, are referred to as non-intervention scenarios. In some cases, intervention scenarios go even further and investigate more radical emissions reductions required to stabilize atmospheric concentrations of these gases (in accordance with Article 2 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1992)). In contrast, the SRES scenarios do not include any explicit additional climate policy initiatives in accordance with the Terms of Reference (see Appendix I). The SRES writing team used a general approach to identify intervention scenarios. According to this approach, a scenario is identified as an intervention scenario if it meets one of the following two conditions: • it incorporates specific climate change targets, which may include absolute or relative GHG limits, GHG concentration levels (e.g., CO2 stabilization scenarios), or maximum allowable changes in temperature or sea level; and • it includes explicit or implicit policies and/or measures of which the primary goal is to reduce GHG emissions (e.g., a carbon tax or a policy encouraging the use of renewable energy). Note that this classification system is only a first step, and further work is needed to refine this taxonomy. Some scenarios in the literature are difficult to classify as intervention or non-intervention, such as those developed to assess sustainable development. These studies consider futures that require radical policy and behavioral changes to achieve a transition to a sustainable development path; Greenpeace formulated one of the first (Lazarus et al., 1993). This class of scenarios describes low emissions futures that sometimes, but not always, result from specific climate policy measures. Such sustainable development scenarios are also included in this assessment of the scenario literature. Where they do not include the explicit policies of the SRES criteria, they can be classified as non-intervention scenarios. However, there is a great deal of ambiguity as to what constitutes policies directed at climate change, as opposed to those directed at achieving sustainable development in general. Thus, some of these sustainable development scenarios are “non-classified” (i.e., the information available is insufficient to determine whether or not the scenarios included any additional climate policy initiatives). 2.3. Emissions Scenario Database The SRES Emissions Scenario Database (ESD) was designed to fulfill several objectives: • To facilitate a thorough review and analysis of the literature. • To enable a statistical analysis of all scenarios in the database – to generate distribution functions of the main scenario driving forces, calculate mean and median values, percentiles, and other sample statistics (the use of such statistical analyses of the scenarios in the database ensures that the new SRES emissions scenarios generally reflect the range of emissions and input assumptions currently found in the open literature). Table 2-1: Number of regional and global GHG emissions scenarios in the SRES ESD. The database (from 3 April 1998) included a total of 416 regional and global scenarios from 171 sources. The individual number of scenarios per region or country exceeds the global total because some scenarios include both global and regional data. There are also more scenarios at the regional level than at the global level. In addition to the original sources of individual emissions scenarios, the database utilized the large number of scenarios compiled in the following assessments: International Energy Workshop Poll (Manne and Schrattenholzer, 1995, 1996, 1997); Energy Modeling Forum (EMF-14; see, e.g., Weyant, 1993) data; and the previous database compiled for the IPCC (Alcamo et al., 1995). Region ID Number of Matching Scenarios World 340 OECD 164 Non-OECD 158 China 153 USA 136 FSU 121 EEC 85 Japan 69 FSU+EEU a 61 Annex I 46 Non-Annex I 46 Latin America 42 India 36 Africa 34 CPAsia b 32 East Europe c 31 ALM d 30 CANZ e 29 Mexico and OPEC 29 Non-OECD Annex I 29 Middle East 27 Oceania 25 Canada 24 OECD Pacific f 23 South Asia (incl. India) 23 OECD Europe g 22 SEAsia (South and East Asia) 16 North America 15 Europe 12 OECD West h 13 Middle East/North Africa 12 East Asia 12 Extra i 12 West Europe 11 DC 7 OSEAsia j 7 SubS Africa 6 Annex II 6 Opacific 6 Poland 5 OPEC 4 United Kingdom 4 LDC 4 Non-OPEC DO 3 Hungary 3 Switzerland 3 INDUS k 3 Asia Pacific 2 Austria 2 Brazil 2 Germany 2 Korea 2 Netherlands 2 Sweden 2 Nigeria 2 Other regions 26 Abbreviations: ALM, Africa, Latin America, and Middle East; CANZ, Canada, Australia, New Zealand; DC, Developing Countries; EEC, European Economic Community; EEU, Eastern Europe; FSU, Former Soviet Union; OECD, Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation; Opacific, Other Pacific Asia; OPEC, Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries; SubSAfrica, Sub Saharan Africa; USA, United States of America. a. Economies under transition, Former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. b. Central Planning Asia including China. c. Eastern and Central Europe. d. Africa, Latin America and the Middle East. e. Japan, Australia, New Zealand. f. OECD Europe and Canada. g. South Pole and other regions with very small populations. h. Asia including Japan and China. i. Developing World (less Asia including China. c. Eastern and Central Europe. d. Africa, Latin America and the Middle East. e. Japan, Australia, New Zealand. f. OECD Europe and Canada. g. South Pole and other regions with very small populations. h. Asia including Japan and China i. Developing World (less than US$(1985) 700/capita). j. Non-OPEC Developing Countries. k. Developed World (more than US$(1985) 1700/capita). 2 As defined in UNFCCC, 1992. An Overview of the Scenario Literature • The third objective was to make the database accessible through a website (www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html) so that data queries, browsing, data retrieval, and entry of new scenarios would be possible by remote users, and necessitated designing a database that could manage flexibly large amounts of data as well as diverse data types. The database serves primarily to document the GHG emissions, including CO2, CH4, N2O, CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), HFCs (hydrofluorocarbons), and other radiatively active gases such as SO2, CO, and NOx. In addition, it includes information about the main driving forces of GHG emissions, such as population growth and economic development, usually expressed in terms of gross domestic product (GDP), energy consumption, and land use. Each of these scenario characteristics has subcategories and different values in time and space. The temporal dimension is often in steps of 10 years, but this is not standardized across the scenarios in the database. The spatial dimension refers to the regional disaggregation of the scenarios. Priority was given to covering all accessible quantitative scenarios with global and regional coverage. The main scenario characteristics are documented by the name and aggregation given in the original study. In some cases, regional and national scenarios are also included to improve the coverage of some parts of the world. (Table 2-1 lists the number of scenarios in the database that include a given region, from the global level through to some individual countries.) There is great diversity with respect to regional aggregation of scenarios in the database. Inclusion of long-term emissions scenarios for individual countries, when available, would improve the regional coverage of the database. Sectoral studies in developing countries, such as power system emissions (e.g., Chattopadhyay and Parikh, 1993) or transport system emissions (e.g., Ramanathan and Parikh, 1999), were also considered in this assessment to develop SRES emissions scenarios. A list of scenario characteristics and their frequency of occurrence across the 416 scenarios is given in Appendix V. Most of these scenarios were created after 1994. Of the 416 scenarios 340 provide data on the global level, and 256 scenarios of these 340 report information on CO2 emissions. A large majority (230) of the scenarios report only energy-related CO2 emissions, while only some report non-energy CO2 and other GHG emissions. For example, only three models estimate land use-related emissions: the Atmospheric Stabilization Framework (ASF) (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990) model that was used to formulate the IS92 scenarios; the Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect 2 (IMAGE 2) model (Alcamo, 1994); and the Asian-Pacific integrated model (AIM; Morita et al., 1994). Only a few scenarios report regional and global SO2 and sulfur aerosol emissions that are also climatically important because of their cooling effect (negative radiative forcing of climate change). Box 2-1 in Section 2.4.1 summarizes the set of scenarios that report non-energy-related CO2 emissions. The information documented in the database about emissions scenarios illustrates both areas that are well covered in the scenario literature and areas with substantial gaps in knowledge. For example, the information in the database strongly confirms the findings of the latest IPCC scenario assessment and evaluation (Alcamo et al., 1995). One of the key findings is that of all GHG emissions, CO2 emissions are by far the most frequently studied, and that of all the CO2 emissions sources, fossil fuel is the source most extensively analyzed in the literature. In part, this is because energy-related sources of CO2 emissions contribute more to the current and potential future climate forcing than any other single GHG released by any other human activity. In part, this is also because of improved data, assessment methods, and models for energy-related activities than for other emissions sources. Another information gap example is the rather diverse regional disaggregation chosen for different scenarios. Even when the regions are similar or equivalent in terms of this assessment, the names are sometimes different, which hampers comparisons. Such gaps in knowledge limit the range and effectiveness of the various policy options that logically follow from the discussion. This creates a level of uncertainty that can only be addressed by concentrated research efforts. 2.4. Analysis of Literature Individual scenarios are considered independent entities in the database. Clearly, in practice, individual scenarios are often related to each other and are not always developed independently. Some are simply variants of others generated for a particular purpose. Many “new” scenarios are designed to track existing benchmark scenarios. A good example is the set of IS92 scenarios, especially the “central” IS92a scenario, which was often used as a reference from which to develop other scenarios. A further consideration is that not all scenarios are created in an equal fashion. Some are the result of elaborate effort, which includes extensive reviews and revisions; others are simply the outcome of input assumptions without much significant reflection. Some are based on extensive formal models, while others are generated using simple spreadsheets or even without any formal tools at all. Numerous factors influence future emissions paths in the scenarios. Clearly, demographic and economic developments play a crucial role in determining emissions. However, many other factors are involved also, from human resources, such as education, institutional frameworks, and lifestyles, to natural resource endowments, technologic change, and international trade. Many of these important factors are not documented in the database, and sometimes not even in the respective scenario reports and publications. Some are neither quantified in the scenarios nor explicitly assumed in a narrative form. For this analysis, a simple scheme is used to decompose the main driving forces of GHG emissions. This scheme is based on the Kaya identity (Kaya, 1990; Yamaji et al., 1991), which gives the main emissions driving forces as multiplicative An Overview of the Scenario Literature factors on one side of the identity and total CO2 (or GHG) emissions on the other. It multiplies population growth, per capita value added (i.e., per capita gross world product), energy consumption per unit value added, and emissions per unit energy on one side of the identity, and total CO2 emissions on the other side (Yamaji et al., 1991);^ it is a specific application of a frequently used approach to organize discussion of the drivers of emissions through the so-called IPAT identity that relates impacts (I) to population (P) multiplied by affluence (A) and technology (T), (see Chapter 3 for a more detailed discussion). The same approach can be used for other emissions such as SO2. However, the driving forces might be different for some species of anthropogenic emissions. Apart from its simplicity, an advantage of analysis that uses the Kaya identity to decompose emissions into four main driving forces is that it facilitates at least some standardization in the comparison and analysis of many diverse emissions scenarios. This decomposition is very useful because it indicates where to seek differences in scenario assumptions that may account for differences in the resultant GHG emissions (Alcamo et al., 1995). However, the identity is not used here to suggest causality. An important caveat is that these driving forces are not independent of each other; in many scenarios they explicitly depend on each other. For example, scenario builders often assume that high rates of economic growth lead to high capital turnover. This favors more advanced and more efficient technologies, which result in lower energy intensities. Sometimes a weak inverse relationship is assumed between population and economic growth. Thus, the scenario ranges for these main driving forces are not (necessarily) independent of each other. (See also the discussion of the relationships between the main scenario driving forces in Chapter 3.) In the following sections, scenario ranges are presented for each of the four factors in the Kaya identity that represent the main (energy-related) emissions driving forces: population, gross world product, energy consumption, energy intensity (energy per unit of gross world product) and carbon intensity (CO2 emissions per unit of energy). The ranges for CO2 and SO2 emissions are presented first because they represent the “dependent variable” in the Kaya identity. These are followed by scenario ranges for the other factors in the decomposition that represent the “independent variables” (main emissions scenario driving forces) in the identity. This sequence was chosen to present the main scenario driving forces because it corresponds to their representation in the Kaya identity; it does not imply a priori any causal relationships among the driving forces themselves or between the driving forces and CO2 emissions. 3 CO2 = (CO2/E) × (E/GDP) × (GDP/P) × P, where E represents energy consumption, GDP the global domestic product (or global value added) and P population. Changes in CO2 emissions can be described by changes in these four factors or driving forces. Four complementary methods of analysis are used: • charts that show the distributions of scenarios in terms of their main characteristics and driving forces, including CO2 emissions, population growth, global GDP, energy consumption, energy intensity, and carbon intensity; • histograms that show the range of values of main scenario driving forces, together with associated statistics such as the mean, minimum, and maximum values; • “snowflake” diagrams, in which each of the axes represents the range of one of the key driving forces; and emissions, population growth, global GDP, energy consumption, energy intensity, and carbon intensity; • histograms that show the range of values of main scenario driving forces, together with associated statistics such as the mean, minimum, and maximum values; • "snowflake" diagrams, in which each of the axes represents the range of one of the key driving forces; and • analysis of the relationships among the main driving forces of energy-related CO2 emissions. The main findings of this scenario analysis are reported in Nakicenovic et al. (1998a). 2.4.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions Ranges The span of CO2 emissions across all scenarios in the database is indeed large, with a range from more than seven times the current emissions levels to below current levels in 2100 (see Figures 2-1a and 2-1b). The possible interpretations of this large range are many. The most important is the great uncertainty as to how the main driving forces, such as population growth, economic development, and energy production, conversion and end use, might unfold during the 21st century. A large majority of the scenarios in the database report only energy-related CO2 emissions (230 of the 256 that report CO2 emissions), while only some report non-energy CO2 and other GHG emissions. Therefore, these comparisons of emissions scenarios focus mostly on energy-related emissions. Box 2-1 summarizes the set of 26 scenarios that report land-use CO2 emissions. Figure 2-1a shows the global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions pathways from the database in the form of spaghetti curves for the period 1990 to 2100 against the background of historical emissions from 1900 to 1990. These curves are plotted against an index on the vertical axis rather than as absolute values, because of large differences and discrepancies for the values assumed for the base year 1990 in various scenarios. The discrepancies may result from genuine differences among the scenarios (e.g., different base years, data sources, and definitions^4) or from simple errors in calibration. The 1990 emissions from energy production and use are estimated by Marland et al. (1999) at 5.9 GtC excluding cement production. It appears as if four scenarios also include deforestation, which might explain relatively large differences in the base-year emissions compared to the other scenarios. Excluding these four scenarios, the 1990 base-year values in the scenarios reviewed range from 4.8 to 6.4 GtC. With the four scenarios the range is from 4.8 to 7.4 GtC. An Overview of the Scenario Literature 85 Box 2-1: Range of Land Use CO2 Emissions in the Database About 23% of the current total anthropogenic CO2 emissions arise from land-use change (Pepper et al., 1992), which makes it an important driving force. Direct comparison of absolute levels of land-use CO2 emissions between scenarios in the database is difficult because of variations in how models depict deforestation and in how modelers classify anthropogenic and natural land-use fluxes. In addition, models are based on different base-year data, which further complicates comparison. For example, the 1990 base-year emissions estimates from land-use change (e.g., deforestation) range from 0.6 to 1.4 gigatons of elemental carbon (GtC). However, by indexing emissions to 1990, it is possible to make more meaningful comparisons of trends among the 26 scenarios in the SRES database that report land-use CO2 emissions. It is important to note that only three modeling groups produced the 26 scenarios described here. Clearly, emissions from land-use change have not been as well explored by the modeling community as energy-related emissions. All 26 scenarios show a decrease in CO2 emissions from land-use change over time and are below current levels by 2100; some models even report emissions reductions below zero, which suggests CO2 sequestration (e.g., through afforestation). The emissions range is very wide during the next few decades, but narrows considerably around mid-century. For example, there is more than a factor ten difference (after normalizing for base-year differences) between the highest and lowest scenarios in 2020. (For reference, the IS92a scenario falls slightly below the median of the range.) By 2050, however, the gap between the extremes narrows, and by 2100 the range is very small indeed: the highest scenario shows CO2 emissions from land use only 2.4 times as great as those found in the lowest scenario. All 26 scenarios in the database report CO2 emissions of less than 1 GtC originating from land-use change in 2100, and 23% of the scenarios indicate CO2 sequestration by the end of the 21st century. 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 Figure 2-1a: Global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions^4 - historical development and future scenarios, shown as an index (1990 = 1). Median (50th), 5th, 25th, 75th, and 95th percentiles of the frequency distribution are shown. The statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence (e.g., the frequency distribution of the scenarios may be influenced by the use of IS92a as a reference for many subsequent studies). The vertical bars on the right side of the figure indicate the ranges for intervention, non-intervention, and non-classified scenario samples, respectively. The emissions paths indicate a wide range of future emissions. The range is also large in the base year 1990 and is indicated by an "error" bar (see also Figure 2-1b). To separate the variation due to base-year specification from different future paths, emissions are indexed for the year 1990, when actual global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions were about 6 GtC. The actual coverage of CO2 emissions sources may vary across the 256 different scenarios from the database included in the figure. The scenario samples used vary across the time steps (for 1990 256 scenarios, for 2020 and 2030 247, for 2050 211, and for 2100 190 scenarios). As a result of software limitations, only 250 scenarios can be plotted on the graph. However, the scenarios not shown are included in the assessment and have almost identical trajectories to the sample of 250 scenarios shown. Data sources: Morita and Lee, 1998; Nakicenovic et al., 1998a. 86 An Overview of the Scenario Literature 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 Figure 2-1b: Global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions^4 - historical development and future scenarios (used to derive indexed values in Figure 2-1a), shown as absolute values in GtC. Median (50th), 5th, 25th, 75th, and 95th percentiles of the frequency distribution are shown. The statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence (e.g., the frequency distribution of the scenarios may be influenced by the use of IS92a as a reference for many subsequent studies). The vertical bars on the right side of the figure indicate the ranges for the intervention, non-intervention, and non-classified scenario samples, respectively. The emissions paths indicate a wide range of future emissions. The range is also large in the base year 1990 and is clearly discernable. The actual coverage of CO2 emissions sources may vary across the 256 scenarios from the database included in the figure. The scenario samples used vary across the time steps (for 1990 256 scenarios; for 2020 and 2030 247 scenarios; for 2050 211 scenarios, and for 2100 190 scenarios were analyzed). As a result of software limitations, only 250 scenarios could be plotted on the graph. However, the scenarios not shown are included in the assessment and have almost identical trajectories to the sample of 250 scenarios shown in the graphic. Data sources: Morita and Lee, 1998; Nakicenovic et al., 1998a. Figure 2-1b gives absolute values of CO2 emissions from various scenarios in the database. It shows the magnitude of differences between the scenarios in the base year 1990 and gives the resultant range of emissions in 2100 directly in GtC.^5 Between 1900 and 1990, global CO2 emissions have increased at an average rate of about 1.7% per year (Nakicenovic et al., 1998b). Global emissions would double during the next three to four decades if this historical trend were to continue. Many scenarios in the database describe such a development. However, even by 2030 the range is very large around this value of possible doubling of global emissions. The highest scenarios have emissions four times the 1990 level by 2030, while the lowest are barely above half that level. The divergence increases with time so that the highest scenarios envisage a tenfold increase of global emissions by 2100. The lowest scenarios continue to decrease and some of them are consistent with emissions trajectories that lead to an eventual stabilization of atmospheric GHG concentrations. Figure 2-1a indicates a large range between the highest and the lowest scenarios. Some of the scenarios on both extremes can be characterized as clear outliers in the far tails of the scenario distribution. Often, such scenarios are normative in nature, having been formulated for a particular purpose. However, even if these extreme tails are discarded the range is very wide. The 95th percentile corresponds to a sixfold increase (about 37 GtC) by 2100, while the 5th percentile leads to a decrease to on both extremes can be characterized as clear outliers in the far tails of the scenario distribution. Often, such scenarios are normative in nature, having been formulated for a particular purpose. However, even if these extreme tails are discarded the range is very wide. The 95th percentile corresponds to a sixfold increase (about 37 GtC) by 2100, while the 5th percentile leads to a decrease to about a third (2 GtC) compared to the 1990 level. This range of 2-37 GtC in 2100 indicates the high degree of uncertainty with respect to the level of future GHG emissions. The emissions range is somewhat smaller, from 6.5 to 22 GtC, for the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. However, the statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of their occurrence. Some additional information about the range of future emissions can be obtained by examining the results from detailed analyses (see, e.g., Alcamo et al., 1996, 1998) conducted by Nordhaus and Yohe (1983), Edmonds et al. (1986), de Vries et al. (1994), and Manne and Richels (1994). These analyses confirm that the range is very large. The analysis of Edmonds et al. (1986) shows a range of 87 to 2 GtC by the year 2070 for the 95th and 5th percentiles, respectively; the range is from 27 to 4 GtC for the 75th and 25th percentiles. Nordhaus and Yohe (1983) estimated the range to be from 55 to 7 GtC for the 95th and 5th percentiles, and from 27 to 12 GtC for the 75th and 25th percentiles, respectively. In contrast, de Vries et al. (1994) estimated a fundamentally smaller range of 24 to 11 GtC by 2050 for the 95th and 5th percentiles, respectively, but they standardized some of the scenario assumptions, such as population and economic growth, relative to a base case. The SRES team also applied the criteria presented in Section 2.2 to identify intervention scenarios from among the CO2 emissions scenarios in the database. Of the 190 scenarios that reported CO2 emissions through the year 2100, 62 were classified as intervention scenarios and 88 as non-intervention scenarios. For 40 scenarios the information available was insufficient to determine whether or not they included any climate policies. These are referred to as non-classified scenarios. The statistics for these three scenario samples are given in Table 2-2. The medians for these samples are also shown in Figures 2-1c to 2-1f. The analysis indicates that many of the 88 non-intervention scenarios are emulations of IS92 scenarios, and many of these are emulations of IS92a. For example, 42 of the 88 non-intervention scenarios were produced by EMF-14, of which 25 are based on IS92a. Figure 2-1c shows spaghetti curves for the non-intervention scenarios found in Table 2-2. In the year 2100 these scenarios cover almost the same range (1.2 GtC to 59.4 GtC) as does the entire sample of 190 scenarios (-2.1 GtC to 59.4 GtC). The sample of non-intervention scenarios includes some that have very low emissions, which suggests that emissions can be low even in the absence of explicit climate intervention policies. However, the non-intervention sample also has a higher median than the total sample – 21 GtC in 2100 compared with the 15.7 GtC median found in the total sample. The lower median of the total sample may result from downward pressure exerted by the inclusion of some intervention scenarios in the total sample. However, it could also result from the influence of IS92a-like scenarios (upward pressure) in the non-intervention sample (see also Figure 2-1f). Figure 2-1d likewise depicts spaghetti curves for the intervention scenarios. The entire range for the intervention scenarios is small compared to those of the no policy scenarios and the total set of scenarios. In 2100 the maximum (14.4 GtC) and the median (6 GtC) of this sample are significantly lower than maximum and median values of the full and non-intervention sets. Figure 2-1e shows the range for scenarios that could not be classified into these two groups because of insufficient information in the database. The range of scenarios in this category is similar to that of the total sample in that it is very broad. The median of this set in 2100 is also similar to that of the total sample (15.7 GtC) and follows a similar trajectory. Finally, the IS92a scenario (Leggett et al., 1992; Pepper et al., 1992) appears to have influenced subsequent emissions scenarios in the literature. The median population, gross world product, and primary energy consumption trends in many scenarios in the literature track very closely the developments in the IS92a scenario (Morita and Lee, 1998). This is because IS92a constituted a reference baseline that was emulated by different modeling groups in a number of scenario evaluation and comparison activities. Figure 2-1f shows the set of 35 IS92a-like scenarios that could be classified from the set of non-intervention scenarios. As these scenarios appear to emulate IS92a, they show little variation around the median of 20.3 GtC, which is about the emission level in that scenario (20.4 GtC) in 2100. The analyses in the following sections focus on the total set of scenarios in the database only. The distinction between intervention and non-intervention scenarios applies only to analyses of CO2 emissions. 2.4.2. Carbon Dioxide Emissions Histograms The first two histograms (Figures 2-2a and 2-2b) give the global CO2 emissions ranges for 2050 and 2100.^ The total range from the highest to the lowest scenario in 2100 is between 59 and -2 GtC,^ from about seven times the current emissions to below zero. For about 10% of the scenarios, emissions in the year 2100 are half the current emissions or below this level. Presumably, some of the scenarios that have about seven times the current emissions to below zero. For about 10% of the scenarios, emissions in the year 2100 are half the current emissions or below this level. Presumably, some of the scenarios that have low future emissions include some policy interventions to reduce GHG emissions. The distribution of emissions in 2050 is asymmetric; most of the scenarios cluster in the range between 20 to 6 GtC. The thin tail that extends above this emissions level includes only 46 of a total of 211 scenarios. Altogether, the distribution implies a substantial increase in global CO2 emissions during the next 50 years. The distribution of emissions in 2100 is even more asymmetric than that in 2050. The emissions portray a structure that resembles a trimodal distribution: those that show emissions of more than 30 GtC (20 scenarios), those with emissions between 12 and 30 GtC (88 scenarios), and those that show emissions of less than 12 GtC (82 scenarios). That this is quite similar to the structure of primary energy consumption distribution for 2100 is not by chance. The lowest cluster may have been influenced by many analyses of stabilization of atmospheric concentrations at levels of 450-550 parts per million (10^9) by volume (ppmv). The middle cluster appears to echo the many analyses that took IS92a as a reference scenario; it indicates the possible influence of IS92 scenarios on other scenarios in the literature. It is very likely that the majority of the scenarios in the middle cluster foresee a substantial contribution of fossil energy sources to total energy consumption in the year 2100; thus, in the first approximation, CO2 emissions can be expected to be proportional to energy consumption. The median is 15.7 GtC, surrounded by the centers of the other two modes, the first at about 21 GtC and the second at about 9 GtC. Published energy-related emissions vary by a factor of 17 between the highest and lowest scenarios for 2050 and from -2 to 60 GtC between the highest and lowest scenarios for 2100. Figure 2-2a: Histogram showing the frequency distribution of global CO2 emissions in 2050 for 211 scenarios. The first horizontal axis shows indexed emissions (1990 = 1); the second axis indicates approximately absolute values by multiplying the index by the 1990 value (5.9 GtC, see footnote 4). For reference, the emissions of the IS92 scenarios are indicated. The horizontal bars indicate the ranges for the intervention, non-intervention, and non-classified scenario samples, respectively. The frequency distribution associated with scenarios from the literature does not imply probability of occurrence. 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 Range (index, 1990 = 1) 3 6 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 Range (GtC) Figure 2-2b: Histogram showing the frequency distribution of global CO2 emissions in 2100 for 190 scenarios. The first horizontal axis shows indexed emissions (1990 = 1); the second axis indicates approximate absolute values by multiplying the index by the 1990 value (5.9 GtC, see footnote 4). For reference, the emissions of the IS92 scenarios are indicated. The horizontal bars indicate the ranges for the intervention, non-intervention and non-classified scenario samples respectively. The frequency distribution associated with scenarios from the literature does not imply probability of occurrence. 2.4.3. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions An overview of global long-term scenarios of SO2 emissions is shown in Figure 2-3. Altogether 81 scenarios in the scenario database report SO2 emissions. Most scenarios were published after 1995, which indicates the importance of the influential and innovative emissions included in the previous IPCC scenario series IS92 (Pepper et al., 1992). Apparently, they stimulated research on long-term trends and impacts of SO2 emissions. The 1990 base-year emissions estimates in the database range from 55 to 91 megatons of sulfur (MtS), a seemingly large difference that can be explained partially by the different extent of coverage of SO2 emissions in different models and scenario studies, in addition to uncertainties in emissions factors. Typically, lower range emissions derive from models that report only (the dominant) energy sector emissions, higher ranges also include other anthropogenic sources such as SO2 emissions from metallurgic processes. Differences in 1990 base-year values across scenario studies and a review of available SO2 emissions inventories are discussed in more detail in Chapter 3. Indexed to a common 1990 basis, future SO2 emissions trends reveal a number of remarkable characteristics. First, contrary to other trends discussed in this chapter, increases are generally modest; numerous scenarios even depict a long-term decline in emissions. Thus, SO2 emissions are invariably projected to be decoupled progressively from their underlying driving forces of increases in population and economic activity, and hence energy demand. The median across all scenarios indicates a gradual increase of some 22% over 1990 levels by 2050, and a return to 1990 levels by 2100. Only two scenarios exceed the range of increases in long-term SO2 emissions spanned by the IS92 scenario series. A detailed review of long-term global and regional SO2 emissions scenarios is given in Grübler (1998) and is summarized in Chapter 3. The most important new finding from the scenario literature is recognition of the significant impacts of continued unabated high SO2 emissions on human health, food production, and ecosystems. As a result, scenarios published since 1995 all assume various degrees of SO2 emissions control and interventions to be implemented in the future, and are thus substantially lower than previous projections, including the IS92 series. In most of these scenarios, such low levels of SO2 emissions are not simply the result of direct SO2 emissions control measures, such as flue gas desulfurization. They also result from other interventions in which SO2 emissions reduction is more a secondary benefit than a primary goal (e.g., structural changes for various reasons other than SO2 control). Dignon & Hameed (1989) IS92a IS92b IS92c IS92d IS92e IS92f median Sc_min Sc_median Sc_max Figure 2-3: Global SO2 emissions – historical development and 81 scenarios from the SRES database, shown as an index (1990 = 1). For comparison, the IS92 scenarios are shown, as is the range and median of the SO2 control (Sc_median, Sc_min, Sc_max) scenarios (see also Chapter 3). The vertical bars on the right side indicate the ranges for the SO2 emissions control (intervention) scenarios and for SO2 non-control scenarios respectively. Data sources: Dignon and Hameed, 1989; Grübler, 1998; Morita and Lee, 1998. 2.4.4. Population Projection Ranges Population is one of the fundamental driving forces of future emissions. Most models used to formulate population projections for the emissions scenarios are taken from the literature and are exogenous inputs. Today three main research groups project global population – United Nations (UN, 1998, 1999), World Bank (Bos and Vu, 1994), and IIASA (Lutz et al., 1997). (For more details see the discussion in Chapter 3.) Most of the “central” population projections lead to a doubling of global population by 2100 (to about 10 billion people compared to 5.3 billion in 1990). In recent years the central population projections for the year 2100 have declined somewhat, but are still in line with a doubling by 2100. For example, the latest UN (1998) medium-low and medium-high projections indicate a range of between 7.2 and 14.6 billion people by 2100, with the medium scenario at 10.4 billion. The IIASA central estimate for 2100 is also 10.4 billion, with a 95% probability that world population would exceed six and be lower than 17 billion (Lutz et al., 1997). While all scenarios require some kind of population assumptions, relatively few are reported explicitly in the SRES database. Figure 2-4 illustrates global population projections in the database. Of the 416 scenarios currently documented, only 46 report their underlying population projections. This limited number indicates that, even though population is an extremely important driving force for emissions, it is typically either not reported or not well explored in most models. For the small sample of population projections, the range is from about 20 to 6 billion people in 2100, with the central or median estimates at about 10 billion. Thus, population assumptions in the emissions scenarios appear to be broadly consistent with the recent population projections, with range and median of the database, shown as an index (1990 = 1). For a sample of population projections, the range is from about 20 to 6 billion people in 2100, with the central or median estimates at about 10 billion. Thus, population assumptions in the emissions scenarios appear to be broadly consistent with the recent population projections, with the caveat that only a few underlying projections are reported in the database. Figure 2-4 contrasts the alternative population projections from the SRES database with historical developments. The long-term historical population growth rate has been on average about 1% per year during the past two centuries. Between 1800 and 1900 the global population growth rate was about 0.5% per year. The average annual growth rate since 1900 has been 1.3%. Between 1990 and 1995 the rate was 1.46%; and since 1995 world population has been growing at a rate of 1.3% annually (UN, 1998). All scenarios reviewed here envisage that population growth will slow in the future. The most recent doubling of the world's population took approximately 40 years. Even the highest population projections in Figure 2-4 require 70 years or more for the next doubling, while in roughly half of the scenarios the global population does not double during the 21st century. The highest average population growth across all projections is 1.2% per year, the lowest is 0.1% per year, and the median is about 0.7% per year. Interestingly, the population projections in Figure 2-4 are not evenly distributed across the full range. Instead, they are grouped into three clusters. The middle cluster is representative of the central projections, with a range of about 10 to less than 11 billion people by 2100. The other two clusters mark the highest and the lowest population projections available in the literature, with between 15 and 20 billion at the high end and about 6 billion at the low end. Despite these large ranges among alternative global population projections, the variation in this factor compared to the base year is the smallest of all the scenario driving forces considered in this comparison. Compared with 1990 values, the factor increase varies from 3.3 to 1.2. Gross World Product Economic development and growth are fundamental prerequisites to achieve an increase in living standards. It is thus not surprising that assumptions about economic development constitute among the most important determinants of emissions levels in the scenarios. However, economic growth prospects are among the most uncertain determinants of future emissions. Figure 2-5 shows the future increase in gross world product compared with the historical experience since 1950. As the differences in base-year data are relatively large, the gross world product paths are plotted as an index and spliced to historical data in 1990. An Overview of the Scenario Literature Figure 2-4: Global population - historical development and 46 scenarios from the database. Fewer than 46 lines are shown because many of the 46 scenarios use identical population projections. Only 46 of the scenarios in the database identify their population projections. Data source: Durand, 1967; Demeny, 1990; UN, 1996; Morita and Lee, 1998. The historical gross world product growth rate has been about 4% per year since 1950; in the scenarios the average annual growth rates to 2100 range from 3.2% per year to 1.1% per year, with the median value at 2.3% per year. Table 2-3 summarizes the future economic growth rates of the 148 scenarios in the database that report gross world product for 2100. This translates into a gross world product level in 2100 that varies from 3.2 (IS92c, Pepper et al., 1992) to more than 32 (FUND/EMF Modeler's choice, Tol, 1995) times the 1990 gross world product. The 1990 gross world product was about US$20 trillion (all values in 1990 US dollars), which translates into a range from more than US$700 to about US$65 trillion by 2100. Figure 2-5 also indicates that this full range includes a few noticeable outliers toward the high and low of future gross world product development. The rest of the scenarios are grouped much more closely together, which compresses the range to a factor increase of about 17 to 7 (129 out of 148 scenarios) times compared to 1990. The degree of clustering is discussed in greater detail in the histograms that follow. 2.4.6. Gross World Product Histograms Figures 2-6a and 2-6b depict the range of gross world product in 2050 and 2100 across all scenarios in the database. The lower horizontal axis shows the factor increase of gross world product compared with the 1990 value (about US$20 trillion). The second horizontal axis multiplies the index by the 1990 gross world product to indicate absolute values for each histogram. Values are shown also as indexed to 1990 values, since model base years and base-year values differ. Table 2-3: Future economic growth rates for the maximum, minimum, median, and percentiles of the 148 scenarios in the database that report gross world product for 2100 (percent per year). 1990-2020 Maximum 3.8 95% 3.2 75% 2.8 Median 2.7 25% 2.6 5% 2.0 Minimum 1.5 1990-2050 Maximum 3.6 95% 2.9 75% 2.6 Median 2.5 25% 2.4 5% 1.7 Minimum 1.4 1990-2100 Maximum 3.2 95% 2.4 75% 2.3 Median 2.3 25% 2.1 5% 1.3 Minimum 1.1 Figure 2-5: Gross world product - historical development and 193 scenarios, shown as an index (1990 = 1). Data source: UN, 1993a, 1993b; Morita and Lee, 1998. For 2050 most of the scenarios cluster in a rather narrow range around a value of about US$100 trillion. In total, 166 scenarios were used to derive the histogram for 2050. This picture changes radically for the year 2100, with a very wide variation of gross world product values, from about US$700 to US$70 trillion, and a median of US$250 trillion. As expected, the distribution of emissions becomes significantly wider as the scenarios extend further into the future. Most of the distribution is concentrated between about US$320 and US$160 trillion, with very thin and asymmetric tails. A very strong peak of values lies at around US$250 trillion, which apparently represents an apparent consensus among modelers based on an average economic growth rate of about 2.3% per year. Figure 2-6a: Histogram showing frequency distribution of gross world product in 2050 for 166 scenarios. The upper horizontal axis shows indexed gross world product (1990 = 1); the lower axis indicates approximate absolute values by multiplying the index by the 1990 value (US$20 trillion). For reference, the gross world products of the IS92 scenarios are indicated. The frequency distribution associated with scenarios from the literature does not imply probability of occurrence. Figure 2-6b: Histogram showing frequency distribution of gross world product in 2100 for 148 scenarios. The upper horizontal axis shows indexed gross world product (1990 = 1); the lower axis indicates approximate absolute values by multiplying the index by the 1990 value (US$20 trillion). For reference, the gross world products of the IS92 scenarios are indicated. The frequency distribution associated with scenarios from the literature does not imply probability of occurrence. An Overview of the Scenario Literature For 2050 and 2100 the gross world products for the IS92a and b scenarios are the same as the median for all scenarios reviewed (Pepper et al., 1992). 148 different scenarios were used to derive the histogram for the year 2100. 2.4.7. Population and Gross World Product Relationships The scenarios in the database portray a weak relationship between population and economic growth; the correlation is slightly negative. Scenarios that lead to a very high gross world product are generally associated with central to low population projections, while high population projections do not lead to the highest gross world product scenarios. At extremely high levels of average global income the correlation is strongly negative. The highest per capita incomes in 2100 - in the range between US$30,000 and US$45,000 - are achieved with a low- to-medium population growth. Figure 2-7 illustrates some of the relationships between population and gross world product in the scenarios. It compares only 39 scenarios as information about population and gross world product assumptions is available for only a few scenarios. In most of these, global population transition is achieved during the 21st century and stabilization occurs at a population between 10 to 12 billion people in the year 2100. Generally, this is associated with relatively high levels of economic development, in the range US$200-500 trillion in the year 2100. Scenarios at the lower end of this scale are labeled collectively as the "mid-range cluster," which world product assumptions is available for only a few scenarios. In most of these, global population transition is achieved during the 21st century and stabilization occurs at a population between 10 to 12 billion people in the year 2100. Generally, this is associated with relatively high levels of economic development, in the range US$200-500 trillion in the year 2100. Scenarios at the lower end of this scale are labeled collectively as the "mid-range cluster," which includes all IIASA-WEC scenarios (IIASA-WEC, 1995; Nakicenovic et al., 1998b), IS92a and b (Pepper et al., 1992), and AIM96 (Matsuoka et al., 1994). The two highest scenarios are labeled as the "extra high growth" cases, namely IS92e (Pepper et al., 1992) and IMAGE 2.1, Baseline-C (Alcamo and Kreileman, 1996). One scenario, IS92f, shows high population growth (over 18 billion people by 2100) with comparatively low economic growth (about the same level as the mid-range cluster of scenarios, approximately US$300 trillion). At the other side of the scale are the two IS92 variants (c and d) (Pepper et al., 1992) with low population projections (about 6 billion people by 2100). 2.4.8. Primary Energy Consumption Ranges Primary energy consumption is another fundamental determinant of GHG emissions. Clearly, high energy consumption leads to high emissions. However, what is more important for emissions is the structure of future energy systems. High carbon intensities of energy - namely high shares of fossil energy sources, especially coal, in total energy consumption - lead to scenarios with the highest CO2 emissions. The primary energy paths of different scenarios are compared here, and the issue of energy carbon intensity is considered in the next section. Figure 2-8 shows the primary energy consumption paths in the scenarios and its historical development since 1900. It gives the whole distribution of the 153 scenarios in the SRES database that report primary energy consumption, the median, and the 95th, 75th, 25th, and 5th percentiles. As a result of the relatively large differences in the base-year values, the primary energy consumption paths are plotted as an index and spliced to the historical data in 1990. In 1990, primary energy was about 370 EJ, including non-commercial energy (Nakicenovic et al., 1996). On average the global primary energy consumption has increased at more than 2% per year (fossil energy alone has risen at almost 3% per year) since 1900. Also, the short-term trend from 1975 to 1995 shows a similar increase. In the scenarios the average growth rates to 2100 range from 2.4% per year to -0.1% per year, with a median value of 1.3% per year. For the full range of scenarios, the factor increase above the 1990 level is 0.9 to 10 by 2100.10 However, Figure 2-8 indicates that this full range includes a few noticeable outliers, especially toward the high end of energy consumption levels. The rest of the scenarios are grouped more closely together, which compresses the range to a factor increase of about 1.5 to 7.5 times the 1990 level. The degree of clustering is discussed in greater detail below. Note that the highest scenario in the database reports 3400 EJ for primary energy consumption by 2100. Relative to the base year of this scenario (340 EJ), this level corresponds to a 10-fold increase. However, relative to the base-year value including non-commercial biomass (370 EJ), this level corresponds to a nine-fold increase only. 2.4.9. Primary Energy Consumption Histograms The final two histograms, Figures 2-9a and 2-9b, give the global primary energy consumption ranges for 2050 and 2100, indexed to 1990. The total range in 2100 is between 330 EJ and 3400 EJ, which corresponds to difference of more than a factor of ten. This factor range is about the same as the factor range for gross world product (10.7) and much larger than that for population. Figure 2-9a: Histogram showing frequency distribution of global primary energy consumption in 2050 for 145 scenarios. The upper horizontal axis shows indexed primary energy consumption (1990 = 1); the lower axis indicates approximate absolute values by multiplying the index by the 1990 value (370 EJ). For reference, primary energy consumptions of the IS92 scenarios are indicated. The frequency distribution associated with scenarios from the literature does not imply probability of occurrence. Figure 2-9b: Histogram showing frequency distribution of global primary energy consumption in 2100 for 127 scenarios. The upper horizontal axis shows indexed primary energy consumption (1990 = 1); the lower axis indicates approximate absolute values by multiplying the index by the 1990 value (370 EJ). For reference, primary energy consumptions of the IS92 scenarios are indicated. The frequency distribution associated with scenarios from the literature does not imply probability of occurrence. The distribution of primary energy consumption in 2050 is asymmetric, with a long but thin tail toward high levels. Most of the distribution is between 600 and 1300 EJ, or about 1.5-3.5 times the 1990 level of consumption. The higher value corresponds to the continuation of a historical growth rate of global primary energy consumption of about 2.2% per year. Most of the scenarios cluster around 1000 EJ, which is about three times that of 1990. A total of 145 different scenarios were used to derive this histogram. In 2100, the distribution of primary energy consumption is much less concentrated and covers the full range, from about 10 times the 1990 level (to 3400 EJ) to a slight decrease by a factor of 0.9 (340 EJ). However, only a few scenarios occur toward these extreme values of the two distribution tails. The rest of the observations portray an interesting structure that resembles a trimodal distribution. The first mode is around 2600 EJ, the second around 1700 EJ, and the third at about 700 EJ. The median of the whole distribution is at 1500 EJ. Interestingly, the continuation of the historical growth rate of about 2.2% per year corresponds to about 11 times the 1990 level (about 4050 EJ in 2100), well above any values observed in the database. Thus, in contrast to data for 2050, all the scenarios for 2100 foresee a level of primary energy consumption that is lower than that of trend extrapolation. Altogether, 127 different scenarios were used to derive the histogram for the year 2100. 2.4.10. Relationships between Primary Energy and Gross World Product In all scenarios, economic growth outpaces the increase in energy consumption, which leads to substantial reductions in the ratio of primary energy consumption to gross world product, also known as "energy intensity." Individual technologies progress, inefficient technologies are retired in favor of more efficient ones, the structure of the energy-supply system and patterns of energy services change; these factors reduce the amount of primary energy needed per unit of gross world product. With all other factors being equal, the faster the economic growth, the higher the turnover of capital, and the greater the decline in energy intensity. These long-term relationships between energy and economic development are reflected in the majority of scenarios and are consistent with historical experience across a range of alternative development paths observed in different countries. Figure 2-10 shows the historical relationship since 1970 between energy intensity and GDP per capita for various world regions (see IIASA-WEC, 1995). This shorter record of development is contrasted with the experience of the USA since 1800. Although there are consistent differences among regions and energy paths, the level of energy intensities in developing countries today is generally comparable with the Figure 2-10: Primary energy intensity versus GDP per capita - regional historical developments (1971 to 1990), USA (1800 to 1990), and in global scenarios; energy intensity in MJ per US dollar at 1990 prices and per capita in US dollars. Abbreviations: AFR, Sub-Saharan Africa; CPA, Centrally Planned Asia and China; EEU, Eastern Europe; FSU, Former Soviet Union; LAM, Latin America and the Caribbean; MEA, Middle East and North Africa; NAM, North America; PAO, Pacific OECD; PAS, Other Pacific Asia; SAS, South Asia; WEU, Western Europe. Data sources: IEA, 1993; World Bank, 1993; Morita and Lee, 1998; Nakicenovic et al., 1998b. scenarios, as shown in the shaded wedge in Figure 2-10. The wedge clearly illustrates a persistent inverse relationship between economic development and energy intensity across the wide range of scenarios in the database, despite numerous differences among them. 2.4.11. Carbon Intensity and Decarbonization Decarbonization denotes the declining average carbon intensity of primary energy over time (see Kanoh, 1992). Although the decarbonization of the world's energy system shown in Figure 2-11 is comparatively slow, at the rate of 0.3% per year, the trend has persisted throughout the past two centuries (Nakicenovic, 1996). The overall tendency toward lower carbon intensities results from the continuous replacement of fuels with high carbon content by those with low carbon content. The carbon intensities of the scenarios are shown in Figure 2-11 as an index spliced in the base year 1990 to the historical development. The median of all the scenarios indicates a continuation of the historical trend, with a decarbonization rate of about 0.4% per year, which is similar to the trend in the IS92a scenario (Pepper et al., 1992). The scenarios that are most intensive in the use of fossil fuels lead to practically no reduction in carbon intensity. The highest rates of decarbonization (up to 3.3% per year) are from scenarios that envision a complete transition to non-fossil sources of energy. Figure 2-12 illustrates the relationships between energy intensities of gross world product and carbon intensities of energy across the scenarios in the database. Both intensities are shown on logarithmic scales. The starting point is the base year 1990 normalized to an index (1990 = 100) for both intensities. Scenarios that unfold horizontally are pure decarbonization cases with little structural change in the economy; scenarios that unfold vertically indicate reduction in the energy intensity of economic activities with little change in the energy system. Most scenarios stay away from these extremes and develop a fan-shaped pattern – marked by both decarbonization and declining energy intensity – across the graph in Figure 2-12. The fan-shaped graph illustrates the notable differences in policies and structures of the global energy system among the scenarios. For example, in a number of scenarios decarbonization is achieved largely through energy efficiency improvements, while in others it is mainly the result of lower carbon intensity because of the vigorous substitution of fuels. A few scenarios follow a path opposite to the other scenarios: decarbonization of primary energy with decreasing energy efficiency until 2040. After 2040 the ratio of CO₂ per unit of primary energy increases – in other words, recarbonization. Figure 2-11: Global decarbonization of primary energy – historical development and future scenarios, shown as an index (1990 = 1). The median (50*), 5*, 25*, 75*, and 95* percentiles of the frequency distribution are shown. Statistics associated with scenarios from the literature do not imply probability of occurrence. Data source: Nakicenovic, 1996; Morita and Lee, 1998. Figure 2-12: Global decarbonization and deintensification of energy in the scenarios, 1990 to 2100; energy and carbon intensities shown as an index (1990 = 1). Some of the scenarios are identified in the figure. Data source: Morita and Lee, 1998. Figure 2-13: Global emissions scenarios in the database and their main driving forces. The minimum, maximum and median (50* percentile) values for 2100 are shown on seven axes of the heptagon based on the scenarios in the database. The seven axes show the ranges across the scenarios in 2100 of CO₂ emissions in GtC, population in billions, gross world product in trillion US dollars at 1990 prices, gross world product growth rates in percent per year, energy intensity in MJ per US dollar at 1990 prices, primary energy in ZJ (1000 EJ) and carbon intensity in tC per TJ. 2.4.12. Comparison of Indicators Figure 2-13 illustrates the database distributions of CO₂, population, gross world product, primary energy, and carbon intensity of energy. The circles closest to the center denote the minimum value of the distribution; the solid circles denote the median value; and the shaded circles represent the maximum database value for each variable. While the values are connected in the form of a snowflake, it is important to note that those of a given range (e.g., minimum, median, and maximum), taken together, do not necessarily yield a consistent or logically possible scenario. As is shown in Chapter 4 (Figure 4-4), actual scenarios may fall into a median range on some axes and into a higher or lower range on others. Snowflake diagrams are useful because they allow the reader to see at a glance the full range of values encompassed by the database. Subsequent snowflake diagrams plot SRES scenario values on the various axes to illustrate where the scenarios fall relative to the database minimum, median, and maximum values. Snowflake diagrams should be used only for purposes of scenario classification and interpretation and not for scenario design, since the latter could lead to logical inconsistencies. 2.5. Conclusions In this chapter a brief overview and evaluation of the emissions scenarios is presented. Much of the quantitative analysis of the emissions scenarios is based on the unique scenario database developed for SRES. This database, its structure, and the process of assembling the data that it now contains are described. The database provides a valuable overview of the various emissions modeling approaches and scenarios in the literature. It is the most comprehensive ESD available, and it can be accessed through a website (www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). The SRES database represents the basis for evaluations of emissions scenarios, their main driving forces, and their uncertainty ranges. The CO₂ emissions trajectories of the scenarios in the SRES database are presented and their distribution and the associated sample statistics assessed. In the same way, the main driving forces of future emissions – population, economic development and energy consumption – are analyzed. Finally, the possible relationships among these driving forces for the collection of emissions scenarios in the database are considered. Future levels of CO₂ emissions from the energy sector are a function of population, gross world product, the structure and efficiency of the economy, and the costs and availability of different sources of energy. The factor range for population increases by 2100 across the scenarios is between 1.2 and 3.3 times 1990 levels (see Figure 2-4). This is the smallest factor increase of all the emissions driving forces. This probably reflects a relatively high consensus among demographers as to future population growth. However, this observation is based on a relatively small number of reported population projections in the database (46). The range in projected gross world product values is between 3.2 and 35 times the 1990 levels (see Figure 2-5). The range of the factor increase of primary energy consumption is from 0.9 to 10 times 1990 levels (see Figure 2-8). For energy intensity the range in 2100 is from 9.3 MJ/US$ down to 2.3 MJ/US$. The range in carbon intensity of primary energy is the widest range of all the driving forces considered here. It varies from 0.025 to 1.1 times 1990 levels (about a factor of 45) in the year 2100 (see Figure 2-11). Emissions trajectories are extremely sensitive to a number of driving forces, which include including population growth, economic growth, and energy intensity improvement. Variation in carbon intensity is the main indicator of the wide variation in energy-related CO₂. However, it is important to recognize that this is a result of the inputs, assumptions, methods, and types of models used to calculate the scenarios. The findings of the analysis of the scenarios in the literature suggest the following general conclusions: • the ranges over which the driving forces vary are large, which contributes to the wide range of future emissions; • of these driving forces, gross world product and population are often exogenous, while carbon and energy intensity are not; • the frequency distributions of driving forces and emissions are asymmetric, with long tails and often more than one peak; • for many driving forces the median and mean are closer to the minimum than to the maximum; • lack of information as to whether climate intervention policies and measures were included in the scenarios, for about 40 scenarios, means that it is not possible to distinguish between intervention and non-intervention scenarios; • it is hoped that IPCC or another international institution will, in the future, maintain this or a similar database so as to assure a continuity of knowledge and scientific progress in GHG emissions scenarios (an equivalent database to document narrative and other qualitative scenarios would also be very useful for future climate-change assessments); and • it for about 40 scenarios, means that it is not possible to distinguish between intervention and non-intervention scenarios; • it is hoped that IPCC or another international institution will, in the future, maintain this or a similar database so as to assure a continuity of knowledge and scientific progress in GHG emissions scenarios (an equivalent database to document narrative and other qualitative scenarios would also be very useful for future climate-change assessments); and • it would be useful in the future to evaluate the consistency of the driving forces and results of all scenarios included in the scenario database. In addition, it would be helpful to extend the database to include land-use change data where currently only land-use emissions are presented. As noted above, only a small percentage of scenarios contain information on land use. Overview of the Scenario Literature References: Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grübler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios. In Climate Change 1994, Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 233-304. Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grübler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios. In Climate Change 1994, Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 233-304. Alcamo, J., and E. Kreileman, 1996: Emission scenarios and global climate protection. Global Environmental Change, 6(4), 305-334. Alcamo, J., G.J.J. Kreileman, J.C. Bollen, G.J. van den Born, R. Gerlagh, M.S. Krol, A.M.C. Toet, and H.J.M. De Vries, 1996: Baseline scenarios of global environmental change. Global Environmental Change, 6(4), 261-303. Alcamo, J., G.J.J. Kreileman, J.C. Bollen, G.J. van den Born, R. Gerlagh, M.S. Krol, A.M.C. Toet, and H.J.M. De Vries, 1998: Baseline scenarios of global environmental change. In Global Change Scenarios of the 21st Century, Results from the IMAGE 2.1 Model, J. Alcamo, R. Leemans, E. Kreileman (eds.), Elsevier Science, Kidlington, Oxford, pp. 97-139. Bos, E., and M.T. Vu, 1994: World Population Projections: Estimates and Projections with Related Demographic Statistics, 1994-1995 Edition, World Bank, Washington, DC. Chattopadhyay, D. and J.K. Parikh, 1993: CO2 emissions reduction from power system in India, Natural Resources Forum, 17(4), 251-261. Demeny, P., 1990: Population. In The Earth As Transformed by Human Action, B.L. Turner II et al. (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 41-54. De Vries, H.J.M., J.G.J. Olivier, R.A. van den Wijngaart, G.J.J. Kreileman, and A.M.C. Toet, 1994: Model for calculating regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 76, 79-131. Dignon, J., and S. Hameed, 1989: Global emissions of nitrogen and sulfur oxides from 1860 to 1980. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association, 39(2), 180-186. Dowlatabadi, H., and M. Kandlikar, 1995: Key Uncertainties in Climate Change Policy: Results from ICAM-2. Proceedings of the 6th Global Warming Conference, San Francisco, CA. Durand, J.D., 1967: The modern expansion of world population. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 111(3), 136-159. Edmonds, J.A., J. Reilly, J.R. Trabalka, D.E. Reichle, D. Rind, S. Lebedeff, J.R. Palutikof, T.M.L. Wigley, J.M. Lough, T.J. Blasing, A.M. Solomon, S. Seidel, D. Keyes and M. Steinberg, 1986: Future Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Scenarios and Limitation Strategies. Noyes Publications, Park Ridge, NJ. EMF (Energy Modeling Forum), 1995: Second Round Study Design for EMF 14: Integrated Assessment of Climate Change. Report prepared for the Energy Modeling Forum, Terman Engineering Center, Stanford University, CA 94305. Gray, V., 1998: The IPCC future projections: are they plausible? Climate Research, 10, 155-162. Grübler, A., 1998: A review of global and regional sulfur emission scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 383-418. Häfele, W., J. Anderer, A. McDonald, and N. Nakicenovic, 1981: Energy in a Finite World: Paths to a Sustainable Future. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA. Häfele, W., 1981: Energy in a Finite World: A Global Systems Analysis. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, USA. 834 pp. (ISBN 0-88410-642-X). Houghton, J.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), 1990: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 365 pp. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1993: Energy Statistics and Balances for OECD and non-OECD countries 1971-1991, OECD, Paris. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1998: Energy Statistics and Balances for OECD and non-OECD countries. OECD, Paris. IIASA-WEC (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis - World Energy Council) 1995: Global Energy Perspectives to 2050 and Beyond. and decarbonization. Science and Sustainability, Selected Papers on IIASA's 20th anniversary. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Kaya, Y., 1990: Impact of Carbon Dioxide Emission Control on GNP Growth: Interpretation of Proposed Scenarios. Paper presented to the IPCC Energy and Industry Subgroup, Response Strategies Working Group, Paris, (mimeo). Kram, T., 1993: National Energy Options for Reducing CO2 Emissions. Report of the Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ETSAP), Annex IV (1990-1993). ECN-C-93-101, Netherlands Energy Research Foundation, Petten, the Netherlands. Lazarus, M.L., L. Greber, J. Hall, C. Bartels, S. Bernow, E. Hansen, P. Raskin, and D. von Hippel, 1993: Towards a Fossil Free Energy Future: The Next Energy Transition. A Technical Analysis for Greenpeace International. Stockholm Environmental Institute Boston Center, Boston. Leggett, J., W.J. Pepper and R.J. Swart, 1992: Emissions Scenarios for IPCC: An Update. In Climate Change 1992. The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov, 1997: Doubling of world population unlikely. Nature, 387(6635), 803-805. Manne, A. and R. Richels, 1994: The Costs of Stabilizing Global CO2 Emissions - a Probabilistic Analysis Based on Expert Judgement. Electric Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA. Manne, A., and L. Schrattenholzer, 1995: International Energy Workshop January 1995 Poll Edition. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Manne, A., and L. Schrattenholzer, 1996: International Energy Workshop January 1996 Poll Edition. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Manne, A., and L. Schrattenholzer, 1997: International Energy Workshop, Part I: Overview of Poll Responses, Part II: Frequency Distributions, Part III: Individual Poll Responses, February, 1997, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Marland, G., T.A. Boden, R.J. Andres, A.L. Brenkert, and C. Johnston, 1999: Global, Regional, and National CO2 Emissions. In Trends Online: A Compendium of Data on Global Change. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, TN. (http://cdiac.esd.ornl.gov/trends/abstract.htm). Matsuoka, Y., M. Kainuma, and T. Morita, 1994: Scenario analysis of global warming using the Asian-Pacific integrated model (AIM). Energy Policy, 23(4/5), 357-371. Morita, T., Y. Matsuoka, I. Penna, and M. Kainuma, 1994: Global Carbon Dioxide Emission Scenarios and Their Basic Assumptions: 1994 Survey. CGER-1011-94. Center for Global Environmental Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. Morita, T., and H.-C. Lee, 1998: IPCC SRES Database, Version 0.1, Emission Scenario Database prepared for IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios, (http://www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). Murthy, N.S., M. Panda, J. Parikh, 1997: Economic development, poverty reduction and carbon emissions in India, Energy Economics, 19, 327-354. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, H. Ishitani, T. Johansson, G. Marland, J.R. Moreira, H.-H. Rogner, 1996: Energy primer. In: Climate Change 1995. Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. R. Watson, M.C. Zinyowera and R. Moss (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 75-92. Nakicenovic, N., 1996: Freeing Energy from Carbon. Daedalus, 125(3), 95-112. Nakicenovic, N., N. Victor, and T. Morita, 1998a: Emissions scenarios database and review of scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 95-120. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, and A. McDonald (eds.), 1998b: Global Energy Perspectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 299 pp. Nordhaus, W.D., and G.W. Yohe, 1983: Future paths of energy and carbon dioxide emissions. In: Changing Climate: Report of the Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee. National Academy Press, Washington, DC. Parikh J. (ed.) 1996: Energy Models: Beyond 2000. Tata McGraw Hills Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi, India. Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg, 1995: International CO2 emissions control - An analysis using CETA. Energy Policy, 23(4), 297-308. Pepper, W.J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992: Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC. An Update: Assumptions, Methodology, and Results. Support Document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callandar and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Ramanathan, R. and J.K. Parikh, 1999: Transport sector in India: An analysis in the context of sustainable development. Transport Policy, 6(1), 35-45. Raskin, P., G. Gallopin, P. Gutman, A. Hammond, and R. Swart, 1998: Bending the Curve: Toward Global Sustainability. A report of the Global Scenario Group, PoleStar Series Report 8. Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm, 128 pp. Schwartz, P., 1991: The Art of the Long View: Three global scenarios to 2005. Doubleday Publications. Tol, R.S.J., 1995: The climate fund sensitivity, uncertainty, and robustness analyses. W-95/02, Institute for Environmental Studies, Climate Framework, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. UN (United Nations), 1993a: Macroeconomic Data Systems, MSPA Data Bank of World Development Statistics, MSPA Handbook of World Development Statistics, MEDS/DTA/1 and 2 June, UN, New York, NY. UN (United Nations), 1993b: UN MEDS Macroeconomic Data Systems, MSPA Data Bank of World Development Statistics, MEDS/DTA/1 MSPA-BK.93, Long-Term Socioeconomic Perspectives Branch, Department of Economic and Social Information and Policy Analysis, UN, New York, NY. UN (United Nations), 1996: Annual Populations 1950-2050: The 1996 Revision. UN Population Division, United Nations, New York, NY. (Data on diskettes.) UN (United Nations), 1998: World Population Projections to 2150. UN Department of Economics and Social Affairs, Population Division, United Nations, New York, NY. UN (United Nations), 1999: World Population Prospects: 1998 Revision, Vol. 1. UN Department of Economics and Social Affairs, Population Division, United Nations, New York, NY. UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1992: Convention Text, UNFCCC, Geneva. US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency), 1990: Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate. Report to Congress. Washington, DC. WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development), 1998: Exploring Sustainable Development, 29 pp. WEC (World Energy Council), 1993: Energy for Tomorrow's World. Kogan Page Ltd., London, 320 pp. Weyant, J.R., 1993: Costs of reducing global carbon emissions. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(4), 7-46. Weyant, J.R. (ed.), 1999: The Costs of the Kyoto Protocol: A Multi-Model Evaluation. Energy Journal Special Issue, June, 448 pp. World Bank, 1993: World Development Report. Oxford University Press, New York, NY. Yamaji, K., R. Matsuhashi, Y. Nagata, and Y. Kaya, 1991: An Integrated Systems for CO2/Energy/GNP Analysis: Case Studies on Economic Measures for CO2 Reduction in Japan. Workshop on CO2 Reduction and Removal: Measures for the Next Century, 19-21 March 1991. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Yohe, G., 1995: Exercises in hedging against extreme consequences of global change and the expected value of information, Department of Economics, Wesleyan University, CT. 3 Scenario Driving Forces CONTENTS 3.1. Introduction 105 3.2. Population 105 3.2.1. Introduction 107 3.2.2. Past Population Trends 107 3.2.3. Population Scenarios 107 3.2.3.1. Population Projections Used in Emission Scenarios 107 3.2.3.2. Currently Available Population Projections 108 3.2.3.3. Recent Developments in Demographic Projections 110 3.2.4. Other Aspects of Population: Aging and Urbanization 111 3.2.4.1. Aging 111 3.2.4.2. Urbanization 112 3.2.5. Relationships 112 3.2.5.1. Introduction 112 3.2.5.2. The Effect of Economic Growth on Population Growth 112 3.2.6. Conclusions 113 3.3. Economic and Social Development 114 3.3.1. Introduction 114 3.3.2. Historical Trends 116 3.3.3. Scenarios of Economic Development 118 3.3.4. Relationships 119 3.3.4.1. Introduction 119 3.3.4.2. Influence of Demographics 120 3.3.4.3. Influence of Social and Institutional Changes 120 3.3.4.4. Influence of International Trade and Investment 121 3.3.4.5. Influence of Innovation and Technological Change 121 3.3.4.6. Do the Poor Get Richer and the Rich Slow Down? 122 3.3.4.7. Economic Productivity and Energy and Materials Intensity 123 3.3.4.8. Development Patterns 125 3.3.5. Conclusion 127 3.4. Energy and Technology 128 3.4.1. Introduction 128 3.4.2. Energy Use and Emissions by Major Sectors 128 3.4.2.1. Overview 128 3.4.2.2. Industry and Agriculture 129 3.4.2.3. Residential, Commercial, and Institutional Buildings 130 3.4.2.4. Transport 132 3.4.3. Energy Resources 133 3.4.3.1. Fossil and Fissile Resources 133 3.4.3.2. Renewable Resources 135 3.4.3.3. Conclusion 137 3.4.4. Energy Supply Technologies 137 3.4.4.1. Introduction 137 3.4.4.2. Fossil and Fissile Energy Supply Technologies 137 3.4.4.3. Renewable Energy Technologies 138 3.4.4.4. Combined Heat and Power Production (Cogeneration) 139 3.4.5. Understanding and Modeling Technological Change 139 3.5. Agriculture and Land-Use Emissions 141 3.5.1. Introduction 141 3.5.2. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Anthropogenic Land-Use Change 142 3.5.3. Methane Emissions from Rice Production 144 3.5.4. Methane Emissions from Enteric Fermentation 144 3.5.5. Nitrous Oxides Emissions from Agriculture 145 3.5.6. Findings Regarding Driving Forces 145 3.5.7. Conclusions 146 3.6. Other Gas Emissions 147 3.6.1. Introduction 147 3.6.2. Nitrous Oxide 147 3.6.3. Methane 148 3.6.4. Sulfur Dioxide 149 3.6.5. Ozone Precursors 153 3.6.5.1. Nitrogen Oxides 153 3.6.5.2. Carbon Monoxide and Non-Methane Hydrocarbons 153 3.6.6. Halocarbons and Other Industrial Gases 154 3.7. Policies 155 3.7.1. Introduction 155 3.7.2. Policy Areas 155 3.7.2.1. Pop. and Social Welfare Policies 155 3.7.2.2. Policies that Target Economic Development and Technological Innovation 155 3.7.2.3. Energy, Agriculture and Other Resource Management Policies 156 3.7.2.4. Environmental Policies 157 3.7.2.5. Transportation and Infrastructure Policies 157 3.7.3. Quantification of Impacts and Implementation of Policies in SRES 157 References 158 Scenario Driving Forces 105 3.1. Introduction Some of the major driving forces of past and future anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, which include demographics, economics, resources, technology, and (non-climate) policies, are reviewed in this chapter. Economic, social, and technical systems and their interactions are highly complex and only a limited overview is provided in this chapter. The discussion of major scenario driving forces herein is structured by considering the links from demography and the economy to resource use and emissions. A frequently used approach to organize discussion of the drivers of emissions is through the so-called IPAT identity, equation (3.1). Impact = Population x Affluence x Technology (3.1) The IPAT identity emissions. A frequently used approach to organize discussion of the drivers of emissions is through the so-called IPAT identity, equation (3.1). Impact = Population x Affluence x Technology (3.1) The IPAT identity states that environmental impacts (e.g., emissions) are the product of the level of population times affluence (income per capita, i.e. gross domestic product (GDP) divided by population) times the level of technology deployed (emissions per unit of income). The IPAT identity has been widely discussed in analyses of energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions (e.g., Ogawa, 1991; Parikh et al., 1991; Nakicenovic et al., 1993; Parikh, 1994; Alcamo et al., 1995; Gaffin and O'Neill, 1997; Gürer and Ban, 1997; O'Neill et al., 2000), in which it is often referred to as the Kaya identity (Kaya, 1990), equation (3.2). CO2 Emissions = Population x (GDP / Population) x (Energy / GDP) x (CO2 / Energy) (3.2) The Kaya multiplicative identity also underlies the analysis of the emissions scenario literature (Chapter 2). It can be broken down into further subcomponents. For instance, the energy component can be decomposed into fossil and non-fossil shares, and emissions can be expressed as carbon emissions per unit of fossil energy, as shown in Figure 3-1 (Gürer and Ban, 1997). A property of the multiplicative identity is that component growth rates are additive. For instance, global energy-related CO2 emissions since the middle of the 19th century are estimated to have increased by approximately 1.7% per year (Watson et al., 1996). This growth rate can be decomposed roughly into a 3% growth in gross world product (the sum of a 1% growth in population and a 2% growth in per capita income) minus a 1% per year decline in the energy intensity of world GDP (the third term in equation (3.2)) and a decline in the carbon intensity of primary energy (the fourth term) of 0.3% per year (Nakicenovic et al., 1993; Watson et al., 1996). While the Kaya identity above can be used to organize discussion of the primary driving forces of CO2 emissions and, by extension, emissions of other GHGs, there are important caveats. Most important, the four terms on the right-hand side of equation (3.2) should be considered neither as fundamental driving forces in themselves, nor as generally independent from each other. Global analysis is often not instructive and even misleading, because of the great heterogeneity among populations with respect to GHG emissions. The ratios of per capita emissions of the world's richest countries to those of its poorest countries approach several hundred (Parikh et al., 1991; Engelman, 1994). Of course, some level of aggregation is necessary. In practice, the models used to produce emissions scenarios in this report, for example, operate on the basis of 9-15 regions (see Appendix IV, Table IV-1). This level of detail isolates the most important differences, particularly with respect to industrial versus developing countries (Lutz, 1993). The spatial and temporal heterogeneity of emission growth that becomes masked in the global aggregates is shown in Figure 3-1, in which the growth in energy-related CO2 emissions since 1970 is broken down into a number of subcomponents. For industrial countries the population growth has been modest and their emissions have evolved roughly in line with increases (or declines) in economic activity. For developing countries both population and income growth appear as important drivers of emissions. However, even in developing countries the regional heterogeneity becomes masked in the aggregate analysis (Grübler et al., 1993a). Although, at face value, the IPAT and Kaya identities suggest that CO2 emissions grow linearly with population increases, this depends on the real (or modeled) interactions between demographics and economic growth (see Section 3.2) as well as on those between technology, economic structure, and affluence (Section 3.3). In principle, such interactions preclude a simple linear interpretation of the role of population growth in emissions. Demographic development interacts in many ways with social and economic development. Fertility and mortality trends depend, among other things, on education, income, social norms, and health provisions. In turn, these determine the size and age composition of the population. Many of these factors combined are recognized as necessary to explain long-run productivity, economic growth, economic structure, and technological change (Barro, 1997). In turn, long-run per capita economic growth and structural change are closely linked with advances in knowledge and technological change. In fact, long-run growth accounts (e.g., Solow, 1956; Denison, 1962, 1985; Maddison, 1989, 1995; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1995) confirm that advances in knowledge and technology may be the most important reason for long-run economic growth; more important even than growth in other factors of production such as capital and labor. Abramovitz (1993) demonstrates that capital and labor productivity cannot be treated as independent from technological change. Therefore, it is not possible to treat the affluence and technology variables in IPAT as independent of each other. Pollution abatement efforts appear to increase with income, growing willingness to pay for a clean environment, and progress in the development of clean technology. Thus, as incomes rise, pollution should increase initially and later decline, a relationship often referred to as the "environmental Kuznets curve." This process seems well established for traditional pollutants, such as particulates and sulfur (e.g., World Bank, 1992; Kato, 1996; Viguier, 1999), and there have been some claims that it might apply to GHG emissions. Schmalensee et al. (1998) found that CO2 emissions have flattened and may have reversed for highly developed economies such as the US and Japan. Other researchers argue that the Kuznets curve does not apply to GHG emissions (Pearce, 1995; Galeotti and Lanza, 1999; Viguier, 1999). The flattening in emissions can be explained by normal market processes and does not appear to result from a willingness to pay to protect the global environment. Urbanization, infrastructure, poverty, and income distribution are other factors in the complex interplay between population, economy, and environment (see, e.g., Rotmans and de Vries, 1997; de Vries et al., 1999; O'Neill et al., 2000). Technological, economic, and social innovation have long been means by which a greater number of people can live from the same environmental resources. The best known historical examples of major periods of innovation include the Neolithic revolution (beginnings of organized agriculture from around 10,000 years ago); and the industrial revolution that began two centuries ago (Rosenberg and Birdzell, 1986). In each case, changes in patterns of primary production (food, energy, materials) are linked to changes in social organization, institutions, economy, and technology (e.g., Mumford, 1934; Campbell, 1959; Landes, 1969; Hill, 1975; Wilber, 1981; Buchanan, 1992; Reynolds and Cutcliffe, 1997). The most remarkable change in recent decades is the so-called demographic transition, which has led to a stabilization of population in many parts of the world. No single one of these changes can be considered as the primary driver, and they cannot be considered as independent from each other; each play a role in an interconnected system. Most innovative efforts in the past two centuries were devoted to improving labor productivity and the human ability to harness resources for economic purposes. While material and energy efficiency improved slowly, economic growth was faster and thus aggregate resource use increased. Finally, and importantly, the high uncertainty with regard to the nature and extent of the relationships between driving forces of GHG emissions means that, with current knowledge, it is not possible to develop probabilistic future emission scenarios. Even if it were possible to derive (subjective) probability distributions of the future evolution of individual scenario driving-force variables (like population, economic growth, or technological change), the nature of their relationships is known only qualitatively at best or remains uncertain (and controversial) in many instances. The next five sections review the major driving forces of GHG emissions within the IPAT identity. Section 3.2 discusses the role of population. Section 3.3 addresses economic and social development processes (including technological change), Section 3.4 examines energy resources and technology in more detail, and Section 3.5 addresses agriculture, forestry, and land-use change. Section 3.6 considers other sources of non-CO2 GHGs. The chapter concludes with a discussion of non-climate policies and their potential impact on the principal driving forces of future emissions. Each section briefly reviews past trends, available scenarios, and important new methodological and empirical advances since the publication of previous Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) emissions scenarios in 1992 (IS92). This chapter provides the background to establish recommendations for the range of driving-force variables to be explored in the new set of scenarios. The available literature and current understanding of the inherent uncertainties in developing very long-term scenarios are on Climate Change (IPCC) emissions scenarios in 1992 (IS92). This chapter provides the background to establish recommendations for the range of driving-force variables to be explored in the new set of scenarios. The available literature and current understanding of the inherent uncertainties in developing very long-term scenarios are reflected. Each section elucidates in detail the important relationships between scenario driving forces, as the question of relationships is a new and important mandate for SRES. Nonetheless, most attention is paid to the possible relationships between population and economic growth, because this is the area most intensively discussed in the literature. 3.2. Population 3.2.1. Introduction Population projections are arguably the backbone of GHG emissions scenarios, and are comparable in some ways with them. Population projections cover timeframes of a century or more, and they involve social and economic considerations and uncertainties similar to those in GHG emissions scenarios. Population projections are among the most commonly cited indicators of the future state of the world. Compared to the multitude of projection efforts they have a relatively high accuracy in the near-to-medium term. Even so the future is always unknowable and surprises are in store, as confirmed by a cursory review of the past history of population projections in which fundamental events were largely unforeseen (post-World War II baby boom, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) or the recent rapidity of fertility decline in developing countries). To be useful for the development of emissions scenarios, population projections need a timeframe of a century or more, global coverage and regional disaggregations, and an appropriate treatment of uncertainty reflected in the variants of the projections. Although other "demographic units" more immediately linked to GHG emissions than people, such as automobiles or households, can be considered, the integrated assessment models used in this report are all based on regional population and, in some cases, labor-force projections. 3.2.2. Past Population Trends World annual population growth rates probably averaged less than 0.6% during the 18th and 19th centuries, passed the 1% rate around 1920, and peaked at 2.04% in the late 1960s (UN, 1998). This peak coincided with growing international concern about population growth in general. World population reached 1 billion in 1804, 2 billion in 1927, 3 billion in 1960, 4 billion in 1974, and 5 billion in 1987, reaching the 6 billion level shortly before the millennium (UN, 1998). The population of the developing regions increased from 1.71 billion in 1950 to 4.59 billion in 1996, with annual growth rates dropping from a peak of 2.5% in 1965 to 1.7% presently. The population of the more-developed regions increased from 813 million to 1.18 billion over the same period, with annual growth rates dropping from 1.2% in 1950 to 0.4% presently (UN, 1998). Population distribution and growth thus differ markedly among major geographic regions. Latin America and the Caribbean was the fastest growing region between 1950 and 1970, followed by Africa, and this is projected to remain the case until 2050 (UN, 1998). Table 3-1 shows the population levels of the major geographic areas between 1800 and the present. 3.2.3. Population Scenarios 3.2.3.1. Population Projections Used in Emission Scenarios Since the IPCC was first convened in 1988, its Working Group III has generated two distinct series of emissions scenarios; the 1990 Scientific Assessment (SA90) series of four scenarios (Houghton et al., 1990), and the IS92 series of six scenarios (Houghton et al., 1992, 1995; Pepper et al., 1992). The four Table 3-1: Population of the world and by major areas between 1800 and 1996 in millions. Data source: UN, 1998. 1800 1850 1900 1950 1996 World 978 1262 1650 2524 5768 Africa 107 111 133 224 739 Asia 635 809 947 1402 3488 Europe 203 276 408 547 729 Latin America and Caribbean 24 38 74 166 484 Northern America 7 26 82 172 299 Oceania 2 2 6 13 29 108 Scenario Driving Forces SA90 scenarios all used the same median population projection - the World Bank 1987 projection (Zachariah and Vu, 1988). The IS92a-f series made use of three different projection variants, the World Bank (World Bank, 1991) 1991 projection and the United Nations (UN, 1992) 1992 medium-high and medium-low projections. Wexler (1996) surveyed the world population projections used in GHG emissions scenarios since 1990. Of the models surveyed, all but one employed the World Bank central projections. The sole exception - the DICE model of Nordhaus (1993; Nordhaus and Yohe, 1983) - used algorithmic projections based on assumed declining population growth rates. As noted in Chapter 2, many long-term emission scenarios available in the literature do not even report their underlying population projections. In general, World Bank projections have been more heavily employed than the UN projections, apparently because of the shorter time horizon and longer cycle time of the UN Long Range projections. UN Revisions until 1994 extended only to 2025 (now to 2050), which is too short for emissions scenarios. The UN Long Range series is revised less frequently, with a six-year interval between the previous two UN Long Range projections. The World Bank, in contrast, updates its published projection every two years, and it has always been a long-range projection, out to year 2150. In addition, the World Bank maintains a country-level disaggregation throughout its projection, unlike the UN Long Range series, which switches to a nine-region summary. In 1994, however, the World Bank discontinued the publication of population projections, even if these continue to be generated for internal uses. In contrast to the past dominance of World Bank projections, the SRES scenario series instead employs published projections from the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) along with the UN's Medium Long Range projection. 3.2.3.2. Currently Available Population Projections World population projections are currently generated by the following institutions: • United States Census Bureau (USCB); • World Bank; • UN; and • IIASA. The main defining characteristics of the individual projections and a detailed description of each projection is given in Gaffin (1998). Figure 3-2 displays these latest world population numbers from all four demographic organizations. Two of the four projections, from the World Bank and USCB, contain only one central estimate and are unpublished. These are generated currently for internal organizational purposes and are not further considered here. The only population projections that currently incorporate variation of the long-range fertility rates are those produced by UN and IIASA (Gaffin, 1998). For the UN, these variants result in four additional projections to the UN medium projection and are referred to as "low," "medium low," "medium high" and "high." The designations reflect the average world fertility rate relative to the medium projection. For IIASA, the primary variants also refer to world average fertility (and mortality) rate relative to the medium projection and are referred to in Figure 3-2 as "high" and "low." The central projections in Figure 3-3 show excellent agreement over the next 100 years, with the exception of the "overshoot" in the IIASA projection, discussed below. Although significant, such an agreement does not imply certainty or accuracy. Rather, it reflects the use of similar methodologies and UN 98 High IIASA High —D— UN 96 High —K— UN 96 Low UN 98 Medium High —○— UN 96 Medium —Δ— US Census —○— IIASA Medium UN 98 Medium —4— World Bank —Φ— IIASA Low UN 98 Medium Low UN 98 Low 2000 2050 2100 2150 Figure 3-2: Most recent world population projections from the four main demographic organizations, including high and low variants. Two of the projections (USCB and World Bank) will not be published. Variations in future world populations are largely determined by different assumptions concerning the demographic transition in developing countries as well as long-range fertility rates worldwide. Scenario Driving Forces 109 UN 1998 Low Range Medium IIASA 1996 2000 2050 2100 2150 Figure 3-3: Central projections extracted from Figure 3-2 show excellent agreement among the central projections over the next 100 years (with the possible exception of the IIASA projection). databases, the dominance of population momentum associated with a young population age structure, and the assumption of replacement-level fertility in the long term. Figure 3-4 shows the breakdown of population growth projections in industrial countries (IND) and developing countries (DEV) as defined by the UN. The key conclusion to draw from Figure 3-4 is the dominance of the DEV population on future world population growth. The most important variable to determine future population levels is fertility. To a lesser extent, future population also depends on mortality and migration rates. Figure 3-5 shows the world-average total fertility rate (TFR), the average number of births per woman, assumed for the various projections. Overall, a fairly broad range of assumptions about future world average fertility is encompassed by the projections. Future population size is very sensitive population on future world population growth. The most important variable to determine future population levels is fertility. To a lesser extent, future population also depends on mortality and migration rates. Figure 3-5 shows the world-average total fertility rate (TFR), the average number of births per woman, assumed for the various projections. Overall, a fairly broad range of assumptions about future world average fertility is encompassed by the projections. Future population size is very sensitive (see Figure 3-2) to comparatively small changes in the long-range fertility rate. For example, within the UN projections, a decrease of the asymptotic fertility rate of less than half a birth per woman (from 2.1 to 1.7) decreases population in 2100 by 46% (UN, 1998). Only the replacement-level fertility of about 2.1 results in a stable population in the long run. Such sensitivity to small asymptotic fertility-rate changes indicates the high and low projections from UN and IIASA are all feasible scenarios of the future population (Gaffin and O'Neill, 1998). Up to 2050, the IIASA central TFR is high compared with the UN and World Bank central projection. Later the IIASA central TFR declines to below replacement-level fertility rate, as depicted in Figure 3-5. As a result, the IIASA central forecast lies considerably above all the others throughout the 21st century. After that, IIASA's below-replacement, long-term fertility assumption causes the projection to decline and to "hit" the World Bank and UN curves in 2100. This "overshoot" occurs because the IIASA central scenario assumptions rely on an expert poll conducted in 1993 (Lutz, 1994), whereas other projections incorporate more recent information into their future assumptions (more rapid recent fertility declines in many developing countries; see Courbage, 1998). However, among demographers disagreement persists on the timing and rates of demographic transition in the developing countries, in particular between the demographers at IIASA and those at the UN and World Bank (see the discussion in Lutz, 1994, on the differences among alternative population projections). This disagreement reflects important uncertainties in the projection of future demographic developments. The below-replacement, long-term fertility level in the IIASA central estimate is a hallmark of the institute's work. Demographers at IIASA strongly adhere to the view that there is little reason to expect developed nations to return to replacement-level fertility, while much evidence suggests that low long-term rates will persist (Lutz et al., 1996). One issue here, however, is that the TFR measure is currently depressed in Europe, in part because women are delaying their childbearing until later ages (Bongaarts, 1998). Thus, the TFR may rise if these women do have children, and such a correction has to be incorporated into the long-term TFR assumptions (e.g., see Courbage, 1998). Important uncertainties are by how fast and how much the TFR will rise. 3.2.3.3 Recent Developments in Demographic Projections 3.2.3.3.1 Downward revisions in population projections The UN 1996 Revision generated substantial press attention in 1997 because it forecast nearly 500 million fewer people in 2050 than it had in 1994. The base year of data for the UN 1996 Revision is 1995, whereas in the 1994 Revision fertility, mortality, and migration rates for 1995 are forecast. The reduction in the population projection largely results from more accurate data available for 1995 (UN, 1997b, 1997c). The major change was the lower-than-anticipated world average fertility of 2.96 children per woman during the period 1990-1995, as compared with 3.10 children per woman assumed in the 1994 Revision. The main reason for this decrease is a faster-than-anticipated decline in fertility in a number of countries in south central Asia, Bangladesh and India, and Sub-Saharan Africa, Kenya, and Rwanda (UN, 1997c). Other important regional declines in fertility also took place in Brazil, the former Soviet republics, and the newly independent states in eastern and southern Europe (Haub, 1997). Higher-than-anticipated mortality rates in a number of countries afflicted by wars and the spread of AIDS also contributed to the downward population revision. 3.2.3.3.2 Demographic impact of the HIV and AIDS epidemic Both the UN and the World Health Organization (WHO) conduct ongoing surveys of the global HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and AIDS epidemic. The most recent surveys indicate that at the beginning of 1998 30.6 million people were infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, and 11.7 million people have already lost their lives to the disease (UNAIDS and WHO, 1998). Since the impact of HIV and AIDS on mortality rates is greatest in the sub-Saharan region, the impact of the epidemic on population growth will be greatest there. One study (Bongaarts, 1996) suggests that by 2005 the annual population growth rates (expressed as "persons increase per thousand population") in sub-Saharan Africa will be about 1.4 persons per thousand lower than would have occurred in the absence of the disease. Other regions, however, will experience a much smaller impact in population growth so that the AIDS-related deficit in world population growth rate will be only -0.4 persons per thousand in 2005. The reason for the modest impact is that birth rates in many developing countries are much higher than the death rates, so the AIDS increase in mortality only partially offsets this larger difference. 3.2.3.3.3 The correlation between fertility and mortality In the recently published IIASA population projections (Lutz, 1996), the correlations of fertility and mortality rates are also different to those of the UN projections. Within IIASA the main scenarios are labeled "central," "rapid transition," "slow transition," "high," and "low." In the two "transition" scenarios, mortality rates and fertility rates are correlated so that low or high mortality accompanies low or high fertility, respectively, in line with conventional wisdom among demographers that fertility declines are associated with mortality declines. This correlation narrows the range of projected population size as compared with an anticorrelation assumption. The "high" and "low" scenarios, by contrast, anticorrelate mortality and fertility and are considered quite unlikely. 3.2.3.3.4 Probabilistic population projections Another recent development in demographic projections is that of probabilistic scenarios. Lutz et al. (1997) consider, based on their probabilistic population projections, a doubling of world population unlikely. Their scenarios use fertility, mortality, and migration rate assumptions based on a Gaussian fit to a survey of demographic experts who were asked to give a range of rates for each region that they considered to cover the 90th percentile probability range. Given the Gaussian curve fits to the expert data, a Monte Carlo simulation was run to generate 4000 scenarios, with five-year timesteps, which have a probability distribution attached to them. The branch points in the fertility, mortality, and net migration rate curves, based on the expert data, were set in 1995, 2000, 2030, and 2080. The probabilistic projections extend to 2100. The 5th and 95th percentile intervals are between 6.7 to 15.6 billion people by 2100, a range that usefully covers current knowledge on the uncertainty of future world population levels to be considered in SRES. It should be noted that such probability assignments derived from expert opinion are inherently subjective and do not necessarily suggest a corresponding likelihood of future occurrence. 3.2.4 Other Aspects of Population: Aging and Urbanization 3.2.4.1 Aging Population aging has widely discussed implications for social planning, health care, labor force structural changes, and entitlement programs. As shown in Figure 3-6, percentage growth in the elderly age cohorts is predicted strongly by all projections. The figure shows the percentage of elderly age cohorts using the medium projection data. Importantly, it will be a continuous process over the entire 21st century, even though total population size is forecast in these cases to stabilize during the latter half of the century. The detailed economic effects of such a profound and rapid over the entire 21st century, even though total population size is forecast in these cases to stabilize during the latter half of the century. The detailed economic effects of such a profound and rapid change in social structure are not well understood (Eberstadt, 1997). The problem is considered below in the discussion of the impact of population dynamics on economic development. In short, conventional wisdom takes a more or less neutral view of the effect of population growth, including the impacts of aging, on the rate of economic growth (Hammer, 1985; Kelley, 1988; National Research Council, 1986). Lowered population growth rates (and concomitant aging) might have a beneficial effect on the economy through reduced youth dependency ratios, which result in higher savings rates (Higgins and Williamson, 1997). Also, population aging could reduce labor supply and thus reduce potential economic growth. Against this argument, labor scarcity induces higher wages that in turn are a powerful incentive to increase labor productivity. Increasing productivity (per capita economic output) would balance shortfalls from possible reductions in the labor force (Disney, 1996). However, lowered fertility and mortality rates will also cause the elderly dependency ratio to increase, which might lead to a trend of lower savings, characteristic of elderly cohorts, which have a reduced incentive to save. In terms of public savings, without institutional reforms aging could eventually lead to severe strains on social security and health care programs supported by governments and thus to reduced governmental savings (US Council of Economic Advisors, 1997). Interestingly, a case has been made that aging may have significant impacts on future CO2 emissions. The suggested mechanism for this relates to household formation rate (MacKellar et al., 1995). An aging population has a greater proportion of people in older age groups. Assuming age-specific household formation rates remain constant over time, as more people enter the older age cohorts the overall household formation rates will increase. This increase will be accompanied by a decline in the number of people per household (a process already observed in industrialized countries) and is related to reduced fertility rates. As small households consume significantly more energy per person than large households (Ironmonger et al., 1995), the various effects suggest CO2 emissions will increase with increased aging (MacKellar et al., 1995). Important uncertainties of this effect remain, not least because household formation rates of aging populations are not well understood. 3.2.4.2. Urbanization Urbanization is also a strongly anticipated demographic trend. Since 1970, most urban growth has taken place in developing countries. It is caused by both internal increases of the existing urban population and rural-to-urban migration (UN, 1997b). Urbanization, though, is not a rigorously modeled phenomenon within the projections. Essentially, future urban and rural growth and decline rates are simply assumed and applied to the projected population levels. Thus, the projections contain no explicit feedback mechanism from urbanization to population growth, even though urbanization is an important factor in fertility rate changes (urban populations generally have lower fertility rates than rural populations). Instead, urbanization rates are considered implicitly within the projections of future fertility. It is estimated that by 2010 more than half of the world's population will live in urban areas (UN, 1996). Urbanization will lead to a rapid expansion of infrastructure and especially transportation uses (Wexler, 1996). In addition, urban households in developing countries use significantly more fossil fuels, as opposed to biofuels, than do rural households. However, the choice of fuel is predominantly an income effect rather than a function of locale (see Murthy et al., 1997), even within urban settings. Hence, urbanization exerts its influence on emissions primarily via higher urban incomes compared to rural ones. Generally, opportunities for higher income are considered an important driver of rural-to-urban migration, and so contribute to rising urbanization rates (HABITAT, 1996). Urbanization is obviously an important factor for future GHG emissions. 3.2.5. Relationships 3.2.5.1. Introduction Within the caveats in Section 3.1, a number of demographic studies show that population change does exert a strong first-order scaling effect on CO2 emissions models (O'Neill, 1996; Gaffin and O'Neill, 1997; O'Neill et al., 2000; Wexler, 1996). These studies support the notion that population growth and the policies that affect it are key factors for future emissions. Balanced against this, however, are other studies that take a more skeptical view (Kolsrud and Torrey, 1992; Birdsall, 1994; Preston, 1996). A full review of model results that address this question is given in O'Neill (1996) and Gaffin and O'Neill (1997) and is not be reproduced here because of space limitations (for a review see Gaffin, 1998). In essence, the controversy is one of the relationships between population growth and economic development, as well as other salient factors that influence emissions. These relationships were first discussed within the context of IPCC emissions scenarios by Alcamo et al. (1995) and are discussed in more detail in the following sections. 3.2.5.2. The Effect of Economic Growth on Population Growth Figure 3-7 shows the long-established negative correlation between fertility rates and per capita income. Clearly, richer countries uniformly have a relatively low fertility rate. Poorer countries, on average, have a higher fertility rate. Lower fertility, however, does exist in some poor countries or regions, which illustrates the importance of social and institutional structures. Barro (1997) reports a statistically significant correlation between per capita GDP growth and the variables life expectancy and fertility in his analysis of post-1960 growth performance of 100 countries. Other things being equal, growth rates correlate positively (higher) with increasing life expectancy and negatively (lower) with high fertility, which confirms the view that the affluent live longer and have fewer children. Figure 3-7, a snapshot of many countries passing through the "demographic fertility transition" can be explained from both economic and socio-demographic points of view (Easterlin, 1978). Economically, Figure 3-7 can be interpreted as a reflection of the substitution that families make – away from having children and toward consuming more goods and services. With greater wealth, both goods and services become increasingly available as part of the families' "basket of choices" for consumption and, accordingly, they shift away from higher fertility to lower fertility. This move is further prompted by the rising relative costs of childcare, which include preferences that increase a child's quality of life, such as better schooling and extracurricular activities. This income effect is primarily interpreted with respect to fertility changes in currently developing countries. In currently industrial countries, any change of fertility in response to increasing wealth is likely to be different from and probably even opposite to that of developing countries' fertility. Indeed, there is evidence of this in Eastern Europe, Sweden, Russia, and (recently) the United States (UN, 1997a), and it is linked to the question of long-term fertility rates in industrial countries (see Section 3.2.3.2.). However, it is evident that future world population levels will be dominated by growth in developing countries. Thus, if it is accepted that fertility is lower with greater affluence, then in emissions scenarios lower populations will still tend to correlate with higher per capita incomes. Another countervailing factor is that mortality rates should also decline with wealth; as an isolated effect, this obviously results in higher population levels. However, the combined impact of both fertility and mortality reduction on population size is a net reduction in population levels (Lutz, 1996). From a demographic point of view, the primary effect seen in Figure 3-7 is interpreted as infant and child mortality decline with increasing affluence. Families, in a sense, have to use birth control to achieve their desired number, which has always been lower than fertility rates. Increased affluence results in increased knowledge of, access to, and use of birth control, and accordingly families shift their reproductive behavior to lower fertility rates. Accompanying this basic premise is a host of complex social changes, including increased opportunities for education, employment, and non-maternal roles for women. Incorporation of the inverse relationship between economic and population growth in long-term emission scenarios is recent and mostly carried out in a qualitative way. Alcamo et al. (1995) reviews the literature available up to 1994. Nakicenovic et al. (1998a) report a long-term scenario study in which timing and extent of economic catch-up in developing countries were found to be tied to timing and pace of their demographic transition. Patterns of the range of per capita GDP growth rates for developing countries available in the literature (and given in Figure 3-10) also appear to qualitative way. Alcamo et al. (1995) reviews the literature available up to 1994. Nakicenovic et al. (1998a) report a long-term scenario study in which timing and extent of economic catch-up in developing countries were found to be tied to timing and pace of their demographic transition. Patterns of the range of per capita GDP growth rates for developing countries available in the literature (and given in Figure 3-10) also appear to reflect this relationship. Growth trends for the period 2020-2050 are generally higher than those for earlier or later periods; it is in this period that, according to demographic projections, the fastest change in demographic variables (especially fertility) will take place. 3.2.6. Conclusions From the available population projections, only those from the UN and IIASA fulfill the characteristics needed for use in long-term emission scenarios. First, the UN and IIASA data are published and available in the public domain, and second (more importantly) the scenarios consider uncertainty by developing more than just one, central demographic projection. We use the medium UN projections in the SRES emissions scenarios because they have greater recognition internationally, and garner considerable attention as evident from the press focus devoted to the 1996 Revision (mentioned above). In addition, the UN assumption of replacement-level fertility in the long term, in contrast to the IIASA below-replacement assumption, is an important normative approach widely used heretofore in projections. The rapid and slow demographic transition variants from IIASA projections remain attractive as the "high" and "low" population variants to be considered for the new IPCC emissions scenarios. The incorporation of a correlation between mortality rates and fertility (Lutz, 1996) is a logical first-order relationship not used in previous population variants and, in particular, not a feature of the UN variants. The two IIASA variants also represent well the uncertainty range as spanned by the probabilistic projections of Lutz et al. (1997), which represent an important methodological advance in the field. As shown in Figure 3-2, the resultant IIASA population range falls within the range of the UN projections. Based on the above recommendations, Figure 3-8 compares the older IS92 population range with the population range described in this section. The population projections in IS92 scenarios comprise the UN 1992 medium-high and medium-low variants for the high and low ranges with the World Bank 1991 projection as the central case. As seen in Figure 3-8, the new range for SRES is somewhat narrower and lower than the IS92 range. The cause is partly the positive correlation between mortality rates and fertility rates within the IIASA variants, which mildly offset each other in terms of future population size. Another reason is the recent downward revision of the UN medium projection compared to earlier UN scenarios (as outlined above). The literature suggests a general inverse correlation between economic growth rates and population growth rates. Higher economic growth rates in developing countries should correlate with lower population growth rates in long-term scenarios and vice versa, because of the importance of economic development in bringing about the demographic fertility transition. This represents a distinctive change from the IS92 trajectories. Importantly, there is still no quantitative basis for associating any particular economic growth curve with a particular population curve; this is a qualitative negative correlation only. Even more important is that income is not necessarily the best predictor of future fertility rates and many countries are currently moving through the demographic transition without a clear economic cause. Alternatively, some countries have failed to begin a fertility decline even though economic and social conditions have improved (e.g., Sathar and Casterline, 1998). The inclusion of a household demographic unit, in addition to population, should be encouraged in future studies. The effect is linked to a strongly predicted demographic trend - aging. Also important are that smaller households are more energy intensive, per person, and that aging may continue to increase more rapidly than population in the future. These factors may increase CO₂ emissions (MacKellar et al., 1995), although senior citizens group-living is a tendency in some industrialized countries. Urbanization might also have a strong effect on emissions because of its effect on income distribution and thus energy consumption patterns around the world, although many of these effects are included implicitly in the models and parameters used in this report. 3.3. Economic and Social Development 3.3.1. Introduction Economic and social development comprises many dimensions and a number of indicators have been devised to assess progress and setbacks in human development (see Box 3-1). The UN defines development as the furthering of human choices. Such choices are neither finite nor static. Yet, regardless of the level of development, the three essential choices are to have access to the resources needed for a decent standard of living, to lead a long and healthy life, and to acquire knowledge (UNDP, 1997). Other valued choices range from political, economic, and social freedom to opportunities for being creative and productive, and to enjoy human rights (UNDP 1997). Arguably, choices are only possible once basic human needs for food, shelter, health care, safety, and education have been met. Poverty is therefore an important indicator of the absence of satisfactory economic development. Alleviation of poverty is an essential prerequisite for human development. Beyond the satisfaction of basic needs, the issue of what constitutes "development" involves many cultural, social, and economic dimensions that cannot be resolved by scientific methods, but are inherently a question of values, preferences, and policies. Box 3-1: On Measures of Human and Economic Development Writing 220 years ago in The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith noted that: "whatever the soil, climate, or extent of territory of any particular nation, the abundance or scantiness of its annual output fundamentally depends on its human resources - the skill, dexterity, and judgement of its labour" (Smith, 1970). Although economists recognized the importance of land, labor, and capital in explaining economic growth and national wealth, in the post-World War II period national well-being has usually been measured by GDP or gross national product (GNP). GDP is defined as the monetary equivalent of all products and services generated in a given economy in a given year. GNP equals GDP plus the net balance of international payments to and from that economy. Few questions were asked about the underlying resource base for GDP growth and whether or not it was sustainable. Further, since GDP does not reflect all economic transactions it does not provide a full measure of human well-being. Nevertheless, GDP is very widely used because it is universally accepted as the monetary indicator of all products and services generated in a given economy within a given year. Environmental and Social Modifications to GDP More recently, several new approaches have been developed to address the inherent shortcomings of GDP measures. These include "green" national accounts that incorporate the role of the stocks and flows of renewable and non-renewable resources, and the related concept of genuine savings (UN, 1993). "Green" GDP is the informal name given to national income measures that are adjusted for the depletion of natural resources and degradation of the environment. The types of adjustment made to standard GDP include a measure of the user costs of exploiting natural resources and a value for the social costs of pollution emissions. In terms of measuring the sustainability of development, the green accounting aggregate with the most policy relevance is "genuine saving." This represents the value of the net change in assets that are important for development - produced assets, natural resources, environmental quality, foreign assets, and human resources, which include returns to education and raw labor and the strength and scope of social institutions. Human resources turn out, not unexpectedly, to be the dominant form of wealth in the majority of countries (World Bank, 1997a). Purchasing Power Parities A further problem arises in international comparisons, in which economic indicators are converted from local currencies into a common currency, such as dollars. Traditionally, market exchange rates are used to make these conversions. In theory, exchange rates adjust so that the local currency prices of a group of identical goods and services represent equivalent value in every nation. In practice, such adjustments can lag far behind changing economic circumstances. Policies, such as currency controls, may further distort the accuracy of market-based rates. Moreover, many goods and services are not traded internationally so market-based exchange rates may not reflect the relative values of such goods and services, even in theory. An alternative approach is based on estimates of the purchasing power of different currencies. The International Comparison Project compared prices for several hundred goods and services in a large number of countries. On the basis of this comparison, the relative values of local currencies are adjusted to reflect PPP (see UNDP, 1993). In effect, the PPP currency values reflect the number of units of a country's currency required to buy the same quantity of comparable goods and services in the local market as one US dollar would buy in an "average" country. The average prices for several hundred goods and services in a large number of countries. On the basis of this comparison, the relative values of local currencies are adjusted to reflect PPP (see UNDP, 1993). In effect, the PPP currency values reflect the number of units of a country's currency required to buy the same quantity of comparable goods and services in the local market as one US dollar would buy in an "average" country. The average country is based on a composite of all participating countries. In 1996 the World Bank initiated the ranking of countries by GDP converted at PPP rates; the effect was to reduce the income spread between the poorest and richest countries (WRI, 1997a). UN Human Development Index The UN has tried to address the shortcomings of GDP by developing the Human Development Index (UNDP, 1997). This index, produced since 1990, combines three factors to measure overall development: • Income as measured by real GDP per capita at PPP to represent command over resources to enjoy a decent standard of living. • Longevity as measured by life expectancy at birth. • Educational attainment as measured by adult literacy and school enrollment. The UN has also developed other measures, such as the Gender-related Development Index (GDI) and the Gender Empowerment Measure (GEM) to assess conditions such as gender equality. The difficulty of incorporating these alternative measures into long-term scenarios is that, with the exception of life expectancy, underlying data or base projections (e.g. on future PPPs, levels of educational attainment, etc.) needed to develop these alternative indicators for future projections are not available. Therefore, this report largely focuses on traditional measures of economic development like GDP. Projections of PPPs are calculated by one of the six SRES models and are presented in Chapter 4. Given the inherent ambiguities of such a complex, multidimensional issue, it is easiest to define and develop indicators of no development. Estimates indicate, for instance, that 1.3 billion people in developing countries live on incomes of less than US$1 (PPP based) per day, a level used to define the absolute poverty cut-off in international comparisons (UNDP, 1997). An equal number of people are estimated to have no access to safe drinking water (UNDP, 1997) and 2 billion people are estimated to have no access to services provided by the use of modern energy forms (WEC, 1993). Income is not an end in itself, but a way to enable human choices, or to foreclose them in the case of poverty. Therefore, levels of per capita income (GDP or GNP) have been widely used as a measure of the degree of economic development, as in many instances such levels correlate closely (as lead or lag indicator) with other indicators and dimensions of social development, such as mortality, nutrition, and access to basic services, etc. Average income values also do not indicate the distribution of income, which is an important quantity. Composite measures, such as the UN Human Development Index, are also used in historical analyses (see Box 3-1). Note, however, that the overall nature of scenario results may not vary much even if some other measure could be used, because often-used components, such as literacy rates, are generally correlated with income levels. In fact, per capita income is the (and often only) development indicator used in the literature for long-term energy and GHG emissions scenarios. This explains why this review chapter, while recognizing the importance of alternative dimensions and indicators to describe long-term human development, almost exclusively embraces an economic perspective. The widespread use of GDP or GNP per capita (however measured) should not distract from the fact that, while a powerful indicator, it does not describe all aspects of economic development (see Box 3-1). GDP and GNP are indicators of financial flows (see Box 3-1), and are not designed to measure stock variables such as the size of the capital stock in an economy. GDP and GNP relate only to goods and services that are subject to market transactions, that is only those activities that are part of the formal economy. Subsistence and other "gray" economic activities and socially important obligatory activities, such as childcare or household work, are not included; also, depletion allowances for natural capital and resources are not considered. Although PPP comparison (see Box 3-1) is considered a valid indicator of relative wealth, it is sometimes quite uncertain and dependent on detailed comparison exercises. As a result, even if studies and scenarios consistently use the same indicator of economic development, numeric values are often not directly comparable because of large differences in base-year values. Comparison of growth rates are more robust, but even here many difficulties exist (see, e.g., Alcamo et al., 1995, and Chapter 2). 3.3.2. Historical Trends Rostow (1990) described several stages in the economic development process: • First, the pre-industrial economy, in which most resources must be devoted to agriculture because of the low level of productivity. • Second, the phase of capacity-building that leads to an economic acceleration. • Third, the acceleration itself, which requires about two decades. • Fourth, about six decades of industrialization and catch-up to the "productivity frontiers" prevailing in the industrialized countries. • Fifth, the period of mass-consumerism and the welfare state. It is important not to conceptualize economic development as a quasi-autonomous, linear development path. Numerous socio-institutional preconditions have to be met before any "take off" into accelerated rates of productivity and economic growth can materialize (see Section 3.3.4). "Leading sectors" (Fogel, 1970) that drive productivity and output growth change over time (Freeman and Perez, 1988; Freeman, 1990), and different "industrialization paths" (Chenery et al., 1986) have been identified in historical analyses. Still, historical evidence, consistent with neoclassic growth theory, allows a number of generalizations as to the patterns of advances in productivity and economic growth. By and large, growth rates are lower for economies at the technology and productivity frontier, compared to those approaching it. For instance, in the 19th century productivity and per capita GDP growth in the rapidly industrializing US far exceeded those of England, then at the technology and productivity frontier. Likewise, in the post-World War II period growth rates in Japan and most of Western Europe exceeded those of the US (by then at the technology and productivity frontier) (Maddison, 1991, 1995). High human capital (education), a favorable institutional environment, free trade, and access to technology are acknowledged as key factors for rapid economic catch-up (see Section 3.3.4). Likewise, entrenchment in progressively outdated capital and technology vintages acts as a retarding force against growth (Frankel, 1955), and rapid capital turnover and possibilities to "leapfrog" (Goldemberg, 1991) outdated technologies and infrastructures provide the potential for faster economic catch-up. Perhaps the most comprehensive compilation of data on historical economic development is that of Maddison (1995). Table 3-2 shows Maddison's per capita GDP growth rate estimates for selected regions and time periods. Since 1820 global GDP has increased by a factor of 40, or at a rate of about 2.2% per year. Per capita GDP growth was 1.2% per year faster than population growth. In the past 110 years (a time frame comparable to that addressed in this report) global GDP increased by a factor of 20, or at a rate of 2.7% per year, and global per capita GDP grew by a factor of more than five, or at a rate of 1.5% per year. There is substantial variation in the rates of economic growth over time and across countries. Even for the present OECD countries modern economic growth dates only from approximately 1870 onward, and for developing economies comparable conditions for economic growth and catch-up in productivity levels existed only in the second half of the 20th century. These approximate dates also set the time frame for drawing useful comparisons between historical experiences and future projections (see Section 3.3.3). Historically, economic growth has been concentrated in Europe, the Americas, and Australasia. Sustained high-productivity growth (per capita GDP growth) resulted in the current high levels of per capita income in the OECD countries. Latecomers (such as Austria, Japan, Scandinavia) rapidly caught up to the productivity frontier of the other OECD economies (most notably that of the US) in the post-World War II period. Per capita GDP growth rates of 3.5% per annum were, for instance, achieved in Western Europe between 1950 and 1980. Similarly, high per capita GDP growth rates were achieved in the developing economies of Asia. Per capita GDP growth rates of individual countries have even been higher – 8% per annum in Japan over the period 1950-1973, 7% in Korea between 1965 and 1992, and 6.5% per year in China since 1980 (Maddison, 1995). Progress in increasing per capita income levels has been significant in many regions and countries over the long term, although income gaps in both absolute and relative terms have not been reduced in the aggregate. For instance, per capita GDP in Africa is estimated to have been about 20% of the level of the most affluent 1950-1973, 7% in Korea between 1965 and 1992, and 6.5% per year in China since 1980 (Maddison, 1995). Progress in increasing per capita income levels has been significant in many regions and countries over the long term, although income gaps in both absolute and relative terms have not been reduced in the aggregate. For instance, per capita GDP in Africa is estimated to have been about 20% of the level of the most affluent OECD region in 1870; by 1990 this ratio had decreased to 6% (Maddison, 1995). Other key indicators of human development have also improved strongly in recent decades. For instance, since 1960 (in little more than a generation) infant mortality rates in developing countries have more than halved, malnutrition rates have declined by one-third, primary school attendance rates have increased from about half to three-quarters, and the share of rural families with access to safe drinking water has increased from 25% to 65% for low-income families and to more than 95% for high-income families (UNDP, 1997; World Bank, 1999). Equally noticeable in Table 3-2 is the slowdown of per capita GDP growth in the OECD countries since the end of the 1970s and the serious setbacks in Eastern Europe and developing countries outside Asia over the same time period. After a decade of decline in economic output, a trend reversal to positive growth rates is expected to occur only after the year 2000 (World Bank, 1998b). Even optimistic scenarios indicate that the pre-crises (1989) levels of per capita income cannot be achieved again until 2010 (Nakicenovic et al., 1998a). The effects of the recent Asian financial crises are estimated to reduce significantly short-term economic growth in the region, but longer-term growth prospects remain solid. After a sluggish growth to the year 2000, economic growth in the developing countries of Asia is anticipated to resume at 6.6% per year for the period 2001-2007 (World Bank, 1998b). The past two centuries have seen major structural shifts, with inter-related changes in demography, economic structure, and technology. The world's largest economies have seen a continuous shift in economic structure, from agricultural production to industry and, to a greater extent, services (see Figure 3-9). During the past half-century, the industry share declined to leave these economies dominated by service sectors. A similar pattern has occurred in most other economies in Europe, North America, and Australasia. Another major feature of the past two centuries, not shown in Figure 3-9, is the growing role of government in the economy. The literature on structural change is reviewed in more detail in Jung et al. (2000). Differences in statistical definitions make it difficult to compare structural change in the former centrally planned economies with that in mature market economies. Also, in the less-developed regions a marked decline in the contribution of agriculture to GDP has occurred in recent years, but the contribution of services is larger than it was historically in industrial countries at the same level of income. This indicates the dangers of using past history too literally as a guide to future behavior. Russia Germany China USA Germany China 1820 1870 1913 1950 1992 Agriculture, forestry and fisheries 1820 1870 1913 1950 1992 Mining, manufacturing, construction and utilities 1820 1870 1913 1950 1992 Services Figure 3-9: Changes in economic structure for selected countries. Data source: Maddison, 1995. These economic developments have accompanied the processes of urbanization, increased access to education, improved health care, and longer life expectancies. They have been linked to increasing complexity in economic, legal, and social institutions (Tainter, 1996). The pattern seen in the six countries shown in Figure 3-9 is reproduced in most parts of the world. In general, increasing income per capita is associated with a shift in production patterns, first from agriculture to industry, and then more gradually away from industry into services. Succession processes beneath these macro-level changes are important. Industrial sectors and technologies have risen and fallen in importance over the past few centuries. These processes and analysts' various attempts to find patterns to describe them are further discussed in Section 3.3.4. 3.3.3. Scenarios of Economic Development Unlike population projections, no long-term economic-development scenarios are available in the literature (for an earlier review, see Jefferson, 1983). In fact, for economic projections "long term" means time horizons of up to a decade (e.g., World Bank, 1997b, 1998b), far too short for the time frame addressed in this report. The longest time frames for economic growth projections available in the literature extend to 2015 (e.g., Maddison, 1998) and 2020 (World Bank, 1997b). The need for long-term economic growth scenarios has arisen primarily in connection with long-term energy and environmental impact analyses. Earlier reviews on the related economic growth assumptions are contained in Nordhaus and Yohe (1983), Keepin (1986), Grübler (1994), and Alcamo et al. (1995). An expert poll on uncertainty in future GDP growth projections is reported in Manne and Richels (1994). Recent scenario assumptions are reviewed in Chapter 2 above. The current state of modeling long-term economic growth is not well developed, not least because the dominant forces of long-run productivity growth, such as the role of institutions and technological change (see Section 3.3.4), remain exogenous to models. As a result, productivity growth assumptions enter scenario calculations as exogenous input assumptions. The structural changes in the economy discussed in the previous paragraph result in additional difficulties; notably that service sector productivity growth is difficult to evaluate and project. Figure 3-10 summarizes the results of the analysis of available literature data on per capita economic growth, disaggregated into global as well as industrial and developing countries. Overall, uncertainty concerning productivity and hence per capita GDP growth is considerable. Uncertainties in productivity growth rates become amplified because even small differences in productivity growth rates in all scenarios, when compounded over a time frame of a century or more into the future, translate into enormous differences in absolute levels of per capita GDP. For instance, in the scenarios reviewed in Alcamo et al. (1995) and Grübler (1994) per capita GDP growth rates range typically between 0.8 and 2.8% per year over the period 1990-2100. On the basis of an average global per capita income of US$4000 in 1990, global per capita GDP could range anywhere between about US$10,000 to about US$83,000 by 2100. Such uncertainties are amplified even more when regional disaggregations are considered, in particular future productivity growth in developing countries. The range of views spans all the extremes between developing countries that lag perennially behind current income levels in the OECD, to scenarios in which they catch up. These ranges are reflected in the SRES scenarios shown in Figure 3-10. Exogenously assumed productivity growth rates correspond to alternative qualitative interpretations as to how the future could unfold, ranging from SRES low (all-min) to SRES high (all-max) rates. Extreme scenarios of productivity growth or lack of growth have not been explored because the SRES terms of reference cover a qualified range from the literature; methodological (and model) pluralism is mandatory (extreme scenarios can be reflected across a wide range of modeling approaches only to a limited degree). Furthermore, it is not possible to treat uncertainties of future demographic, economic, and technological developments as independent. This is shown by the conclusions of recent scenario evaluation exercises (Alcamo et al., 1995) as well as by theoretical and empirical evidence (e.g. Abramovitz, 1993; Barro, 1997). Thus, contrary to the previous IPCC IS92 scenario series (that varied salient scenario driving forces independently of each other), the SRES scenarios attempt to incorporate advances in the understanding of the relationships between important scenario drivers. From this perspective, uncertainties about future productivity and hence economic growth are not parametric, but rather are related to the uncertainties in current understanding and modeling of the interactions between demographics, productivity growth, and socio-institutional and technological change. These are addressed in Section 3.3.4. 3.3.4. Relationships 3.3.4.1. Introduction Economic growth can either be achieved by increasing the factor inputs to production, such as capital and labor, or by increasing productivity (i.e., the efficiency by which factors of production are used to generate economic output). Without productivity growth, long-run output growth cannot be maintained with limited or depletable resource inputs; as a result, complex societies become increasingly vulnerable (Tainter, 1988). Changes between inputs and outputs are usually analyzed by drawing upon the production function approach pioneered by Tinbergen (1942) and Solow (1957). Yet, empirical analyses (e.g., Denison, 1962, 1985) quickly identified that quality and composition of factor inputs are more important in explaining long-run output growth than merely the quantitative growth in available factor inputs. For instance, at first sight population growth might be considered as central for economic growth, because it increases the labor force. Upon closer examination, however, institutional and social factors that govern working-time regulation, female workforce participation, and above all the qualification of the workforce (education) have been more important determinants of long-run economic growth (Denison, 1962, 1985) than simple growth in the numbers of the potential workforce (usually calculated as the population in the age bracket 15 to 65 years). Another puzzling finding of Solow (1957) is that, even when changes in quality the workforce (education) have been more important determinants of long-run economic growth (Denison, 1962, 1985) than simple growth in the numbers of the potential workforce (usually calculated as the population in the age bracket 15 to 65 years). Another puzzling finding of Solow (1957) is that, even when changes in quality and composition of factors of production are accounted for, increases in per capita economic output (productivity) remain largely unexplained, a "residual" in the analysis remains unclear (for a review, see Griliches, 1996). The "residual," is usually ascribed to "advances in knowledge and technology" which, unlike capital and labor, cannot be measured directly. However, it might also be the result of other influences, which potentially include growing contributions to the economy by non-market or under-priced natural resources. Thus, considerable measurement and interpretative uncertainties remain in the explanation of productivity growth. New approaches and models extended the neoclassic growth model (e.g., Romer, 1986; Lucas, 1988; Grossmann and Helpman, 1991, 1993). In these, increases in human capital through education and the importance of technological innovation via directed activity (research and development (R&D)) complement more traditional approaches, which represents a return to the earlier work of Schumpeter (1943), Kuznets (1958), Nelson et al. (1967), and Landes (1969). 3.3.4.2. Influence of Demographics Neoclassic economic growth theory embraces as a general principle the notion that long-term per capita income growth rate is independent of population growth rate. Thus, a rapidly growing population should not necessarily slow down a countries' economic development. Blanchet (1991) summarizes the country-level data. Prior to 1980, the overwhelming majority of studies showed no significant correlation between population growth and economic growth (National Research Council, 1986). Recent correlation studies, however, suggest a statistically significant, but weak, inverse relationship for the 1970s and 1980s, despite no correlation being established previously (Blanchet, 1991). As noted in Section 3.2, the reverse effect of income growth on demographics is much clearer. Population aging is another consideration advanced as having significant influence on economic growth rates. Reductions in workforce availability and excessive social security and pension expenditures are cited as possible drivers. Section 3.2 above concluded that evidence for a strong negative impact is rather elusive. Two additional points deserve consideration. First, population aging is not necessarily the best indicator for workforce availability, because while the percentage of the elderly, in particular those of retirement age, increases, the proportion of younger people (of pre-work or -career age) decreases. As a result, the percentage of the working age population (age 15 to 65 years) in the total population changes less dramatically, even in scenarios of pronounced aging. For instance, in the IIASA low population scenario (7 billion world population by 2100) discussed in Section 3.2, the percentage of age categories 15 to 65 years changes from 62% in 1995 to 54% by 2100. This percentage falls to 48% in the regions with the highest population aging (Lutz et al., 1996). A second point is that these demographic variables only indicate potential workforce numbers. Actual gainfully employed workforce numbers are influenced by additional important variables - unemployment levels, female workforce participation rates, and finally working time. The importance of these variables can be illustrated by a few statistics. Currently, about 40 million people are unemployed in the OECD countries (UNDP, 1997). The female workforce participation ratios vary enormously, from about 10% to 48% of the workforce (as in Saudi Arabia and Sweden, respectively; UNDP, 1997), and have been changing dramatically over time. For the US, for instance, female workforce participation rates increased from 17% in 1890 (US DOC, 1975) to 45% in 1990 (UNDP, 1997). Similar dramatic long-term changes have occurred in the number of working hours in all industrial countries. Compared to the mid-19th century, the number of average working hours has declined from about 3000 to about 1500 (Maddison, 1995; Ausubel and Grübler, 1995). However, in most OECD countries the trend in working time reductions has slowed to a halt since the early 1980s (Marchand, 1992). Thus, unless the rather implausible assumption is made that with population aging all these other important determinants of labor input remain unchanged, the impacts of aging are likely to be compensated by corresponding changes in these variables (e.g. greater female workforce participation, earlier retirement, etc.). Finally, it must be reiterated that qualitative labor force characteristics, most notably education, are a more important determinant for long-run productivity and hence economic growth than mere workforce numbers. 3.3.4.3. Influence of Social and Institutional Changes The importance of social and institutional changes to provide conditions that enabled the acceleration of the Industrial Revolution is widely acknowledged (Rosenberg and Birdzell, 1986, 1990). Rostow (1990) and Landes (1969) identify many social and cultural factors in the "preconditions for economic acceleration" and in the process of economic development. The importance of institutions and stable social environments is also increasingly discussed in the literature concerned with current economic growth (World Bank, 1991, 1998a). Barro (1997), and Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995) report a statistically significant relationship between rule-of-law and democracy indices with per capita GDP growth. Law enforcement and legal rights are important indicators for human development in their own right, but enforceable legal contracts are equally important for markets to function. Other socio-institutional factors have been identified that are important to productivity and economic growth: education is mentioned above. Income inequality (and resultant social tensions) also appears to correlate negatively with economic development (World Bank, 1998a; Maddison, 1995). Strong parallels run between social, institutional, and technological changes (Grübler, 1998a; OECD, 1998a). In particular, many features common to the processes of evolution in biologic organisms have been found (e.g., Teilhard de Chardin, 1959; Hayek, 1967; Matthews, 1984; Dawkins, 1986; Michaelis, 1997c). Thus, to understand these processes would involve: • A search for new behaviors, institutions, and social or cultural patterns. • Experimentation with those that are found. • Various methods of selecting the "fit" or "desirable" changes. • Various methods of perpetuating and diffusing those changes that are selected. Many aspects of the processes of technical change (e.g., its unpredictability and the importance of mechanisms such as path-dependence and "lock-in") also apply to social change. It is obviously difficult to evaluate the role of social, cultural, and institutional changes in economic and technical development. Whereas the monetary and technological aspects of change are often measurable and can be observed on a relatively "objective" basis, social, cultural, and institutional processes are hard to measure and often subjective. They tend to involve personal interactions among people, sometimes large numbers of people, over long periods. Nonetheless, these factors must be taken into account in the scenarios. The SRES approach to develop qualitative scenario "storylines" that provide an overall framework and background for quantitative scenario assumptions and model runs can be considered a particularly valuable strength. Storylines allow these issues to be addressed explicitly, even if current knowledge does not allow social, cultural, and institutional factors to be treated in a rigid, quantitative (not to mention deterministic) way. 3.3.4.4. Influence of International Trade and Investment International trade is recognized as an important source of economic gains, as it enables comparative advantages to be exploited and the diffusion of new technologies and practices. Equally important are domestic and international investments. From an economic perspective, trade reflects gains from increasing division of labor, and the historical evidence indicates an associated phenomenal growth. Updated (Grübler, 1998a) estimates from Rostow (1978) indicate an increase of more than a thousand-fold in international trade since the beginning of the 19th century. In 1990, world trade accounted for close to US$3.4 trillion (10^12), or 13% of world GDP. Chenery et al. (1986) and Barro (1997) indicate strong empirical evidence of a positive relationship between trade ("openness" of economies) and terms of trade (of the economies) on productivity, industrialization, and economic growth. Dosi et al. (1990) highlight also the critical roles of policies and institutions in the relative success or failure of realizing economic gains from the international division of labor. Finally, openness to trade could have negative economic impacts on countries that experience a deterioration of terms of trade. Globalization is an increasingly popular term for an ill-defined collection of processes. The most important of these processes appear to be the liberalization of markets for goods, services, and capital, and the increasing flow of information and capital around the world. According to the neoclassic model, globalization should benefit everyone; it helps industry in all countries to move closer to the productivity frontier and gives consumers access to a wider choice of goods and services at lower prices. In practice, of course, the world is more complicated than is assumed in the neoclassic model. Economists such as Dosi et al. (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991) have experimented with alternative models, and shown that some countries may not benefit from free trade or from freely available information. Huntington (1996) observes that by "globalization," Americans and Europeans often mean "westernization" in the sense of global adoption of western social and cultural norms. This process of cultural convergence is a source of great concern in many parts of the world. However, Huntington suggests that economic globalization may be possible without cultural globalization. 3.3.4.5. Influence of Innovation and Technologica global adoption of western social and cultural norms. This process of cultural convergence is a source of great concern in many parts of the world. However, Huntington suggests that economic globalization may be possible without cultural globalization. 3.3.4.5. Influence of Innovation and Technological Change The importance of “advances in knowledge” and technology in explaining the historical record of productivity growth is mentioned above. In the original study by Solow (1957) this was estimated to account for 87% of per capita productivity growth (the remainder was attributed to increases in capital inputs). Since then further methodological and statistical refinements have reduced the unexplained “residual” of productivity growth that is equated to advances in knowledge and technology, but it remains the largest single source of long-run productivity and economic growth. It is estimated to account for more than one-third of total GDP growth in the USA since 1929 (Denison, 1985), and for between 34% and 63% of GDP growth in the OECD countries over the period 1947 to 1973 (Barro and Sala-I-Martin, 1995). The observed slowdown in productivity growth rates since the early 1970s is generally interpreted as a weakening of the technological frontier in the OECD countries (Maddison, 1995; Barro, 1997), although quantitative statistics (and even everyday experience) do not corroborate the perception of a slowdown in technological innovation and change. An alternative interpretation of slower recent productivity growth is that the OECD countries have moved out of a long period of industrialization and into post-industrial development as service economies. In such economies, productivity is extremely hard to measure, partly because services comprise a mixture of government, non-market, and market activities, partly because economic accounts measure services primarily via inputs (e.g. cost of labor) rather than outputs, and partly because it is difficult to define service quality. Nevertheless, labor productivity in the service sector appears to grow more slowly than that in the agricultural and industrial sectors (Millward, 1990; Baumol, 1993). The traditional concept of labor productivity may need revision to be applied usefully to the service economy. Finally, another interpretation is that productivity growth lags behind technological change, because appropriate institutional and social adjustment processes take considerable time to be implemented (Freeman and Perez, 1988; David, 1990). Once an appropriate “match” (Freeman and Perez, 1988) between institutional and technological change is achieved, productivity growth could accelerate. Maddison (1995) observes that the 19th century productivity surge in the USA was preceded by a long period of investment in infrastructure. Landes (1969) notes that both the German and Japanese economic acceleration was preceded by a long period of investment in education. Maddison (1995) further suggests that recent developments in information technology involve considerable investment, both in hardware and in human learning, which may result in higher efficiency improvements and productivity gains in the future only. This perspective is consistent with the possible emergence of a new “techno-economic paradigm” or “Kondratiev wave.” This complementary theory of long-term economic development focuses on the interplay and interrelationships between institutional and technological change. Following Kondratiev’s (1926) observation of “long waves” in the American economy, Schumpeter (1935) developed a theory to explain these waves on the basis of discontinuities in entrepreneurial innovations. Freeman (1990) emphasizes Schumpeter’s view that long waves are not so much evident in economic statistics as in qualitative features of the economy. Freeman and Perez (1988) describe five historical waves of technical and economic change and identify associated economic booms and recessions (successive “techno-economic paradigms”). Work at IIASA (e.g., Hafele et al., 1982; Grübler and Nakicenovic, 1991; Nakicenovic, 1996; Grübler et al., 1993b; Grübler, 1998a) sought to identify regularities in the market succession of technology in energy supply, transport, and the iron and steel industry. In fact, there may be a close parallel between the waves of technology they observe and Kondratiev’s economic long waves. However, both empirical and theoretical implications of “long waves” remain unclear (see the review in Freeman, 1996; and especially Rosenberg and Frischtak, 1984). Equally, no approach can hope to foresee reliably the form of the next “wave.” It is possible that solar energy and nuclear power might play a strong role, perhaps combined with hydrogen as an energy carrier, as suggested by Hafele et al. (1982) and others. The next wave in transport technology might well be an increasing share for aviation and high speed rail (Grübler and Nakicenovic, 1991), a transition to 0.5 litre/100 km “hypercars” (Lovins et al., 1993), or a radical change in urban planning to minimize transport needs (Newman and Kenworthy, 1990). These possibilities highlight in particular the need for technology diffusion to avoid technological “lock-in” to older technological vintages (Parikh et al., 1997). 3.3.4.6. Do the Poor Get Richer and the Rich Slow Down? Neoclassic growth theory suggests that different capital and labor productivities across countries lead to differential productivity growth rates and hence to conditional convergence across different economies. Rostow (1990) coined the term that the “poor get richer and the rich slow down.” The convergence theorem of neoclassic theory arises from diminishing returns on capital. Economies that tend to have less capital per worker tend to have higher rates of return and hence higher growth rates (see Abramovitz, 1986). Conversely, economies with high capital intensity (which, because of the relationship between capital intensity and productivity, are closer to or at the productivity frontier) tend to have lower growth rates. Evidently, economies differ in more respects than their capital intensities, and hence even neoclassic theory only postulates conditional convergence (after accounting for all other factors). The neoclassic concept of capital is usefully extended to include also human capital in the form of education, experience, and health (see, e.g., Lucas, 1988; Barro and Sala-I-Martin, 1995). Thus, additional convergence potentials accrue for economies with a proportionally higher ratio of human-to-physical capital. Equally, the generation and adoption of new technologies is facilitated by high human capital. Yet, even with the inclusion of human capital, long-term per capita growth must eventually cease in the absence of continuous improvements in technology. This cessation, however, mostly affects economies at the productivity frontier and not those that lag behind. For the latter, both theory and empirical evidence seem, all else being equal, to indicate conditional convergence (i.e., “the poor can get richer.”). The ceteris paribus condition is an important qualifier for the convergence theorem. Evidently, the potential for conditional convergence and economic catch-up cannot be realized in an economy struck by civil war, poor institutions, or even low savings rates (related to the demographic transition discussed in Section 3.2). The recent Asian financial crisis also demonstrated that differential capital productivity indeed can lead to vast influxes of capital into developing economies, and appropriate assimilative capacities (banking systems, functioning legal system, institutions, etc.) need to be in place to use such capital flows productively (World Bank, 1998b). In terms of a functional relationship, therefore, per capita GDP growth rates are expected to be higher for economies with low per capita GDP levels. Notwithstanding many frustrating setbacks, such as the recent “lost decade” for economic catch-up in Africa and Latin America, empirical data indicate that the convergence theorem holds. Figure 3-11 illustrates some empirical evidence put forward by Barro (1997) based on the experiences of some 100 countries in the period 1960 to 1985. Similar convergence trends have also been identified within economies. For instance, Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995) find significant convergence trends across individual states in the USA, between prefectures in Japan, and between different regions in Europe. Barro (1997) concludes in his analysis that the conditional convergence rates across these countries is statistically highly significant, and proceeds rather slowly at 2-3% per year. It may take an economy 27 years to reach 50% of steady-state levels (the productivity frontier) and some 90 years to achieve 90% of that level. Based on this convergence criterion alone, it may well take a century (given all other factors set favorably) for a poor economy to catch-up to levels that prevail in the industrial countries today, never mind the levels that might prevail in affluent countries 100 years in the future. Barro’s analysis indicates a threshold GDP per capita level at approximately US$3000 per year. Below that level, additional productivity growth potentials result from catch-up; beyond that level, higher per capita GDP levels make further productivity growth ever more difficult to achieve (as indicated by the negative values of the residual GDP per capita growth rates in Figure 3-11). Given the wide range in historical experiences and the slow rates of convergence suggested by neoclassic growth theory, it is not surprising that the available scenario literature takes a cautious view on economic catch-up. Whereas convergence tendencies are generally evident in scenario assumptions (see the significantly higher GDP per capita growth rates for currently developing countries compared to industrial countries in Figure 3-10), long-term convergence rates are low. For instance, from all six IS92 scenarios only one (IS92e) assumes that developing countries outside China may eventually reach present OECD income levels, and even in this most optimistic scenario it is assumed to occur only after 2080 (Pepper et al., 1992). Even in this convergence scenario per capita income differences remain large - growth rates for currently developing countries compared to industrial countries in Figure 3-10), long-term convergence rates are low. For instance, from all six IS92 scenarios only one (IS92e) assumes that developing countries outside China may eventually reach present OECD income levels, and even in this most optimistic scenario it is assumed to occur only after 2080 (Pepper et al., 1992). Even in this convergence scenario per capita income differences remain large - a factor of five by the end of the simulation horizon (US$31,000 per capita GDP per year in developing countries outside China versus US$150,000 OECD average). In an influential critique Parikh (1992) referred to the IS92 scenario series as being "unfair to the South," a point also taken up in the evaluation of the IS92 scenarios. Alcamo et al. (1995) concluded that new IPCC scenarios "will be needed for exploring a wide variety of economic development pathways, for example, a closing of the income gap between industrial and developing countries." With a few notable exceptions (e.g., the scenario developed by Lazarus et al. (1993) and the Case C scenarios presented in IIASA-World Energy Conference (WEC) (IIASA-WEC, 1995) and Nakicenovic et al. (1998a)), the challenge to explore conditions and pathways that close the income gap between developing and industrial regions appears to have been insufficiently taken up in the scenario literature, a gap this report aims to begin to fill. Chapter 4 describes two scenarios in which the ratios between regions of GDP/capita decline and the absolute differences increase. 3.3.4.7. Economic Productivity and Energy and Materials Intensity Evidence suggests that the physical input of energy or materials per unit of monetary output (materials or energy intensity) follows an inverted U-curve (IU hypothesis) as a function of income. For some materials the IU-hypothesis (Moll, 1989; Tilton, 1990) holds quite well. The underlying explanatory factors are a mixture of structural change in the economy along with technology and resource substitution and innovation processes. Recent literature illustrates material consumption that rises faster than GDP in well-developed countries in a relationship better described as N-shaped (de Bruyn and Opschoor, 1994; de Bruyn et al., 1995; Suri and Chapman, 1996; Ansuategi et al., 1997). A similar IU curve is observed for modern, commercial energy forms (Darmstadter et al., 1977; Goldemberg et al., 1988; Martin, 1988; IIASA-WEC, 1995; Watson et al., 1996; Judson et al., 1999), although the initially rising part of commercial energy intensity stems from the substitution of traditional (inefficient) energy forms and technologies by modern commercial energy forms (see also the discussion of the "environmental Kuznets curve" for traditional air pollutants in Section 3.1, also an inverted U-shaped curve). The resultant aggregate total (commercial plus non-commercial) energy intensity shows a persistent declining trend over time, especially with rising incomes (Watson et al., 1996; Nakicenovic et al., 1998a). Empirical evidence thus suggests that, all else being equal, energy and materials intensities are closely related to overall macroeconomic productivity. In other words, higher productivity (GDP per capita) is associated with lower energy and materials intensity (lower use of energy and materials per unit of GDP). Figure 3-12 shows material intensity versus per capita income data for 13 world regions for some metals (Van Vuuren et al., 2000; see also the discussion in de Vries et al., 1994). Figure 3-13 shows a similar curve for total energy intensity (including traditional non-commercial energy forms) for 11 world regions, again as a function of per capita income (Nakicenovic et al., 1998a). The most important conclusion to retain from Figures 3-12 and 3-13 is that energy and materials intensity (i.e. energy use per unit of economic output) tend to decline with rising levels of GDP per capita. Thus, energy and material productivity - the inverse of energy intensity - improve in line with overall macroeconomic productivity (as represented, e.g., by GDP per capita levels). Also, they tend to deteriorate when productivity levels fall, as happened during the start of the deep economic recession in Central and Eastern Europe (Government of Russian Federation, 1995). A corollary of this relationship is that material and energy intensities decline the faster per capita income grows. Thus, overall economic productivity growth (GDP per capita growth) and reductions in materials and energy use per unit GDP (materials and energy productivity growth) are closely related. The fundamental reason is that high macroeconomic growth presupposes accelerated rates of technical change and corresponds with a fast turnover of capital stock and, hence, a faster incorporation in the economy. This represents an important new finding for long-term energy and emissions scenarios that have, to date, largely treated economic and resource productivity growth as independent of each other. According to recent empirical and theoretical findings, they no longer can. Two final caveats are important. First, growth in productivity and intensity improvement growth have historically been outpaced by economic output growth. Hence, materials and energy use has risen in absolute terms (see Nriagu, 1996; Watson et al., 1996; Grübler, 1998a). The second caveat is that energy and material intensity are affected by many factors other than macroeconomic productivity growth and resultant income. OECD (1998b) notes that high rates of productivity increase have been associated in the past with new competitive pressures, strong price or regulatory incentives, catching up or recovery, and a good "climate for innovation." Also, the emergence of new technologies and resource-strategic considerations has led to rapid productivity growth. Table 3-3 summarizes selected macroeconomic, labor, energy, and material productivity increases that have been achieved in a range of economies and sectors at different times. Principally, it demonstrates that the least likely assumption for future scenarios from historical evidence is absence of productivity growth. Human ingenuity (as reflected in new technologies and new practices) historically has responded to purposeful action (R&D and inventive activities) and to a wide range of policies to improve vastly productivity in the use of all factors of production. Of course, it remains uncertain how future productivity growth rates will diffuse nationally, regionally, and internationally. The essential lesson provided by history is that change is continuous and pervasive. From that perspective, static or "business-as-usual" scenarios need to be replaced by "dynamics-as-usual" scenarios, which divide into "fast" and "slow" alternatives as a function of perceived opportunities, new institutional configurations, policies, and environmental constraints, even if these do not include climate policies (as mandated by the SRES Terms of Reference, see Appendix I). For instance, low historical rates of energy intensity improvement reflect the low priority placed on energy efficiency by most producers and users of technology. On average energy costs account for only about 5% of GDP. Energy intensity reductions average about 1% per year, in contrast to improvements in labor productivity above 2% per year over the period 1870 to 1992. Over shorter time periods, and given appropriate incentives, energy intensity improvement rates can be substantially higher, as in the OECD countries after 1973 or in China since 1977, where energy intensity improvement rates of 5% have been observed. Rapid productivity growth can also occur during periods of successful economic catch-up; for instance, Japanese labor productivity grew at 7.7% annually during 1950-1973 (Maddison, 1995). Similar high-productivity growths were also achieved in industrial oil usage in the OECD or US car fuel economies after 1973. Of the examples given in Table 3-3, productivity increases are the highest for communication. Not surprisingly, many observers consider that given a continuation of historical trends communication may become a similarly important driver of economic growth in the future as traditional, resource- and energy-intensive industries have been in the past. 3.3.4.8. Development Patterns The key questions about how future development patterns determine GHG emissions thus include the following. Material and energy content of development in industrial countries: • Will structural change toward services and increasing importance of information as a "raw material" reduce the energy and matter content of economic activity? • Will telecommunications substitute significantly for travel or encourage more of it? • Will growth in transportation change toward services and increasing importance of information as a "raw material" reduce the energy and matter content of economic activity? • Will telecommunications substitute significantly for travel or encourage more of it? • Will growth in transportation and other energy-using activities, stimulated by trade liberalization, be offset by less material intensive development patterns? • Will the tendency to saturation in some energy end-use requirements be offset by new energy or GHG intensive goods and services (e.g., in leisure activities)? Development patterns in the developing countries: • Will developing countries reproduce the development paths of industrial countries with respect to energy use and GHG emissions? • Is there a potential for technological "leapfrogging" whereby developing countries bypass dirty intermediate technologies and jump straight to cleaner technologies? Links among energy, transport and urban planning: • Will modal choices and urban-form decisions tend toward less or greater energy intensity? • How are significant differences within and between industrial and developing countries going to evolve in the future? Land use and human settlements: • What are the links between agriculture, forestry, rural-to-urban migration, energy use, GHG, and sulfur emissions, particularly in developing countries? Table 3-3: Examples of productivity growth for the entire economy and for selected sectors and countries. Data sources: see table footnote. Sector/Technology Region Productivity Indicator Period Annual Productivity Change (%) Whole economy^ 12 countries Europe GDP/capita 1870-1992 1.7 Whole economy^ 12 countries Europe GDP/hour worked 1870-1992 2.2 Whole economy^ USA GDP/hour worked 1870-1973 2.3 Whole economy^ USA GDP/hour worked 1973-1992 1.1 Whole economy^ Japan GDP/hour worked 1950-1973 7.7 Whole economy^ South Korea GDP/hour worked 1950-1992 4.6 Whole economy'' World GDP/primary energy 1971-1995 1.0 Whole economy'' OECD GDP/primary energy 1971-1995 1.3 Whole economy'' USA GDP/primary energy 1800-1995 0.9 Whole economy'' United Kingdom GDP/primary energy 1890-1995 0.9 Whole economy'' China GDP/primary energy 1977-1995 4.9 Whole economy'^ Japan GDP/material use 1975-1994 2.0 Whole economy*^ USA GDP/material use 1975-1994 2.5 Agriculture*^ Ireland Tons wheat/hectare 1950-1990 5.3 Agriculture*^ Japan Tons rice/hectare 1950-1996 2.2 Agriculture*^ India Tons rice/hectare 1950-1996 2.0 Industry" OECD (6 countries) Value added/hour worked 1950-1984 5.3 Industry" Japan Value added/hour worked 1950-1973 7.3 Industry'' OECD Industrial production/energy 1971-1995 2.5 Industry'' OECD Industrial production/oil use 1974-1986 8.0 New cars'* USA Vehicle fuel economy 1972-1982 7.0 New cars'* USA Vehicle fuel economy 1982-1992 0.0 Commercial aviation'' World Ton-km/energy 1974-1988 3.8 Commercial aviation'' World Ton-km/energy 1988-1995 0.3 Commercial aviation'' World Ton-km/labor 1974-1995 5.6 Telephone call costs*^ Transatlantic London-NY, costs for 3 min 1925-1995 8.5 Telephone cables^ Transatlantic Telephone calls/unit cable mass 1914-1994 25.0 Data sources: a: Maddison, 1995. b: OECD and IEA statistics. c: WRI, 1997a. d: Including light trucks, Schipper, 1996. e: International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) statistics. f: OECD, 1998b; Waggoner, 1996; Hayami and Ruttan, 1985. g: FAO (various years 1963-1996) Production Statistics. Distribution issues: • What are the links between development patterns, distribution of income, energy use and GHG emissions? The informal economy: • What is the link between informal economic activities and GHG emissions? The effect of development pattern assumptions in the assessment of future GHG emissions is greater for developing countries. As a major part of the needed infrastructure to meet development needs is still to be built in the developing countries, the spectrum of future options is considerably wider than that in industrial countries. The traditional approach to assume "business-as-usual" as the baseline is particularly meaningless in such cases; instead there is a need for multiple baselines for different scenarios built to cover the range of possible futures. It cannot be assumed that developing countries will automatically follow the past development paths of industrial countries. The significant transformations that recently intervened in the international economy and energy markets highlight the important dangers of such a double analogy, both in space and time. It can also be argued that many developing countries may have passed already any developmental bifurcation point, in which case developments could follow the patterns of industrialized countries. Both the GDP structure and the physical basis on which it is to be achieved in developing countries have to be considered. A crucial question regards their share in the world production of highly energy- and pollution-intensive goods, such as steel and aluminum. As the recent shift of heavy industries from the industrial toward the developing countries ends, long-term economic output could come from services and other less energy-intensive activities. Moreover, technological choices, both in production and consumption apparatus, can substantially decrease the energy demand per GDP. For instance, Chinese households are not bound to adopt the same model of energy-intensive refrigerators that have equipped American families. Similarly, future cement factories in developing countries should not fail to include up-to-date technological improvements, such as the dry process. The spatial distribution of the population and its economic activities is still unclear, which raises the possibility of adopting urban and/or regional planning. Industrial policies directed at rural development and strengthening the role of small and medium cities would reduce the extent of rural exodus and the degree of demographic concentration in large cities. These examples show that developing countries could adopt anticipative strategies to avoid, in the long-term, the problems faced today by industrial societies ("leapfrogging"). Such alternative development patterns highlight the technical feasibility of emission futures in the developing regions that can be compatible with national objectives. However, the barriers to a more sustainable development in the developing regions can hardly be underestimated, and range from financial constraints to cultural behaviors (in both industrial and developing countries), which include the lack of appropriate institutional structures. 3.3.5. Conclusion The process of economic and social development depends both on the ability of the current lead countries in productivity to maintain their technological and institutional creativity, and on the ability of other countries to adopt leading-edge technologies and institutions or to develop their own. The crucial issues of "how much" and "what kind" of productivity growth can be addressed only by describing alternative scenarios of future development. To develop alternative scenarios it is necessary to recall the important qualitative relationship between demographic transition and social and economic development. Causality links could be in either direction, but the importance of the relationship is recognized in both theoretical and empirical studies. Hence, as summarized in Section 3.2, this relationship should be incorporated into the SRES scenarios. Scenarios of accelerated rates of economic and social development should therefore be the scenarios with an accelerated demographic transition. This corresponds to a linking of high per capita development with comparatively low population levels. There is a need to explore in particular pathways that close the development gap (see Parikh, 1992; Alcamo et al., 1995). As the likelihood of zero or even negative productivity growth in the developed countries is low, closure of the development gap requires accelerated rates of productivity growth and the need to overcome or avoid setbacks in per capita income growth in many developing countries. Scenarios that explore this possibility will necessarily extend beyond the range of futures spanned by the IS92 scenarios, as well as beyond the range of the majority of the "conventional wisdom" scenario literature on the future of developing countries. As a major part of the needed infrastructure to meet development needs still has to be built, the spectrum of future options is considerably wider in developing than in industrial countries. For instance, the technical possibilities for low emission futures in the developing countries are many. The extent of the spectrum of future options depends on the changes discussed in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, but also on the outcome of crucial issues. These include political power structure, national governance and institutional structure; income distribution; cultural attitudes and consumption patterns (diets, housing, etc.), development of and access to modern technologies (energy, production, distribution, etc.), and the geographic distribution of activities (land use, urban settlement, transportation needs, etc.). Particular sets of technological and behavioral options can be clustered into alternative, internally consistent packages to represent different choices over time and so define different development paths for any economy. Such clusters can give rise to self-reinforcing loops between technical choice, consumer demand, and geographic distribution, which create "lock-in" effects and foreclosures of options in technology and socio-institutional innovations. The time-dependent nature of these choices gives rise to bifurcations and irreversibilities in which the shift from one development path to another entails important economic and political costs. Globalization of markets, technologies, and information networks may help accelerate productivity growth in the future. However, both economic and social losers could result from the globalization process. The financial instability during 1998 has cast further doubt on the inevitability of global convergence as a standard model of political economy. Hence, a further important dimension of uncertainty to be explored in the scenarios is the degree of globalization or regionalization in economic, social, and technological development. The various perspectives on economic history discussed in Section 3.3.4 reveal several possible options for the future: • Perhaps the most extreme result from the globalization process. The financial instability during 1998 has cast further doubt on the inevitability of global convergence as a standard model of political economy. Hence, a further important dimension of uncertainty to be explored in the scenarios is the degree of globalization or regionalization in economic, social, and technological development. The various perspectives on economic history discussed in Section 3.3.4 reveal several possible options for the future: • Perhaps the most extreme view may be that the development process is nearing completion in Europe, North America, and Australasia, so that the main prospect for growth is through the diffusion of existing best-practice technologies to the rest of the world. • The nature of economic development may have changed significantly in high-income countries, with a new emphasis on services, quality, and information. Such development is hard to measure in material terms. Many writers refer to "dematerialization" and the emergence of the "knowledge-based" economy. • The start of a new "Kondratiev wave" may be underway, to be revealed in the early 21st century in a surge of economic growth, with the massive development of high-technology industries leading to new products of increasing value and renewed opportunities for fast developmental catch-up. As a result, scenarios can span from low dematerialization to high dematerialization futures associated with a wide range of income levels. In the former, the shift toward more value-added products in industry would be compensated by rising labor productivity and hence lower product costs. Economic production remains material oriented. It may be a world with huge underground cities, air-conditioned tourist resort areas with indoor beaches, a significant fraction of people in low-density regions may fly their own airplanes, and robots may do housework in most homes. In the latter, much of the money flow would be associated with exchange of information and services. Industrial value added would be, to a large extent, generated from R&D and know-how, and less from increasing productivity in traditional industries. Educational, childcare, and medical services would make up a large part of personal expenditures. Already, all kinds of artistic and handicraft work have become part of the formal monetary economy, partly because of the booming world tourist industry. Much "economic growth" may revolve around the (re)distribution of scarce, positional goods such as space and valuable artworks. Therefore, the task of future scenario development entails more than just the adoption of alternative quantitative assumptions. The overall context within which alternative assumptions on productivity growth or energy and materials intensity take place needs to be made explicit. This is simply because many key influencing factors (e.g., institutions) cannot be assessed quantitatively, or the relationship between factors is known only qualitatively. The development of alternative qualitative scenario "storylines" (see Chapter 4) is therefore an important advance over previous IPCC scenario methodologies. 3.4. Energy and Technology 3.4.1. Introduction In this section, energy end-uses, resources, and technologies are reviewed. Their future evolution is of critical importance to future emissions levels. First, major patterns of energy end-use and emissions by sector are considered, followed by a discussion of energy resources; then energy supply technologies that might become of greater importance in the future are reviewed briefly before the current understanding and modeling of technological change are discussed. 3.4.2. Energy Use and Emissions by Major Sectors 3.4.2.1. Overview Sectoral energy use and GHG emissions changes are often discussed in terms of trends in the major end-use sectors (e.g., Sathaye et al., 1989; IEA, 1997c; Schipper et al., 1997a; Price et al., 1998). Trends reveal striking differences between sectors and regions of the world. The key sectors of the economy that use energy are industry (including agriculture), commercial, residential, and institutional buildings, and transportation. Key drivers of energy use and carbon emissions include activity drivers (total population growth, urbanization, building, and vehicle stock, commodity production), economic drivers (total GDP, income, and price elasticities), energy intensity trends (energy intensity of energy-using equipment, appliances, vehicles), and carbon intensity trends. These factors are in turn driven by changes in consumer preferences, energy and technology costs, settlement and infrastructure patterns, technical progress, and overall economic conditions. Table 3-4 shows that global primary energy use grew from 191 EJ in 1971 to 307 EJ in 1990 at an average annual growth rate of 2.5% per year. This growth tapered off in all sectors after 1990, and total global primary energy increased to only 319 EJ by 1995, mainly because of the large declines experienced in the REF region (see Chapter 1 for definition of SRES world regions) as a result of the political and economic restructuring of the countries within it. Table 3-4 shows that the industrial sector clearly dominates total primary energy use, followed by the buildings sector (commercial, residential, and institutional buildings combined), transport sector, and agriculture sector. Energy intensity is the amount of energy used to perform a particular service, such as to produce a ton of steel, power a refrigerator, or propel a vehicle. Technical progress generally leads to improved energy efficiency in technologies such as lights, vehicles, refrigerators, and manufacturing processes. Many studies show that considerable energy efficiency improvement can be realized (technically and economically) in the short term (10-15 years) with available technologies (Szargut and Morris, 1987; Ayres, 1989; Jochem, 1989; Lovins and Lovins, 1991; Nakicenovic et al., 1993; WEC, 1995b; Watson et al., 1996; Worrell et al., 1997). In 1990, industry accounted for two-fifths of global primary energy use, residential and commercial buildings for a slightly smaller amount, and transportation for one-fifth of the total. These shares vary according to economic structures in each region (see below). Carbon emissions that result from energy use depend on the carbon intensity of the energy source. Changes in carbon intensity mainly result from fuel substitution, but can also arise from changes in technology or process. The largest shifts in carbon intensity over the long term are associated with changes in the energy sources used for power generation since 1850 (Nakicenovic and Grübler, 1996). Smaller but still significant shifts resulted from fuel switching in industrial, commercial, and residential energy consumption. The relationship between total sector energy use and economic drivers such as GDP per capita varies across countries and depends upon the sector. In 1995, the relationship in the transport and buildings sectors was relatively strong and that in the industrial sector was moderate (Price et al., 1998). Income elasticities vary widely among the different types of energy services and the country or region under consideration. For example, the income elasticity of refrigerator ownership in most countries in the IND region (see Chapter 1 for definition of SRES world regions) is extremely low, as most households already own a refrigerator. The elasticity is much higher in medium-income countries in which refrigerator ownership is low. Other economic indicators, such as level of economic development in the industrial sector and personal consumption expenditures in residential buildings, are more closely correlated with energy use in these sectors. elasticity of refrigerator ownership in most countries in the IND region (see Chapter 1 for definition of SRES world regions) is extremely low, as most households already own a refrigerator. The elasticity is much higher in medium-income countries in which refrigerator ownership is low. Other economic indicators, such as level of economic development in the industrial sector and personal consumption expenditures in residential buildings, are more closely correlated with energy use in these sectors. 3.4.2.2. Industry and Agriculture Driving forces behind energy use and carbon emissions in the industrial sector include the state of economic development, consumption and trade patterns, relative costs of labor, capital, and energy, and availability of resources. In 1990, industry accounted for 42% (129 EJ) of global primary energy use. Between 1971 and 1990, industrial energy use grew at a rate of 2.1% per year, slightly less than the world total energy demand growth of 2.5% per year. This growth rate has slowed in recent years, and was virtually flat between 1990 and 1995, primarily because of declines in industrial output in the REF region. Energy use in the industrial sector is dominated by the industrialized countries, which accounted for 42% of world industrial energy use in 1990. Countries in the REF, ASIA, and ALM regions used 29%, 20%, and 9% of world industrial energy, respectively, that year. The share of industrial sector energy consumption within the industrialized countries declined from 40% in 1971 to 33% in 1995, which partly reflects the transition toward a less energy-intensive manufacturing base. The industrial sector dominates in the REF region, accounting for more than 50% of total primary energy demand, a result of the long-term policy that emphasized materials production and was promoted under years of central planning. Average annual growth in industrial energy use in this region was 2% between 1971 and 1990, but dropped by an average of 7.3% per year between 1990 and 1995 (IEA, 1997a; IEA, 1997b; BP, 1997). The agriculture sector used only 3% of global primary commercial energy in 1990. Unlike the other sectors, the REF region dominated agricultural energy use in 1990, using 34% of the total, followed by the IND (30%), ASIA (26%), and ALM (10%). Between 1971 and 1990, the average annual growth in primary energy used for agriculture was slower in the industrialized countries (2.2% per year) than in the three other regions, for which growth ranged between 4.5% and 4.8% per year. Trends in agricultural primary energy use changed significantly in the REF and ALM regions after 1990, with REF consumption dropping to an average of 10.6% per year and ALM consumption increasing to an average of 12.6% per year by 1995. Energy use in the industrial sector is dominated by the production of a few major energy-intensive commodities, such as steel, paper, cement, and chemicals. Rapidly industrializing countries have higher demands for these infrastructure materials and more mature markets have declining or stable levels of consumption. Studies of material consumption in industrialized countries show increases in the initial development of society to a maximum consumption level, which then remains constant or even declines as infrastructure needs are met and material recycling increases. Absolute and per capita consumptions of some materials appear to have reached levels of stabilization in many industrialized countries, although this is not true of all materials (e.g., paper). Expressed as a function of unit GDP, material intensity generally declines after reaching a maximum (Williams et al., 1987; Wernick, 1996; WRI, 1997b; see also Section 3.3). Although the use of all materials in developing countries will certainly grow, per capita consumption may not reach that in the industrialized countries, because more efficient processes and substitutes are available. Carbon intensities with respect to GDP (CO2 emissions as a function of GDP) in the industrial sector have been relatively stable in most countries except for those that are rapidly industrializing (Houghton et al., 1995). This trend results from the changing economic structure, reduced energy intensity, and reduced carbon intensity of the fuel mix. A shift toward less carbon-intensive fuels took place between 1971 and 1992 in most industrialized countries, as well as in South Korea (Ang and Pandiyan, 1997; Schipper et al., 1997a). The industrial sector fuel mix has become more carbon-intensive in some developing countries, such as China and Mexico (Ang and Pandiyan, 1997; Sheinbaum and Rodriguez, 1997), although a trend away from coal to other fuels has also occurred in some developing countries (Han and Chatterjee, 1997). The contribution of fuel-mix changes to CO2 emissions reduction has been small in most industrialized countries (Golove and Schipper, 1997; Schipper et al., 1997a). Technical energy-intensity reductions of 1 to 2% per year are possible in the industrial sector and have occurred in the past (Ross and Steinmeyer, 1990). The annual change in energy intensity in the industrial sector varied between -0.1% and -6.6% per year for a variety of countries from the early 1970s to the early 1990s. Generally, electricity intensity remained constant and fuel intensity declined, which reflects the increasing importance of electricity (IEA, 1997c). 3.4.2.3. Residential, Commercial, and Institutional Buildings In the buildings sector, household expenditure levels, appliance and equipment penetration levels, and the share of population that lives in urban areas all affect energy use. In 1990, residential, commercial, and institutional buildings consumed almost 100 EJ of primary energy, about one-third of the total global primary energy. Uncertainties persist with respect to quantities and structure of non-commercial fuel use in developing countries. Primary energy use in the buildings sector worldwide grew at an average annual rate of 2.9% between 1971 and 1990. Growth in buildings energy use varied widely by region, ranging from 1.8% per year in the IND region to 7.1% per year in the ALM region. Growth in commercial buildings was higher than growth in residential buildings in all regions of the world, averaging 3.5% per year globally. In 1990, the IND region used about 60% of global building energy, followed by REF (22%), ASIA (10%), and ALM (9%) countries, respectively. Between 1990 and 1995, growth in the use of primary energy in buildings slowed in all regions except the industrialized countries, where buildings primary energy use climbed at an average of 1.9% per year. The greatest decline occurred in the REF region, where buildings energy use declined by an average of 6.8% annually between 1990 and 1995, dominated by a 7.2% per year average drop in residential primary energy use. Growth in buildings energy use in the other two regions – ASIA and ALM – slowed during this period, but growth rates were still high, averaging 4.8% and 3.8%, respectively (BP, 1997; IEA, 1997a; IEA, 1997b). Along with population size, key activity drivers of energy demand in buildings are the rate of urbanization, number of dwellings, per capita living area, persons per residence, and commercial floor space. As populations become more urbanized and areas develop electrification, the demand for energy services such as refrigeration, lighting, heating, and cooling increases. In the residential buildings sector, the level of energy demand is further influenced by population age distribution, household income, number of households, size of dwellings, and number of people per household. In the commercial buildings sector, factors that influence energy demand include the overall population level (i.e., the number of people who desire commercial services), the size of the labor force, and commercial sector income. The number of people living in urban areas increased from 1.35 billion, or 37% of the total, in 1970 to 2.27 billion, or 43% of the total, in 1990 (see also Section 3.2). Growth in urbanization was strongest in the ASIA and ALM regions, where the average annual increase in urban population was nearly 4.0% per year. This increase and the resultant income effects led to increased usage of commercial fuels, such as kerosene and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), for cooking instead of traditional biomass fuels. In general, higher levels of urbanization are associated with higher incomes and increased household energy use (Sathaye et al., 1989; Nadel et al., 1997). Energy consumption in residential buildings is strongly correlated with household income levels. Between 1973 and 1993, increases in total private consumption translated into larger homes, more appliances, and an increased use of energy services (water heating, space heating) in most industrialized countries (IEA, 1997c). Dwelling size is a key determinant of residential energy use, and has grown with personal consumption expenditures in most industrialized countries. In the DEV region, urban areas are generally associated with higher average incomes (Sathaye and Ketoff, 1991). Wealthier populaces in developing countries exhibit consumption patterns similar to those in industrialized countries – purchases of appliances and other energy-using equipment increase with gains in disposable income (WEC, 1995b). In the commercial sector, the ratio of primary energy use to commercial sector GDP fell in a number of industrialized countries between 1970 and the early 1990s, despite a large growth in energy-using equipment in commercial buildings. Almost certainly this is an effect of improved equipment efficiencies combined with economic growth in the commercial sector unrelated to energy consumption. Electricity use in the commercial sector shows a relatively strong correlation with commercial sector GDP, although there is a wide range of electricity use at any given level of commercial sector GDP (IEA, 1997c). Overall energy intensity in the buildings sector can be measured using energy consumption per capita values. Between 1971 and 1990, global primary energy use in the buildings sector grew from 16.5 economic growth in the commercial sector unrelated to energy consumption. Electricity use in the commercial sector shows a relatively strong correlation with commercial sector GDP, although there is a wide range of electricity use at any given level of commercial sector GDP (IEA, 1997c). Overall energy intensity in the buildings sector can be measured using energy consumption per capita values. Between 1971 and 1990, global primary energy use in the buildings sector grew from 16.5 GJ per capita to 20 GJ per capita. Buildings per capita energy use varied widely by region, with the IND and REF regions dominating globally. Energy use per capita was higher in the residential sector than in the commercial sector in all regions, although average annual growth in commercial energy use per capita was higher during the period, averaging 1.7% per year globally compared to 0.6% per year for the residential sector (Price et al., 1998). Space heating is an important end-use in the IND and REF regions and in some developing countries; it accounts for half of China's residential and commercial building energy demand (Nadel et al., 1997). The penetration of central heating doubled, from about 40% of dwellings to almost 80% of dwellings, in many industrialized countries between 1970 and 1992 (IEA, 1997c). District heating systems are common in some areas of Europe and in the REF region. Space heating is not common in most developing countries, with the exception of China, South Korea, South Africa, Argentina, and a few other South American countries (Sathaye et al., 1989). Residential space-heating energy intensities declined in most industrial countries (except Japan) between 1970 and 1992 because of reduced heat losses in buildings, lowered indoor temperatures, more careful heating practices, and improvements in efficiency of heating equipment (Schipper et al., 1996; IEA, 1997c). Water heating, refrigeration, space cooling, and lighting are the next largest residential energy uses, respectively, in most industrialized countries (IEA, 1997c). In developing countries, cooking and water heating dominate, followed by lighting, small appliances, and refrigerators (Sathaye and Ketoff, 1991). Appliance penetration rates increased in all regions between 1970 and 1990. The energy intensity of new appliances has declined over the past two decades - new refrigerators in the US were 65% less energy-intensive in 1993 than in 1972 (Schipper et al., 1996). Primary energy use per square meter of commercial sector floor area has gradually declined in most industrial countries, despite countervailing trends such as growth in the share of electricity, increases in electricity intensity, and reduction in fuel use and fuel intensity. Electricity use and intensity per unit area increased rapidly in the commercial buildings sector as the penetration of computers, other office equipment, air conditioning, and lighting grew. Fuel intensity per unit area declined rapidly in industrialized countries as the share of energy used for space heating in commercial buildings dropped because of thermal improvements in buildings (Krackeler et al., 1998). Carbon intensity of the residential sector declined in most industrialized countries between 1970 and the early 1990s (LBL, 1998). In the commercial sector, CO2 emissions per square meter of commercial floor area also dropped in most industrialized countries during this period, even though carbon intensity per unit area for electric end-uses increased in most industrialized countries, dropping only in France, Sweden, and Norway - countries that moved away from fossil fuels (Krackeler et al., 1998). In developing countries, (non-commercial) biomass is often used in the residential sector, especially in rural areas. Increased urbanization, as well as increases in incomes and rural electrification, can lead to rising carbon intensities in buildings when sustainable biomass use is replaced with carbon-intensive fuels such as LPG, coal, and electricity generated by fossil fuels. Conversely, if biomass use was previously on an unsustainable basis, the shift toward commercial fuels can lower carbon intensities. The trend toward replacement of biomass fuels by commercial fuels is expected to continue in developing countries (IEA, 1995). In addition to the energy use in buildings, Tiwari and Parikh (1995) drew attention to energy use for buildings construction, which accounts for 17% of India's carbon emissions in terms of embodied energy in steel, cement, glass, bricks, etc. Typically, this embodied buildings energy is accounted for as industrial energy use in energy statistics. Tiwari and Parikh (1995) found that in India alternative construction methods could save 23% of energy use at 0.03% increase in costs. 3.4.2.4. Transport The transport sector consumed slightly over 63 EJ, or about 20% of global primary energy, in 1990. Transport sector primary energy use grew at a relatively rapid average annual rate of 2.8% between 1971 and 1990, slowing to 1.7% per year between 1990 and 1995. Industrialized countries clearly dominate energy consumption in this sector, using 62% of the world's transport energy in 1990, followed by REF (16%), ALM (12%), and ASIA (10%) regions. The most rapid growth was seen in the ASIA countries (5.9% per year) and the ALM region (4.6% per year). Transport energy use dropped dramatically in the REF region after 1990; by 1995 this region only consumed 11% of global transport energy use. Growth in transport primary energy use also declined slightly in the IND region, dropping from an average of 2.2% per year between 1971 and 1990 to 1.9% per year between 1990 and 1995. High growth continued in the ASIA and ALM regions, with the ASIA countries increasing to an average of 7.6% per year between 1990 and 1995 (BR, 1997; IEA, 1997a; IEA, 1997b). Influences on GHG emissions from the transport sector are often divided into those that affect activity levels (travel and freight movements) and those that affect technology (energy efficiency, carbon intensity of fuel, emission factors for nitrous oxide (N2O), etc.). The various driving forces and their effects are reviewed in detail in the IPCC Working Group II (WGII) Second Assessment Report (SAR) (Michaelis et al., 1996). In aggregate, transport patterns are closely related to economic activity, infrastructure, settlement patterns, and prices of fuels and vehicles. They are also related to communication links. At the household level, travel is affected by transport costs, income, household size, local settlement patterns, the occupation of the head of the household, household make-up, and location (Jansson, 1989; Hensher et al., 1990; Walls et al., 1993). People in higher-skilled occupations that require higher levels of education are more price- and income-responsive in their transport energy demand than people in lower-skilled occupations (Greening and Jeng, 1994; Greening et al., 1994). Urban layout both affects and is affected by the predominant transport systems. It is also strongly influenced by other factors such as people's preference for living in low-density areas, close to parks or other green spaces, away from industry, and close to schools and other services. Travel patterns may be influenced by many factors, including the size of the settlements, proximity to other settlements, location of workplaces, provision of local facilities, and car ownership. A survey of cities around the world (Newman and Kenworthy, 1990) found that population density strongly and inversely correlates with transport energy use. Many studies have examined the response of car travel and gasoline demand to gasoline price, and are reviewed, for example, in Michaelis (1996) and Michaelis et al. (1996). Such studies typically find a measurable reduction in fuel demand, distance traveled, car sales, and energy intensity in response to fuel price increases. Studies of freight transport found relatively small short-term impacts of diesel price increases, and often produced results that were inconclusive or statistically insignificant. Over the longer term, price responsiveness is generally assumed to be larger because of possible technology responses. An important influence on future travel may be the development of telecommunication technologies. In some instances, improved communication can substitute for travel as people can work at home or shop via the internet. In others, communication can help to increase travel by enabling friendships and working relationships to develop over long distances, and by permitting people to stay in touch with their homes and offices while traveling. To the extent that improvements in telecommunication technology stimulate the economy, they are likely to result in increased freight transport. Energy intensity in the transport sector is measured as energy used per passenger-km for passenger transport and per ton-km for freight transport. Transport energy projections typically incorporate a reduction in fleet energy intensity in the range 0.5 to 2% per year (Grübler et al., 1993b; IEA, 1993; Walsh, 1993). On-road energy intensity (fuel consumption per kilometer driven) of light-duty passenger vehicles in North America fell by nearly 2% per year between 1970 and 1990, to about 13 to 14 liters per 100 kilometers, but it is now stationary or rising. In other industrialized countries, changes in on-road fuel consumption from 1970 to the present were quite small. The average on-road energy intensity in North America was 85% higher than that in Europe in 1970, but only 25 to 30% higher by the mid-1990s (Schipper, 1996). In some countries, such as Italy and France, where fleet average energy intensity has fallen during the past 20 years, the energy intensity of car travel (MJ/passenger-km) has increased as a result of declining car occupancy and the increasing use of more efficient diesel vehicles (Schipper et al., 1993). However, conversion to diesel has been encouraged by low duties on diesel fuel relative to those on gasoline. The lower costs of driving diesel vehicles may have acted as a significant stimulus to travel by diesel car owners, and so offset much of the energy saved from their high-energy efficiency. A more recent trend, though, is toward higher energy intensity in new cars in countries such as the US, Germany, and Japan (IEA, 1993). Factors in the recent increases in energy intensity include the trend toward larger cars, increasing and so offset much of the energy saved from their high-energy efficiency. A more recent trend, though, is toward higher energy intensity in new cars in countries such as the US, Germany, and Japan (IEA, 1993). Factors in the recent increases in energy intensity include the trend toward larger cars, increasing engine size, and the use of increasingly power-hungry accessories (Martin and Shock, 1989; Difiglio et al., 1990; Greene and Duleep, 1993; IEA, 1993). Average truck energy use per ton-km of freight moved has shown little sign of reduction during the past 20 years in countries for which data are available (Schipper et al., 1993). Energy use is typically in the region 0.7 to 1.4 MJ/ton-km for the heaviest trucks but can be in excess of 5 MJ/ton-km for smaller trucks. In countries where services and light industry are growing faster than heavy industry, the share of small trucks or vans in road freight is increasing. Along with the increasing power-to-weight ratios of goods vehicles, these trends offset, and in some cases outweigh, the benefits of improved engine and vehicle technology (Delsey, 1991). Energy intensity tends to be lower in countries with large heavy-industry sectors, because a high proportion of goods traffic is made up of bulk materials or primary commodities. Air traffic grew about three times as fast as GDP in the early 1970s, but only about twice as fast since the early 1980s. After allowing for the effects of continually falling prices, the elasticity of the 10-year average growth rate with respect to the 10-year average GDP growth is not much more than 1.0 (Michaelis, 1997a). Over the 30 years to 1990, the average energy intensity of the civil aircraft fleet fell by about 2.7% per year. The fastest reduction, of about 4% per year, was in the period 1974 to 1988. The large reductions in energy intensity during the 1970s and 1980s resulted partly from developments in the technology used for new aircraft in the rapidly expanding civil aircraft fleet and partly from increases in aircraft load factor (passengers per seat or percentage of cargo capacity filled). The aircraft weight load factor increased from 49% in 1972 to 59% in 1990, but nearly all of this rise occurred during the 1970s (ICAO, 1995a, 1995b). Transport sector carbon intensities for personal travel, measured as the ratio of emissions to passenger-km traveled, increased in most European countries and Japan between 1972 and 1994. This increase resulted from falling load factors (persons per vehicle), which were greater than improvements in vehicle energy intensity. The only exception among industrialized countries was the US, where carbon intensities dropped from 55 gC/passenger-km in 1972 to 46 gC/passenger-km in 1994 (IEA, 1997c; Schipper et al., 1997a). Carbon intensity of freight travel, measured as the ratio of emissions to ton-km transported, rose slightly in a number of industrialized countries between 1972 and 1994, mostly because of modal shifts to more carbon-intensive trucks (Schipper et al., 1997b). As mobility increases in developing countries, transport emissions could rise dramatically. Ramanathan and Parikh (1999) indicate passenger traffic growth at 8% per year and train traffic growth at 5% per year for India. They found that efficiency improvements could reduce future energy demand by 26%. If, in addition, the modal split changes in favor of public transport modes, these authors estimate a 45% reduction in energy demand (Ramanathan and Parikh, 1999). Fuels used to power transport are typically oil-based, except for rail, for which shifts toward electrified systems can lower carbon intensities depending upon the source of fuel for electricity generation in the country. In France, for example, the move toward electrified rail based on electricity generated by nuclear power led to lower carbon intensities (IEA, 1997c). Increased use of diesel engines can reduce CO2 emissions, but leads to greater emissions of other gaseous pollutants, such as N2O and carbon monoxide (CO). Use of alternative fuels, such as compressed natural gas, LPG, and ethanol, can significantly reduce CO2 emissions from transport (IEA, 1995). 3.4.3. Energy Resources 3.4.3.1. Fossil and Fissile Resources The term energy resource can be defined as “the occurrence of material in recognizable form” (WEC, 1995a) – it is essentially the amount of oil, gas, coal, etc., in the ground. In the IPCC WGII SAR (energy primer, see Nakicenovic et al., 1996) a further definitional distinction was made. Resources were defined as those occurrences considered “potentially recoverable with foreseeable technological and economic developments” and any additional amounts not considered as potentially recoverable were referred to as “occurrences.” An energy reserve is a portion of the total, and depends on exploration to locate and evaluate a resource and on the availability of a technology to extract some of the resource at acceptable cost. Proved oil reserves, for example, are defined as “those quantities which geological and engineering information indicates with reasonable certainty can be recovered in the future from known reservoirs under existing economic and operating conditions” (BP, 1996). Thus, reserves can increase with exploration (new or better information), engineering advances (better economic and operating conditions), and higher prices (better economic conditions). In essence, reserves are “replenished” by shifting volumes from the resource into the reserve category. Reserves can also be depleted through production and can decrease with lower prices. Throughout this section the size of reserve and resource figures are expressed in EJ or ZJ (i.e., 10^21 J, or 1000 EJ). For SRES the fossil resource categorization used is reserves, resources, and additional occurrences. The definition of BP (1996) was adopted for reserves. Resources are those hydrocarbon occurrences with uncertain geologic assurance or that lack economic attractiveness. Finally, all other hydrocarbons that do not fall within the reserve and resource categories are aggregated in the category “additional occurrences” (i.e., occurrences that have a high degree of geologic uncertainty, are not recoverable with current or foreseeable technology, or are economically unwarranted at present). The assessment is summarized in Table 3-5. This account of fossil resources needs to be put in context with the long-run demand for these fuels and their relative production economics. It is the specific demand for these fuels that “converts” resources into reserves (Odell, 1997, 1998, 1999). Obviously, this is a dynamic process that, in addition to future demand trajectories, depends on advances in knowledge and technological progress. The discussion of oil reserves below applies to all hydrocarbon and nuclear resources. In terms of exploration, the oil industry is relatively mature and the quantity of additional reserves that remain to be discovered is unclear. One group argues that few new oil fields are being discovered, despite the surge in drilling activity from 1978 to 1986, and that most of the increases in reserves results from revisions of underestimated existing reserves (Ivanhoe and Leckie, 1993; Laherrere, 1994; Campbell, 1997; Hatfield, 1997). Laherrere (1994) puts ultimately recoverable oil resources at about 10 ZJ (1800 billion barrels), including production to date. Adelman and Lynch (1997), while accepting some aspects in the propositions behind the pessimistic view of reserves, point to previous pessimistic estimates that have been wrong. They argue that “there are huge amounts of hydrocarbons in the earth’s crust” and that “estimates of declining reserves and production are incurably wrong because they treat as a quantity what is really a dynamic process driven by growing knowledge.” Smith and Robinson (1997) note improvements in technology, such as 3D seismic surveys and extended reach (e.g., horizontal) drilling, that have improved recovery rates from existing reservoirs and made profitable the development of fields previously regarded as uneconomic. Both of these increase reserves and lower costs. The various arguments and assessments are reviewed in greater detail in Gregory and Rogner (1998). To include all these views and to reflect uncertainty, future reserves availability cannot be represented by single numbers. Instead, a range of values that reflect the optimistic and pessimistic assumptions on extent and success rates of exploration activities, as well as the future evolution of prices and technology, needs to be considered for a scenario approach. To this end, the estimates of Masters et al. (1994) reflect the current state of knowledge as to the uncertainties in future potentials for conventional oil resources. These estimates assess conventional oil reserves at slightly above 6 ZJ, and a corresponding range of additionally recoverable resources between 1.6 and 5.9 ZJ. The figures include estimates of oil that is yet to be discovered. In addition to conventional oil reserves and resources, oil shales, natural bitumen, and heavy crude oil, together called unconventional oil resources, have previously been defined as occurrences that cannot be tapped by conventional production methods for technical or economic reasons, or both (Rogner, 1996, 1997). In part these resources represent some of the huge amounts of hydrocarbons in the earth’s crust. The figures include estimates of oil that is yet to be discovered. In addition to conventional oil reserves and resources, oil shales, natural bitumen, and heavy crude oil, together called unconventional oil resources, have previously been defined as occurrences that cannot be tapped by conventional production methods for technical or economic reasons, or both (Rogner, 1996, 1997). In part these resources represent some of the huge amounts of hydrocarbons in the earth's crust that Adelman and Lynch (1997) refer to. Technologies to extract some of these resources competitively at current market conditions are now developed and production has started in countries such as Canada and Venezuela. Masters et al. (1987) put total recoverable resources of heavy and extra heavy crude oil at 3 ZJ, recoverable resources of bitumen at 2 ZJ, and ultimate resources of shale oil in place at 79 ZJ (they do not estimate the proportion of shale oil that might be recovered and hence give resources in place). The extent to which these unconventional resources might be defined as reserves in the future depends on the continued development of technologies to extract them at acceptable costs. Nakicenovic et al. (1996) in IPCC WGII SAR assess all unconventional oil reserves at 7.1 ZJ, with an additional 20 ZJ of unconventional oil resources estimated to be recoverable with foreseeable technological progress. Estimates of ultimately recoverable reserves of gas are less controversial than those for oil. Proved reserves are high, both in relation to current production (BP, 1996) and to cumulative production to date (Masters et al., 1994). Masters et al. (1994) and Ivanhoe and Leckie (1993) note that gas discoveries need to be matched to an infrastructure for gas consumption, which is currently lacking in many parts of the world. Hence, exploration has been limited and the potential for discoveries of major quantities of gas in the 21st century is high. Estimates of gas reserves and resources are being revised continuously. The most up-to-date information is represented by the figures of the International Gas Union (IGU, 1997a), which give conventional gas reserves of 5.4 ZJ plus 9.4 ZJ additional reserves, including gas yet to be discovered. On the basis of IGU comments that some of their regional estimates of reserves are extremely conservative, Gregory and Rogner (1998) suggest an optimistic estimate for ultimately recoverable reserves of 28 ZJ (5.4 ZJ reserves plus 22.6 ZJ additional reserves, including quantities to be discovered), using the same ratio of optimistic to pessimistic reserves as Masters et al. (1994). In addition to conventional reserves, reviews of the literature indicate very substantial amounts of unconventional gas occurrences. Rogner (1996, 1997) estimated resources in place for coal-bed methane (CH4) of 10 ZJ, gas from fractured shale of 17 ZJ, tight formation gas of 7 ZJ, gas remaining in situ after production of 5 ZJ, and clathrates at some 980 ZJ. The magnitude of these estimates is also confirmed in IPCC WGII SAR (Nakicenovic et al., 1996), which gives 6.9 ZJ unconventional gas as current reserves, and an additional 20 ZJ as recoverable with current or foreseeable improvements in technologies. The largest resource occurrence of all fossil fuels (even exceeding coal) is estimated to be methane clathrates. Also called hydrates, methane clathrates represent gas locked in frozen ice-like crystals that probably cover a significant proportion of the ocean floor and have been found in numerous locations in continental permafrost areas. Technologies to recover these resources economically could be developed in the future, if demand for natural gas continues to grow in the longer run, in which case gas resource availability would increase enormously. The implications of such developments are considered in some of the SRES scenarios. Coal reserves are different in character to oil and gas – coal occurs in seams, often covers large areas, and relatively limited exploration is required to provide a reasonable estimate of coal in place. Total coal in place is estimated at about 220-280 ZJ (WEC, 1995a; Rogner, 1996; 1997; Gregory and Rogner, 1998). Of this total, about 22.9 ZJ are classified as recoverable reserves (WEC, 1995a; 1998), over 200 times current production levels. The question is the extent to which additional resources can be upgraded to reserves. WEC (1995a; 1998) estimates additional recoverable reserves at about 80 ZJ, although it is not clear under what conditions these reserves would become economically attractive. Over 90% of their estimate of total reserves occur in just six countries, with 70% in the Russian Federation alone. Further coal resources are known to exist in various countries, some of which might be exploitable in the future, perhaps at high cost. However, in some countries the environmental damage from coal mining will prevent possible additional reserves being developed. In the IPCC WGII SAR, Nakicenovic et al. (1996) estimate that, in addition to today's reserves, a further 89 ZJ could, at least in principle, be mined with technological advances, a figure in agreement with the WEC (1998) estimates. The picture for uranium and thorium reserves is different again. Current proved uranium reserves recoverable at less than US$130/kg amount to some 3.38 million tons (WEC, 1998) or 2 ZJ in once-through fuel cycles. This extractable thermal energy would be some 60 times larger if reprocessing and fast breeder reactors are used (Ishitani and Johansson, 1996). These reserves are sufficient to meet the needs of an expanded nuclear program well into the 21st century, even without reprocessing and fast breeder reactors. The ultimately recoverable global natural uranium resource base is currently estimated at around 29 million tons, which corresponds to 17 ZJ without reprocessing and about 1000 ZJ with reprocessing and fast breeder reactors (Nakicenovic et al., 1996). Additionally, very limited exploration for new reserves has occurred in recent years because of the relative abundance of existing known reserves and the drop of real uranium prices from US$150/kg in 1980 to about US$30/kg in 1996. The exploration and development of uranium deposits today is probably on a par with that of the oil industry 100 years ago, while thorium occurrences have hardly been assessed. Uranium and thorium are minerals contained in deposits in the Earth's crust and their long-term availability will be determined by the same process dynamics, in terms of knowledge and technology advances, as for their hydrocarbon counterparts. Once new reserves are required, given the comparison with the oil industry over the past 100 years, the potential for exploration to yield major discoveries at acceptable cost is enormous. From the perspective of occurrence alone, uranium resources are already known to be immense, especially if low-concentration sources such as seawater or granite rock are considered. In summary, the development of nuclear power throughout the 21st century, even based only on once-through reactors, is unlikely to be constrained by uranium (or thorium) resource limitations. 3.4.3.2. Renewable Resources A review of medium-term (to 2025) and long-term (up to 2100) potentials of renewable energy is given in IPCC WGII SAR (Nakicenovic et al., 1996) and shown in Table 3-6. A summary of the literature of renewable resource development potentials consistent with IPCC WGII SAR, including a detailed regional breakdown, is given in Christiansson (1995) and Neij (1997). Table 3-6: Global renewable energy potentials for 2020 to 2025, maximum technical potentials, and annual flows, in EJ. Data sources: Watson et al., 1996; Enquete-Kommission, 1990. Consumption Potentials by Long-term Technical Annual 1860-1990 1990 2020-2025 Potentials Flows Hydro 560 21 35-55 >130 >400 Geothermal – <1 4 >20 >800 Wind – – 7-10 >130 >200,000 Ocean – – 2 >20 >300 Solar – – 16-22 >2,600 >3,000,000 Biomass 1,150 55 72-137 >1,300 >3,000 Total 1,710 76 130-230 >4,200 >3,000,000 Hydropower currently provides some of the cheapest electricity available in the world, although the potential for new capacity is limited in some regions. WEC (1994, 1995a) estimates the gross world potential for hydroelectric schemes at about 144 EJ per year, of which about 47 EJ per year is technically feasible for development, about 32 EJ per year is economically feasible at present, and about 8 EJ per year is currently in operation. IPCC WGII SAR (Nakicenovic et al., 1996) gives a comparable medium-term potential of between 13 and 55 EJ, and a maximum technical potential above 130 EJ. Other important renewable energy resources are wind and solar, as well as modern forms of biomass use. Biomass resources are potentially the largest renewable global energy source, with an annual primary production of 220 billion oven dry tons (ODT) or 4500 EJ (Hall and Rosillo-Calle, 1998). The annual bioenergy potential is estimated to be in the order of 2900 EJ, of which 270 EJ could currently be considered available on a sustainable basis (Hall and Rosillo-Calle, 1998). Hall and Rao (1994) conclude that the biomass challenge is not one of availability but of the sustainable management, conversion, and delivery to the market place in the form of modern and affordable energy services. It is also important to distinguish between harvesting and deforestation; the former results in afforestation, and the latter in conversion of forest land for other uses, such as agriculture or urban development. The use of biomass as an energy source necessitates the use of land. Based on estimates by IIASA-WEC (1995), availability but of the sustainable management, conversion, and delivery to the market place in the form of modern and affordable energy services. It is also important to distinguish between harvesting and deforestation; the former results in afforestation, and the latter in conversion of forest land for other uses, such as agriculture or urban development. The use of biomass as an energy source necessitates the use of land. Based on estimates by IIASA-WEC (1995), by 2100 about 690-1350 million hectares of additional land would be needed to support future biomass energy requirements for a high-growth scenario. However, the additional land requirement for agriculture is estimated to reach 1700 million hectares during the same period. These land requirements can be fulfilled if the potential additional arable land is taken into account (at present this is mostly covered by forest). Hence, land-use conflicts could arise, and particularly for Asia which is projected to require its entire potential of arable land by 2100. Africa and Latin America may have sufficient land to support an expanded biomass program. One estimate (WEC, 1994) shows that Africa can support the production of biomass energy equivalent to 115% of its current energy consumption (8.6 EJ). Some authors stress that increased demand for bioenergy could compete with food production (Azar and Berndes, 1999). They note that the competitiveness between food and bioenergy production is not realistic in most energy-economy models; rather it is treated in an ad hoc fashion with the assumption that enough land is secured for food production. In reality an increasing competitiveness of bioenergy plantations may cause food prices to jump. Some developing regions, in particular Africa, are often assumed in scenarios to become major importers of food (Azar and Berndes, 1999). Unlike hydropower, most of the technologies that could harness these renewable energy forms are in their infancy and are generally still high cost (although wind power is becoming increasingly competitive in some areas). Conversely, the potential for improvement in technical performance and costs is substantial. Thus, the future resource potential of these renewables is largely determined by advances in technologies and economics (discussed in Section 3.4.4). Advances in renewable energy technologies could materialize to a significant extent even in the absence of climate policies, albeit conventional wisdom holds that such policies could accelerate their diffusion considerably. According to IPCC WGII SAR (Nakicenovic et al., 1996), in the medium-term (to 2025) the largest renewable energy potentials lie in the development of modern biomass (70 to 140 EJ), solar (16 to 22 EJ), and wind energy (7 to 10 EJ) as indicated in Table 3-6. In the long term the maximum technical energy supply potential for renewable energy is evidently solar (>2,600 EJ), followed by biomass (>1,300 EJ). 3.4.3.3. Conclusion Comparatively few scenarios in the literature explicitly consider the interplay between resource availability and technological change, and hence the possibilities of wide-ranging alternative futures of fossil and renewable resource use. For fossil fuels, alternative resource development scenarios are described in Ausubel et al. (1988), Edmonds and Barns (1992), IIASA-WEC (1995), Nakicenovic et al. (1998a), and Schollenberger (1998). For renewable energy resources, scenarios of enhanced resource development are described in Goldemberg et al. (1988), Johansson et al. (1993), Lazaras et al. (1993), Watson et al. (1996), and Nakicenovic et al. (1998a). A critical issue in the context of this report is how to capture alternative future interplays between energy technology and resource development, in contrast to the more traditional approach of assuming fixed resource quantities across all scenarios. This is important because the literature reviewed above indicates that resource availability can vary widely. For instance, generally oil and gas are considered the most constrained fossil fuel resources. Yet, a representative range from the literature gives cumulative production levels between 1990 and 2100 of between 21 and 65 ZJ, with typical intermediate scenarios of 30-35 ZJ (Nakicenovic et al., 1998a; Schollenberger, 1998). The extreme values of cumulative resource use are evidently inversely related between different energy sources across the range of alternative scenarios. For instance, in scenarios with high availability of oil and gas, typically the use of coal or renewable resources is more limited, whereas in scenarios of rapid development of renewable alternatives, the use of fossil resources is more limited. In other words, future resource availability of fossil fuels as well as renewables is constructed in scenarios based on current understanding and the available literature. Resource availability results from alternative policies and strategies in exploration, R&D, investments, and the resultant resource development efforts. The long lead-times and enormous investments involved result in such strategies yielding a cumulative effect, referred to in the technological literature as "lock-in" (see Section 3.4.4). Development of alternatives can be furthered, but it can also be blocked when policies and investments favor existing resources and technologies. The most important long-term issue is how the transition away from easily accessible conventional oil (and to a lesser extent conventional gas) reserves will unfold. Will it lead to a massive development of coal in the absence of alternatives or, conversely, to a massive development of unconventional oil and gas? Alternatively, could the development of post-fossil alternatives make the recourse to coal and unconventional oil and gas (such as methane clathrates) obsolete? 3.4.4. Energy Supply Technologies 3.4.4.1. Introduction The recent literature on long-term energy and emission scenarios increasingly emphasizes that both resource availability and technology are interrelated and inherently dynamic (see, e.g., IIASA-WEC, 1995; Watson et al. 1996; Nakicenovic et al., 1998a). The state of the art of theories and models of technological change is reviewed in Section 3.4.5. The literature suggests that models of endogenous technological change are still in their infancy, and that no methodologies are established that reduce the substantial uncertainties with respect to direction and rates of change of future technology developments. Differences in opinions as to the likelihood and dynamics of change in future technologies will therefore persist. Such future uncertainties are best captured by adopting a scenario approach. The following discussion on changes in energy supply and end-use technologies therefore reviews the literature with emphasis on empirically observed historical and conjectured future changes. The principal message is that while the future is uncertain, the certainty is that future technologies will be different from those used today. Hence the most unlikely scenario of future development is that of stagnation, or absence of change. 3.4.4.2. Fossil and Fissile Energy Supply Technologies Fossil-fueled power stations traditionally have been designed around steam turbines to convert heat into electricity. Conversion efficiencies of new power stations can exceed 40% (on a lower heating value basis - when the latent heat of steam from water in the fuel or the steam arising from the hydrogen content of the fuel has been excluded). New designs, such as supercritical designs that involve new materials to allow higher steam temperatures and pressures, enable efficiencies of close to 50%. In the long run, further improvements might be expected. However, the past decade or so has seen the dramatic breakthrough of combined cycle gas turbines (CCGTs). The technology involves expanding very hot combustion gases through a gas turbine with the waste heat in the exhaust gases used to generate steam for a steam turbine. The gas turbine can withstand much higher inlet temperatures than a steam turbine, which produces considerable increases in overall efficiency. The latest designs currently under construction can achieve efficiencies of over 60%, a figure that has been rising by over 1% per year for a decade. The low capital costs and high availability of CCGTs also make them highly desirable to power station operators. Gregory and Rogner (1998) estimate that maximum efficiencies of 71 to 73% are achievable within a reasonable period (on a lower heating basis; around 65 to 68% on a higher heating basis). CCGTs can also be used with more difficult fuels, such as coal and biomass, by adding a gasifier to the front end to form an integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC) power station. The gases need to be hot cleaned prior to combustion to avoid energy losses and this is one of the key areas of development. The added benefit is that coal flue gas desulfurization (FGD) becomes unnecessary as sulfur is removed before the combustion stage. In addition to FGD and IGCC, fluidized bed combustion (FBC) technology facilitates sulfur abatement (adding limestone during combustion to retain sulfur) and allows the utilization of low quality fossil fuels because of the high sulfur retention capacity. However, FGD reduces overall conversion efficiencies (i.e., increases CO2 emissions). Also, both FGD and FBC sulfur abatement technologies use calcium carbonate to reduce emissions, which increases CO2 emissions because of CaO liberation from CaCO3 capture. The use of high sulfur coals in FBC requires high limestone consumption, which results in increased CO2 emissions. Only IGCC reduces SO2 and CO2 emissions, because of the higher power generation efficiency. Biomass is particularly suited to gasification. Stoll and Todd (1996) and Willerboer (1997) estimate that current designs for coal are around 9% less efficient than a standard CCGT burning gas. Developments to reduce heat losses through better heat recovery and by hot gas cleaning could potentially increase efficiency significantly in the next 10 to 15 years, and the technology can yield efficiencies of 51% now and perhaps 65% in the longer run. The particularly suited to gasification. Stoll and Todd (1996) and Willerboer (1997) estimate that current designs for coal are around 9% less efficient than a standard CCGT burning gas. Developments to reduce heat losses through better heat recovery and by hot gas cleaning could potentially increase efficiency significantly in the next 10 to 15 years, and the technology can yield efficiencies of 51% now and perhaps 65% in the longer run. The major potential competitor to CCGT technology is the fuel cell, which may be able to offer similar efficiencies at much lower plant sizes and so may be an ideal candidate for distributed combined heat and power generation. Another promising fuel cell application is vehicle propulsion. In contrast to other fossil-sourced electricity generation, fuel cells (similar to batteries) convert the chemical energy of fuels electrochemically (i.e., without combustion) into electricity and heat, and thus offer considerably higher conversion efficiencies than internal combustion engines. In the past, high costs and durability problems have restricted their use to some highly specialized applications, such as electricity generation in space. Recent advances in fuel cell technology, however, have led to their commercial production and application in niche markets for distributed combined heat and power production (Penner et al., 1995). Although operating internally on hydrogen, fuel cells can be fueled with a hydrocarbon fuel, such as natural gas, methanol, gasoline, or even coal. Before entering the fuel cells, these fuels would be converted on-site or on-board into hydrogen via steam reforming, partial oxidation, or gasification and hydrogen separation. In the longer run and to make fuel cells truly zero-emission devices, non-fossil derived pure hydrogen, supplied and stored as compressed gas, cryogenic liquid, metal hydrate, or other storage form, could replace hydrocarbon fuels. Current fuel cell conversion efficiencies (45 to 50%) have yet to approach their potentials; some designs report efficiencies as high as 60% electrical efficiency in simple systems and 74% total efficiency in hybrid fuel cell and gas combined cycle systems (FETC, 1997). Hydrogen production efficiencies range from 65 to 85% for fossil-based systems, 55 to 73% for biomass-based systems, and 80% to close to 90% for electrolysis (Ouellette et al., 1995; Williams, 1998). Nuclear power is a proven technology that provides 17% of global electricity supply. There is currently no consensus concerning the future role of nuclear power. While it stagnates in Europe and North America, it continues as a strong option in a number of Asian countries and countries undergoing economic reform. Economics and security of supply are considerations in the choice of nuclear power, along with its environmental trade-offs – on a full energy chain basis, from mining to waste disposal and decommissioning, nuclear power emits little GHG emissions. Public opinion is opposed to the use of nuclear power in many countries because of concerns regarding operating safety, final disposal of high-level radioactive waste, and proliferation of weapon-grade fissile materials, as well as uranium mining and its environmental implications. These concerns, perceived or real, cannot be ignored if nuclear power is to regain the position of an accepted technology. In addition, changed market conditions call for new reactor technologies – smaller in scale, reduced construction periods, and improved economics with no compromise in safety. The industry is striving continuously to develop advanced reactor designs of much lower cost and with inherent safety concepts (i.e., designs that make safety less dependent on specifically activated technology components and human performance). The latest reactor technology already prevents the release of fission products or health-damaging radiation to the environment even under highly unlikely severe accident conditions. The 1998 update of the OECD cost comparison for power plants expected to be commercially available around 2005 reports nuclear generating cost in the range 2.5 to 9.0 c/kWh (US cents per kilowatt-hour), depending on location, type of reactor, plant factor, plant life time, discount rate, and underlying fuel price escalation (OECD, 1998c). Reconciliation of the assumptions of the OECD report with those used in the IPCC WGII SAR leads to an almost identical cost range of 2.9 to 5.4 c/kWh, at 5% discount rate, and 7.7 c/kWh, at 10% discount rate (Ishitani and Johansson, 1996). 3.4.4.3. Renewable Energy Technologies Since the birth of the modern wind power industry in the mid-1970s, it has seen a continuous chain of innovations and cost reductions. Christiansson (1995) discusses a learning curve that relates cost reductions to installed capacity. She notes that the experience curve for the USA indicates a progress ratio of 0.84 (i.e., for each doubling of installed capacity, costs of new installations are reduced to 0.84 of the previous level). In the UK, developers have the opportunity to bid to supply renewable electricity to the grid under the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation. In 1998, the average bid price for large wind power schemes was about 5 c/kWh, nearly 20% lower than in 1996 (ENDS, 1998). The bids are made on a full commercial cost basis and they indicate that wind energy is cheaper than most of its competitors for new schemes in the UK for modest increments of capacity. (The exception is gas-powered CCGT generation.) However, wind, by nature, is intermittent and back-up capacity will be required as the proportion of electricity provided by wind increases, which reduces its economic attractiveness. Large integrated electricity systems and systems that contain significant amounts of hydropower (especially with storage) are able to cope with the fluctuations in wind power best (Grubb and Meyer, 1993; Johansson et al., 1993). Solar voltaic power is on a similar learning curve to wind, with progress ratios of 0.82 in the USA and 0.81 in Japan (Christiansson, 1995; Watanabe, 1997). Various alternative technologies are being developed and solar voltaics can be envisaged as providing electricity through large arrays of cells in central power generation, through arrays built into cladding or roofing on buildings, or through single arrays to meet specific purposes. In this last form, solar cells have already established themselves as economic and reliable power sources in the provision of light, clean water, and improved health services to isolated rural communities (WEC, 1994). Based on the principle of a learning curve, solar cell costs are expected to fall as capacity builds. For example, the US Department of Energy projects costs to fall from 38–55 c/kWh in 1995 to 3.5–5 c/kWh in 2030 (US DOE, 1994). For another system, WEC estimates costs to fall from 13–23 c/kWh in 1990 to 5–10 c/kWh in 2020 (WEC, 1994). Biomass, particularly wood, has been the main initial source of energy as countries develop and remains a substantial energy source in many developing countries (WEC, 1994). In addition to this, byproducts of agriculture and forestry can be useful sources of energy. The extent to which biomass can contribute beyond this to provide energy crops for use in, say, power stations or for conversion into liquid fuels depends firstly on the competition for land with agriculture for food production. This, in turn, depends on improved productivity in food production, the amount and type of meat and other animal (e.g., dairy) products in the diet, and the growth in human population. The future contribution of biomass will also depend on increased productivity in biomass production coupled with limitations in energy input to grow, harvest, and use energy crops (Ishitani and Johansson, 1996; Leemans, 1996). Current costs of biomass (for a eucalyptus plantation in Uruguay) are typically put at US$1.8/GJ with projected costs of US$1.4/GJ and productivity at 360 GJ/hectare per year (Shell International Ltd., 1996). Agricultural productivity is also growing at 2% per year with the prospects of a similar productivity gain for energy crops (Shell International Ltd., 1996). WEC (1994) notes that Brazil has had a program to grow sugar cane to produce transport fuel since the mid 1970s and that production has reached 62% of the country's needs; this may be one option for wider use as the availability of conventional oil starts to fall. Finally, other forms of renewable energy, such as geothermal energy, tidal energy, wave energy, ocean thermal energy conversion, and solar thermal power plants, could make significant contributions at some stage in the future, as geothermal energy already does in specific markets. Also, technologies and processes that lead to carbon sequestration as a by-product include enhanced oil recovery using CO2 to improve the viscosity of crude oil or reforestation for reasons of soil preservation (Ishitani and Johansson, 1996). 3.4.4.4. Combined Heat and Power Production (Cogeneration) The fuel effectiveness of all energy conversion processes that involve combustion, but also of fuel cells, can be raised substantially by combined heat and power generation. Utilities located in the vicinity of urban areas may divert the waste heat from combustion for residential or commercial heating purposes. Industrial producers of high-temperature process heat may consider the generation of electricity when process temperature requirements are lower than the temperatures supplied. Combined heat and power production can accomplish fuel utilization rates of 90% or more (Ishitani and Johansson, 1996). 3.4.5. Understanding and Modeling Technological Change The future direction and rates of technological change are uncertain and therefore need to be explored when developing a range of alternative futures (i.e., scenarios). However, it would be misleading to resort to simplistic parametric variations of scenario assumptions without considering some basic elements of the nature of technological change, briefly reviewed here. Technological change has often been pictured in linear terms that involve several sequential steps: • Scientific discovery – an addition to knowledge. • Invention – a tested combination of already existing knowledge to a useful end. • Innovation – an initial and significant application of an invention. • Improvement of technology characteristics and reduction of costs. • Spread of an innovation, usually accompanied by Technological change has often been pictured in linear terms that involve several sequential steps: • Scientific discovery - an addition to knowledge. • Invention - a tested combination of already existing knowledge to a useful end. • Innovation - an initial and significant application of an invention. • Improvement of technology characteristics and reduction of costs. • Spread of an innovation, usually accompanied by improvement. However, this model places undue emphasis on the role of basic R & D and scientific knowledge as precursors and determinants of innovation. It also understates the role of interactions among different actors and between the five functions listed above. The emphasis in recent innovation literature is placed more on a "chain-link" model of innovation, exploiting interactions between firms' R&D departments, and various stages of production and marketing (Dosi, 1988; Freeman, 1994). Lane and Maxfield (1995) emphasize the role of "generative" relationships in creativity. Technological change is linked to the economic and cultural environment beyond the innovating firm in many ways, as described by Landes (1969), Mokyr (1990), Rosenberg (1982, 1994, 1997), Rostow (1990), and Grübler (1998a). Innovations are highly context-specific; they emerge from local capabilities and needs, evolve from existing designs, and conform to standards imposed by complementary technologies and infrastructure. Successful innovations may spread geographically and also fulfill much broader functions. The classic example is the steam engine, developed as a means of pumping water out of deep mines in Cornwall, England, but to become the main source of industrial motive power and the key technology in the rail revolution worldwide. Numerous examples can be used to demonstrate the messiness, or complexity, of innovation processes (e.g., Grübler, 1998a; Rosenberg, 1994). But even if the innovation process is messy, at least some general features or "stylized facts" can be identified (Dosi, 1988; Grübler, 1998a): • The process is fundamentally uncertain: outcomes cannot be predicted. • Innovation draws on underlying scientific or other knowledge. • Some kind of search or experimentation process is usually involved. • Many innovations depend on the exploitation of "tacit knowledge" obtained through "learning by doing" or experience. • Technological change is a cumulative process and depends on the history of the individual or organization involved. These five features render some individuals, firms, or countries better at innovation than others. Innovators must be willing and able to take risks; have some level of underlying knowledge; have the means and resources to undertake a search process; may need relevant experience; and may need access to an existing body of technology. Many of these features introduce positive feedback into the innovation process, so that countries or firms that take the technological lead in a market or field can often retain that lead for a considerable time. Technological change may be supply driven, demand driven, or both (Grübler, 1998a). Some of the most radical innovations are designed to respond to the most pressing perceived needs. Many technologies have been developed during wartime to address resource constraints or military objectives. Alternatively, some innovation (e.g., television) is generated largely through curiosity or the desire of the innovator to meet a technical and intellectual challenge. Market forces (including those anticipated in the future) can act as a strong stimulus for innovation by firms and entrepreneurs aiming either to reduce costs or to gain market share. For example, Michaelis (1997a) shows the strong relationship between fuel prices and the rate of energy efficiency improvement in the aviation industry; Michaelis (1997b) also discusses the effects of the introduction of competition on the organizational efficiency of the British nuclear industry. All innovations require some social or behavioral change (OECD, 1998a). At a minimum, changes in production processes require some change in working practices. Product innovations, if they are noticeable by the user, demand a change in consumer behavior and sometimes in consumer preferences. Some product innovations - such as those that result in faster computers or more powerful cars - provide consumers with more of what they already want. Nevertheless, successful marketing may depend on consumer acceptance of the new technology. Other innovations - such as alternative fuel vehicles or compact fluorescent lights - depend on consumers accepting different performance characteristics or even redefining their preferences. An important perspective on technical change is that of the end-user or consumer of products and services. Technology can be seen as a means of satisfying human needs. Several conceptual models have been developed to describe needs and motivation, although their empirical foundations are weak (Douglas et al., 1998; Maslow, 1954; Allardt, 1993). In many cases, a given technology helps to satisfy several different types of need, particularly evident in two of the most significant areas of energy use: cars and houses. This tendency of successful technologies to serve multiple needs contributes to lock-in by making it harder for competing innovations to replace them fully. Hence, many attempts to introduce new energy efficient or alternative fuel technologies, especially in the case of the car, have failed because of a failure to meet all the needs satisfied by the incumbent technology. Different individuals may interpret the same fundamental needs in different ways, in terms of the technology attributes they desire (OECD, 1996). Deep-seated cultural values or "metarules" for behavior can be considered to be filtered through a variety of influences at the societal, community, household, and individual level (Douglas et al., 1998; Strang, 1997). Commercial marketing of products usually aims to adjust the filters, and encourages people to associate their deep-seated values with specific product attributes (Wilhite, 1997). These associations are likely to be more flexible than the values themselves, and provide a potential source of future changes in technology choice. Technology diffusion is an integral part of technical change. Uptake of a technology that is locally "new" can be viewed as an innovation. Often, when technology is adopted it is also adapted in some way, or used in an original way. Just as technology development is much more complicated than the simple exploitation of scientific knowledge, Landes (1969), Wallace (1995), Rosenberg (1997), and others emphasize that technology diffusion is highly complex. Wallace emphasizes the importance of an active and creative absorption process in the country that takes up the new technology. The implication of this complexity is that no general rules define "what works." The process of technology adoption is as context dependent as that of the original innovation. Rosenberg (1997) also emphasizes the role of movements of skilled people in the diffusion of technology. Transnational firms often play a strong role in such movements. Other factors that influence the technology transfer process include differences in economic developmental, social and cultural processes, and national policies, such as protectionist measures. Grossman and Helpman (1991), Dosi et al. (1990), and others have attempted to capture some of the complexities in "new growth" and "evolutionary" economic models. They have been able to demonstrate the flaws in some of the simpler solutions to technology diffusion often advocated - for example, they show how free trade might sometimes exacerbate existing gaps in institutions, skills, and technology. The complex interactions that underpin technology diffusion may give rise to regularities at an aggregate level. The geographical and spatial distribution of successive technologies displays patterns similar to those found in the succession of biological species in ecosystems, and also in the succession of social institutions, cultures, myths, and languages. These processes have been analyzed, for example, in Campbell (1959), Marchetti (1980), Grübler and Nakicenovic (1991), and Grübler (1998a). An extensive review of the process of international technology diffusion is available in the IPCC Special Report on Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology Transfer (IPCC, 2000). That report provides a synthesis of the available knowledge and experience of the economic, social and institutional processes involved. Many attempts to endogenize technical change in economic models rely on a linear approach in which technical change is linked to the level of investment in R&D (e.g., Grossman and Helpman, 1991, 1993). More importantly, this linear model has been the basis of many governments' strategies for technological innovation. As mentioned above, important additional features of technological change include uncertainty, the reliance on sources of knowledge other than R&D, "learning by doing" and other phenomena of "increasing returns" that often lead to technological "lock in" and hence great difficulties in introducing new alternatives. These features can be captured to some degree in models and a great deal of experimentation has taken place with different model specifications. However, the first feature, uncertainty, means that models cannot be used to predict the process of technical change. This uncertainty stems partly from lack of knowledge - the outcomes of cutting-edge empirical research simply cannot be predicted. It also stems from the complexity of the influences on technological change, and in particular the social and cultural influences that are extremely difficult to describe in formal models. Recent attempts to endogenize technical change in energy and economic models are reviewed by Azar (1996). Optimization models usually treat technology development as exogenous, but technology deployment as endogenous and driven by relative technology life-cycle costs. A few GHG emission projection models (e.g., Messner, 1997) were developed to incorporate "learning by doing" - the reduction in technology costs and improvement in performance that can result from experience (Arrow, 1962). Models have also been developed that explicitly include technological uncertainty to analyze robust technology policy options (e.g., Grübler and Messner, 1996; Messner et al., 1996). Other models developed more recently incorporate the effects of investment in knowledge and R & D (Goulder and Mathai, 1998). Economists and others who study technological change have developed models that take a variety of dynamics into account (Silverberg, 1988). Some models focus on technologies themselves, for example examining the various sources of "increasing returns to scale" and "lock-in" (Arthur, Messner et al., 1996). Other models developed more recently incorporate the effects of investment in knowledge and R & D (Goulder and Mathai, 1998). Economists and others who study technological change have developed models that take a variety of dynamics into account (Silverberg, 1988). Some models focus on technologies themselves, for example examining the various sources of "increasing returns to scale" and "lock-in" (Arthur, 1989, 1994). Other models focus on firms and other decision-makers, and their processes of information assimilation, imitation, and learning (Nelson and Winter, 1982; Silverberg, 1988; Andersen, 1994). Few of these dynamics, apart from "increasing returns to scale," have been applied to the projection of GHG emissions from the energy sector. 3.5. Agriculture and Land-Use Emissions 3.5.1. Introduction The most important categories of land-use emissions are CO2 from net deforestation, CH4 from rice cultivation, CH4 from enteric fermentation of cattle, and N2O from fertilizer application. These sources account for nearly all the land-use emissions of CO2 (Schimel et al., 1995), about 53% of the land-use emissions of CH4 (Prather, et al., 1995), and about 80% of land-use emissions of N2O (Prather, et al. 1995). These estimates, however, have a high uncertainty. Measurements and analyses of other sources of CH4 and N2O (notably biomass burning, landfills, animal waste, and sewage) are relatively rare, but increasing (Bogner et al., 1997, in the literature. Of the scenarios reviewed for this report (see Table 3-7), about 20 address emissions from agriculture and land-use change (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990; Houghton, 1991; Leggett et al., 1992; Matsuoka and Morita, 1994; Alcamo et al., 1998; Alcamo and Kreileman, 1996; Leemans et al., 1996). Current assessments of GHG emissions indicate that land use or land cover activities make an important contribution to the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere; these are referred to as "land-use emissions" in this report. Of the three most important GHGs, the contribution of land-use emissions to total global CO2 is relatively small (23%), but it is very large for CH4 (74%) and N2O. Furthermore, although land-use emissions make up only a small percentage of global CO2 emissions, they comprise a large part (45%) of CO2 emissions from developing countries, and an even larger percentage of their total CH4 (78%) and N2O (76%) emissions (Pepper et al., 1992). Hence, from a variety of perspectives, the contribution of land-use emissions to total emissions of GHGs is important, and consequently their future trends are relevant to the estimation of climate change and its mitigation. These activities include deforestation, afforestation, changes in agricultural management, and other anthropogenic land-use changes that result in a net flow of GHGs to or from the atmosphere. They exclude natural biogenic emissions and emissions that are not related to anthropogenic activity such as CO2 from volcanoes or volatile organic compounds from forests. We include deforestation in this category of emissions even though this is a process of land-cover change rather than a land-use activity. Table 3-7: Overview of scenarios presented in Section 3.5. Scenario Identification Number Scenario Type(*) Reference 1-2 IS92a IPCC 1992 G R Leggett et al. (1992) 1-3 IS92b IPCC 1992 G R Leggett et al. (1992) 1-4 IS92c IPCC 1992 G R Leggett et al. (1992) 1-5 IS92d IPCC 1992 G R Leggett et al. (1992) 1-6 IS92e IPCC 1992 G R Leggett et al. (1992) 1-7 IS92f IPCC 1992 G R Leggett et al. (1992) 1-8 IS92 S1: IPCC 1992 Sensitivity 1 (High Deforestation, High Biomass) G R Leggett et al. (1992) 2-1 Baseline A IMAGE 2.1 G R Alcamo, et al. (1996) 2-2 Baseline B IMAGE 2.1 G R Alcamo, et al. (1996) 2-3 Baseline C IMAGE 2.1 G R Alcamo, et al. (1996) 2-4 Less B1 Changed Trade G R Leemans, et al. (1996) 2-5 Less B1 No Biofuels G R Alcamo and Kreileman (1996) 2-6 Stab 350 All G R Alcamo and Kreileman (1996) 3-1 AIM, Asian Pacific Integrated Model Land use emission scenario G R Matsuoka and Morita (1994) 7-1 EPA-SCW EPA (Slowly Changing World) G R Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 7-2 EPA-RCW EPA (Rapidly Changing World) G R Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 7-3 EPA-High Reforestation EPA (Halt Deforestation, High Reforestation) G R Lashof and Tirpak (1990) 8-1 H1 Houghton-Population G Houghton (1991) 8-2 H2 Houghton-Exponential Extrapolation G Houghton (1991) * G = global, R = regional. 3.5.2. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Anthropogenic Land-Use Change A variety of changes in land use can result in anthropogenic CO2 emission or absorption. These changes most obviously include permanent deforestation or afforestation. However, many changes in land-management practices also contribute to CO2 fluxes because of changes in standing biomass densities or in soil carbon. Empirical studies of such CO2 fluxes are rare, so that information on current emissions is very poor. Whereas comprehensive information exists for forests globally, only a few countries have detailed information on forest and agricultural land-management practices. Hence, global estimates of CO2 emissions from anthropogenic land-use change, including those in the SRES, tend to be based entirely on net deforestation-afforestation and on average figures for carbon storage per hectare in forests. Emissions of CO2 from deforestation arise mostly from the burning of trees and other vegetation in tropical forests cleared for agricultural use. These emissions also stem from the decomposition of trees harvested for lumber, the burning of wood for fuel, and soil respiration. If harvested wood is replaced by new seedlings, it is normally assumed that the amount of CO2 released by decomposition or burning is compensated by the CO2 taken up during growth of the seedlings and, therefore, that the net emissions of harvested trees is zero. Where net afforestation occurs, net emissions are taken to be negative (i.e. afforestation acts as a sink). As a consequence of inconsistencies in base-year estimates for net changes in forest biomass, emission estimates are normalized relative to their 1990 value before comparison with each other (Figure 3-14). Figure 3-14 also clearly depicts the relative change of emissions with time (Alcamo, et al., 1995; Nakicenovic et al., 1998b). The scenarios of CO2 emissions from land-use change have quite different temporal paths, and show their widest range before the middle of the 21st century (Figure 3-14). Nearly all the scenarios then converge to very low emissions by the end of the century. At their widest point, the scenarios span about a factor of 14. The different sets of scenarios can be grouped into roughly two typical paths: One set declines smoothly after 1990, while the other sharply increases for a few decades after 1990. After the middle of the 21st century most scenarios stabilize or continue to decline because either the driving forces of deforestation equilibrate or because forests are depleted. These processes are discussed further below. By 2100, CO2 scenarios of deforestation range from zero to 30% of their base-year estimates. As emissions from deforestation are more significant in developing regions than industrial regions, few scenarios of CO2 from deforestation are available for industrial regions, so the focus here is on developing regions only. For Asia, emissions in all but one scenario (EPA-SCW, 7-1 in Table 3-7) steadily decline after the base year, and reach 25% or less of their 1990 value in 2100 (Figure 3-14b). For Africa, emissions first increase before eventually decreasing in 2100 to a small fraction of their 1990 value (Figure 3-14c). In this scenario, deforestation rates decline in Asia and Africa because of the depletion of their forests. For Latin America, the wide range of scenarios reflects the wide range of views about its future rates of deforestation (Figure 3-14d). One of the main factors that affects estimates of CO2 from deforestation is the assumed deforestation rate, which is estimated by a wide variety of methods. For example, the IS92a-IS92f scenarios assume that deforested area is proportional to population, with a time lag of 25 years, and that deforestation continues until 25 years after the population stabilizes or until forests are exhausted (Leggett et al., 1992). The IMAGE 2.1 emission estimates are based on computed changes in global land cover, which take into account changing demand for agricultural commodities. Trexler and Haugen (1995) compute the rate of tropical deforestation on a country-by-country basis, and include information from questionnaires. Jepma (1995) uses a combination of three models (a socio-economic model, a wood demand-supply model, and a land-use model), while Palo et al. (1997) correlate deforestation rates with income levels. To further confound this situation, the factors that affect deforestation vary greatly from place to place, and therefore need to be defined as locally as possible. Figure 3-15 presents population assumptions of various deforestation scenarios, together with the assumed or implied deforestation rates on a per capita basis. The shape of the emission curves (Fig. 3-14) follows the shape of the deforestation rate curves, rather than that of the population assumptions. However, the range of emissions is much larger Figure 3-15 presents population assumptions of various deforestation scenarios, together with the assumed or implied deforestation rates on a per capita basis. The shape of the emission curves (Fig. 3-14) follows the shape of the deforestation rate curves, rather than that of the population assumptions. However, the range of emissions is much larger than the range of deforestation rates. Some conclusions can be drawn from these data: • When given on a per capita basis, the range of deforestation rates is perhaps not as great as expected (about a factor of eight) considering the wide range of assumptions and methods used to estimate these rates. • The temporal trend of emissions arises from the temporal trend of deforestation estimates. • The range of emissions is strongly, but not only, influenced by the deforestation rates, and at its widest (a factor 14) can be better explained by the combined range of per capita deforestation rates, population, and carbon density. The role that assumed carbon density of vegetation plays in the estimation of emissions must be considered. To estimate CO2 emissions, it is necessary to estimate the carbon density of vegetation that is burned and decayed when forests are cleared. However, there is wide disagreement in the literature as to typical values of carbon density because of both the many methods used to measure density and the wide variation in the mix of tropical forest vegetation. 3.5.3. Methane Emissions from Rice Production CH4 emissions from rice paddies are an important emission category, and are reviewed in more detail in Wassmann et al. (1993, 1997, 1998), Houghton et al. (1995), and Olivier et al. (1996). CH4 emissions are primarily a function of emission factors and assumed rice cropland area. In turn, emission factors depend on cultivation method (wet versus dry cultivation), water management practices, type of rice variety planted, and cropping patterns. Most long-term scenarios assume that the emission factor of CH4 per unit area of rice cropland remains constant with time, although estimates vary greatly from one scenario reference to another. The many approaches used to estimate the future extent of rice fields result in increases in the global area of rice fields from a factor of 0.8 to one of 1.8 by 2100 (see Alcamo and Swart, 1998, for a brief review). One of the main factors to affect the future area of rice cropland is the assumed long-term improvement in rice productivity. The typical range of estimates for this variable is between 1.0 and 1.6% per year, depending on the region, time horizon, and reference. 3.5.4. Methane Emissions from Enteric Fermentation Estimated emissions of CH4 from enteric fermentation depend on assumptions about emission factors per animal and the number of livestock. As summarized by IPCC (1995), emission factors vary greatly depending on the type of cow, their feed regime, and their productivity. Assumptions for the change in meat production from 1990 to 2100 in existing scenarios vary greatly, by a factor of 1.2 to 4.2. Despite the wide range of assumptions about meat production, emissions of the various scenarios do not vary by more than a factor of two, which indicates that other assumptions (e.g., animal productivity) must compensate for the differences in assumed meat production. As noted above, global estimates can mask significant differences in assumptions about industrial and developing regions. For industrial regions, nearly all scenarios assume a decline in beef production per capita, which is consistent with the current shift away from the consumption of beef to poultry and other protein sources. Meanwhile, the scenarios for developing countries assume a continuing increase in beef consumption, which grew by 3.1% per year between 1982 and 1994, leading to an overall growth of 1.1% per year globally (Rosegrant et al., 1997). Another factor that influences the future number of livestock is the change in animal productivity, that is, the weight of meat or dairy product per animal. The rate of increase in beef productivity dropped in industrial countries from 1.25% per year in 1967-1982 to 0.69% in 1982-1994, but increased from 0.11% per year to 0.61% per year in the developing countries. Similar to emissions from rice fields, emissions from livestock are influenced not only by number of livestock (equivalent to the extent of rice area), but also by changes in the productivity of animals as these alter the CH4 emission factor. Some authors doubt that assumed increases in meat production and animal productivity can be sustained indefinitely. For example, Brown and Kane (1995) argue that livestock production cannot be increased greatly because nearly all of the world's suitable rangelands are intensively exploited already. They claim that the rapidly growing demand for meat and dairy products can only be met by livestock production in feedlots, which would result in a rising demand for feed that requires further development of agricultural land and further GHG emissions. 3.5.5. Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Agriculture Budgets are associated with considerable uncertainties. Agricultural activities and animal production systems are the largest anthropogenic sources of these emissions. Recent calculations using IPCC 1996 revised guidelines indicate that emission from agriculture is 6.2 MtN as N2O per year (IPCC, 1996; Mosier et al., 1998). About one-third is related to direct emissions from the soil, another third is related to N2O emission from animal waste management, and the final third originates from indirect emissions through ammonia (NH3), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and nitrate losses. This compares to earlier estimates of total anthropogenic emissions that range between 3.7 and 7.7 MtN (Houghton et al., 1995). Industrial sources contribute between 0.7 to 1.8 MtN (Houghton et al., 1995; see also Chapter 5, Table 5-3 and Section 3.6.2). Total natural emissions amount to 9.0 ± 3.0 MtN as N2O, so oceans, tropical, and temperate soils are together the most important source of N2O today. Atmospheric concentrations of N2O in 1992 were 311 parts per billion (10^9) by volume (ppbv) (Houghton et al., 1995); the 1993 rate of increase was 0.5 ppbv, somewhat lower than that in the previous decade of approximately 0.8 ppbv per year (Houghton et al., 1996). Among the anthropogenic sources, cultivated soils are the most important, contributing 50 to 70% of the anthropogenic total (see Chapter 5, Table 5-3). This source of N2O is particularly uncertain as the emission level is a complex function of soil type, soil humidity, species grown, amount and type of fertilizer applied, etc. The second largest anthropogenic source of N2O is industry; two processes account for the bulk of industrial emissions - nitric acid (HNO3) and adipic acid production. In both cases N2O is released with the off-gases from the production facilities. Recently, N2O release from animal manure was identified as another significant source of N2O emissions. N2O emissions from agricultural soils occur through the nitrification and denitrification of nitrogen in soils, particularly that from mineral or organic fertilizers. Emissions are very dependent on local management practices, fertilizer types, and climatic and soil conditions, and are calculated by multiplying an emission factor by the sum of mineral and organic nitrogen applied as fertilizer. The emission factor depends on the fertilizer type and local environmental circumstances, and those used in IPCC (1996) result in an assumed loss of 1.25% (range 0.25 to 2.25%) of nitrogen as N2O per year. To estimate the trend in fertilizer use, different references employ different approaches. For example, Leggett et al. (1992) directly estimate the amount of fertilizer used, whereas Alcamo et al. (1996) back-calculate fertilizer use from the future amount of agricultural land. Despite these different approaches, estimates of future fertilizer use are quite consistently given as an increase by about a factor 1.4 to 2.8 between 1990 and 2100. Although the different references are consistent in their findings about future global fertilizer use, the question arises whether these are at all reasonable guesses. Some researchers assume that fertilizer use will increase even more. For example, Kendall and Pimentel (1994) in their "business-as-usual" scenario assume a 300% increase in the use of nitrogen and other fertilizers by 2050. Moreover, most studies of future world food production assume improvements in crop yield. These yield improvements may imply higher overall rates of fertilizer use because many high-yielding crop varieties depend on large amounts of fertilizer. However, some authors question whether global average fertilizer use will grow. For example, Brown and Kane (1995) note that world fertilizer use has actually fallen in recent years and Kroeze (1993) assumes that per capita N2O emissions from fertilizer consumption decrease by 50% in 2100 relative to 1990 through policies that promote the more efficient use of synthetic fertilizers. Future fertilizer use may also be lower than in the "business-as-usual" scenarios because farmers have other incentives to reduce nitrogen fertilizer use, such as to reduce farming costs and avoid nitrate contamination of groundwater. This brief review of the literature on prognoses of fertilizer use indicates that the N2O emission scenarios depicted in Figure 3-16 do not take into account the full range of views about future trends in fertilizer use. Additional uncertainty in future emissions occurs because changes than in the "business-as-usual" scenarios because farmers have other incentives to reduce nitrogen fertilizer use, such as to reduce farming costs and avoid nitrate contamination of groundwater. This brief review of the literature on prognoses of fertilizer use indicates that the N2O emission scenarios depicted in Figure 3-16 do not take into account the full range of views about future trends in fertilizer use. Additional uncertainty in future emissions occurs because changes in the number of livestock, as discussed above for CH4 emissions, and animal husbandry practices will also affect N2O emissions. 3.5.6. Findings Regarding Driving Forces Herein, some of the many specific factors that affect scenarios of land-use emissions have been discussed. From a correlation analysis that compared the influence of changing population, economic activity, and technological change on land-use emission scenarios, Alcamo and Swart (1998) concluded that population was the most influential driving force. The reason is the relationship between population and increasing food demand, which leads to more cows that produce CH4 and more extensive fertilized croplands that release N2O. Although most scenarios also assume that improvements in crop and animal productivity will partly compensate for increasing food demand, some authors do not believe that productivity increases can be sustained. For example, Kendall and Pimentel (1994) show a decrease, rather than increase, in per capita grain production because of less optimistic assumptions about the increase in crop productivity (0.7% per year). Brown and Kane (1995) point out some developments that may slow down productivity: • The backlog of unused agricultural technology (and hence the potential for further agricultural productivity increases) is shrinking. • Demands for water are reducing the ability of the hydrologic cycle to supply irrigation water. • In many countries, the use of additional fertilizer on current crop varieties does not significantly increase their yields. • Industrial countries are losing fertile land to urbanization. Brown and Kane (1995) argue that in recent years rice yields have either stabilized or fallen in many key rice-producing countries, and suggest that dramatically boosting rice yields above a level of 4 tons per hectare may require new technological advances. If the skeptics are right, and the assumed productivity increases of the "business-as-usual" scenarios are not realized, then a greater expanse of cropland would be needed to satisfy the same agricultural demand. This expansion would lead to still higher emissions of CH4 from rice fields and livestock, and more rapid deforestation and earlier peaks in the emissions of CO2. However, the lower increase in productivity probably also implies lower fertilizer use per hectare, which may lower emissions of N2O from fertilized soils. 3.5.7. Conclusions Some of the main findings regarding different categories of land-use emissions are outlined below. Global scenarios of CO2 emissions from deforestation have their widest range around the middle of the 21st century and converge on zero toward the end of the century. The eventual decrease in emissions computed by the scenarios results in part from the assumed slowing of agricultural land expansion in tropical regions. Another reason is some scenarios assume that forests will nearly disappear in Asia and Africa before or around the middle of the 21st century. Most global scenarios of CH4 emissions from rice cultivation show an upward trend until the middle of the 21st century and then stabilize. The global trend is chiefly influenced by estimates for Asia, where more than 80% of these emissions currently originate. Normalized global emissions range by a factor of three in the year 2100. The wide range has mostly to do with different estimates of the future rice cropland area, which is influenced largely by different assumptions about future rice productivity. All global scenarios of CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation show an upward trend until the end of the 21st century. The maximum range of normalized emissions is by a factor of 2.0 (which occurs in the year 2100), the smallest range of the four categories of emissions examined. Also, these emissions have the smallest range of current estimates in the literature, and the smallest range of base-year estimates in the scenarios. Most scenarios of emissions in industrial regions show a stabilizing or decreasing trend, because of the assumption that the number of livestock will continue to decline with decreasing demand for beef and increasing animal productivity. Meanwhile, the assumed economic development in the developing regions will stimulate demand for beef, which leads to an increase in livestock (despite improvements in animal productivity) and higher emissions. Most global scenarios show that N2O emissions from fertilized soils continue to increase up to the end of the 21st century, and the range of estimates of normalized emissions in 2100 exceeds a factor of two. Three of the four categories of emissions show increasing global trends up to the end of the 21st century. The exception is CO2 from deforestation (see above). Hence it is likely that land-use emissions will continue to contribute significantly to the build-up of GHGs in the atmosphere, especially to levels of CH4 and N2O. Studies of mitigation of climate change should take this into account and scenarios of land-use emissions should be included in these studies. Regarding regional scenarios, land-use emissions stabilize or decrease in industrial regions, and increase substantially in Africa, but less so in Asia. Emission trends in Latin America are between those of industrial and developing regions. These regional trends reflect the stabilizing demand for agricultural products and agricultural land in industrial countries, and the assumed continuation of agricultural development elsewhere. 3.6 Other Gas Emissions 3.6.1. Introduction Driving forces of emissions other than CO2 or those of agriculture or land-use changes are discussed here. The direct GHGs N2O and CH4 are discussed first, followed by the indirect GHGs, which include sulfur and the ozone precursors NOx, CO, and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Finally, the many various powerful GHGs, including ozone-depleting substances (ODS), are discussed. The sources and sinks for these gases continue to be highly uncertain. Little research has been carried out to evaluate the influences of socio-economic and technological driving forces on long-term emission trends of these gases. As a rule, future emissions of these gases are included in long-term emission models on the basis of simple relationships to aggregate economic or sector-specific activity drivers, not least because individual source strengths continue to be highly uncertain. Notable exceptions are emissions of sulfur and ODS, which have been more intensively studied in connection with non-climate policy analysis in the domains of regional acidification and stratospheric ozone depletion. 3.6.2. Nitrous Oxide Natural and agricultural soils are the dominant sources of N2O emissions, so future emission levels are governed by the land-use changes and changes in agricultural output and practices discussed in Section 3.5.2. Nevertheless, other sources are also important and are discussed here. The dominant industrial sources are the production of HNO3 and adipic acid. The key driver for the production of HNO3 is the demand for fertilizer. Hence this emission source is closely related to the agricultural production driving forces discussed in Section 3.5, as well as to improvements in production technologies. Adipic acid, (CH2)4(COOH)2, is a feedstock for nylon production and one of the largest-volume synthetic chemicals produced in the world each year - current annual global production is 1.8 million metric tons (Stevens III, 1993). Production has an associated by-product of 0.3 kg N2O/kg adipic acid for unabated emission, which at present results in a global emission of about 0.4 MtN as N2O annually. Emissions mostly arise in the OECD countries, which accounted for some 95% of global adipic acid production in 1990 (Davis and Kemp, 1991). Fenhann (2000) reviews the (sparse) scenario literature and concludes that future emissions will be determined mostly by two variables - demand growth as a result of growth in economic activity and progressively phased-in emission controls. By the early 1990s, it was estimated that about one-third of OECD emissions had been abated (Stevens III, 1993). This abatement is an accidental result of the treatment of flue-gases in a reductive furnace (thermal destruction) to reduce NOx emissions, which coincidentally also converts about 99% of the N2O into nitrogen gas (N2). In other regions only about 20% of emissions had been abated by the early 1990s. Major adipic acid producers worldwide have agreed to substantially reduce N2O emissions by 1996 to 1998. In July 1991 they formed an inter-industry group to share information on old and new technologies developed for N2O abatement, such as improved thermal destruction, conversion into nitric oxide for recycling, and the promising low-temperature catalytic decomposition into N2 currently being developed by DuPont. The introduction of all three technologies could result in a 99% reduction of N2O emissions from adipic acid production (Storey, 1996). They are expected to be introduced at plants owned by Asahi (Japan), BASF and Bayer (Germany), DuPont (US), and Rhône-Poulenc (France) (Chemical Week, 1994). After the planned changes, US producers will have abated over 90% of the N2O emissions from adipic acid production. In recent years nylon-6.6 production dropped in the US, Western Europe, and Japan, largely in response to capacity and production in other Asian countries. By 2000 production is expected to recover in these countries (Storey, 1996). Another major source of N2O is the transport sector. Gasoline vehicles without catalytic converters have very low, sometimes immeasurably small, emissions of N2O. However, vehicles equipped with three-way catalytic converters have N2O emissions that range from 0.01 to 0.1 g/km in new catalysts, and from 0.16 to 0.22 g/km in aging catalysts (IPCC, 1996). Emission levels also depend on precise engine running in these countries (Storey, 1996). Another major source of N2O is the transport sector. Gasoline vehicles without catalytic converters have very low, sometimes immeasurably small, emissions of N2O. However, vehicles equipped with three-way catalytic converters have N2O emissions that range from 0.01 to 0.1 g/km in new catalysts, and from 0.16 to 0.22 g/km in aging catalysts (IPCC, 1996). Emission levels also depend on precise engine running conditions. At the upper end of the emission range from aging catalysts, N2O emissions contribute around 25% of the in-use global warming impact of driving (Michaelis et al., 1996). The introduction of catalytic converters as a pollution control measure in the majority of industrialized countries is resulting in a substantial increase in N2O emissions from gasoline vehicles. Several Annex I countries include projections of N2O from this source in their national communications to the UNFCCC, using a variety of projection methods (for example, Environment Canada, 1997; UNFCCC, 1997; VROM, 1997). The projections from these countries differ substantially in the contribution that transport is expected to make to their national N2O emissions in 2020, ranging from about 10% in France to over 25% in Canada. They anticipate that mitigation measures will be much more effective in reducing industrial and agricultural emissions of N2O than mobile source emissions. Indeed, little research has been carried out to identify catalytic converter technologies that result in lower N2O emissions. However, emissions are likely to be lower in countries that require regular emission inspections and replacement of faulty pollution control equipment. 3.6.3. Methane Agricultural and land-use change emission drivers are discussed in Section 3.5.2. The other major sources are from the use of fossil fuels and the disposal of waste, for which the driving forces are briefly reviewed here. The earlier literature is reviewed in Barnes and Edmonds (1990). A more detailed recent literature review is given in Gregory (1998). Emissions from the extraction, processing, and use of fossil fuels will be driven by future fossil fuel use. CH4 emissions from venting during oil and gas production may decrease because of efforts to reduce them (IGU, 1997b). Flaring and venting volumes from oil and gas operations peaked in 1976 to 1978, but a gradual reduction in volumes of gas flared and vented has occurred over the past 20 years (Boden et al., 1994; Marland et al., 1998; Stern and Kaufmann, 1998). Shell International Ltd. (1998) estimated a reduction in its own emissions from venting by 1 MtCH4 per year to 0.367 MtCH4 in the five years to 1997. The IEA Greenhouse Gases R&D Programme (1997) notes that emission reductions from the oil and gas sector would yield a high economic return. Additionally, new natural gas developments generally use the latest technology and are almost leak free compared to older systems. Taking all these factors into account, it seems plausible that CH4 emissions from the oil and gas sector should fall as the 21st century progresses. Nonetheless, the primary driver (oil and gas production) is likely to expand significantly in the future, depending on resource availability and technological change. A representative range from the literature, for example the scenarios described in Nakicenovic et al. (1998a), indicates substantial uncertainty in which future levels of oil and gas production could range between 130 and some 900 EJ. Assuming a constant emission factor, future CH4 emissions from oil and gas could range from a decline compared to current levels to a fourfold increase. With the more likely assumption of declining emission factors, future emission levels would be somewhat lower than suggested by this range. The concentrations of CH4 in coal seams are low close to the surface, and hence emissions from surface mining are also low (IEA CIAB, 1992). Concentrations at a few hundred meters or deeper can be more significant; releases from these depths are normally associated with underground mining. Emissions per ton of coal mined can vary widely both from country to country and at adjacent mines within a country (IEA Greenhouse Gases R&D Programme, 1996a). CH4 mixed with air in the right proportions is an explosive mixture and a danger to miners. Measures to capture and drain the CH4 are common in many countries – the captured CH4, if of adequate concentration, can be a valuable energy source. The techniques currently used reduce total emissions by about 10%. Many older, deeper coal mines in Europe are being closed, which will reduce emissions. Replacement coal mines tend to be in exporting countries with low cost reserves near the surface, so the emissions will be low. For the future, emissions will depend principally on the proportion of coal production from deep mines and on total coal production. A representative range of future coal production scenarios given in Nakicenovic et al. (1998a) indicates a very wide range of uncertainty. Future coal production levels could range anywhere from 14 to well over 700 EJ, between a sevenfold decrease to an eightfold increase compared to 1990 levels. Conversely, CH4 capture, either during mining or prior to mining, not only reduces risk to miners but also provides a valuable energy source. Thus, rising levels of CH4 capture for non-climate reasons are likely to characterize the 21st century. This would in particular apply to high coal production scenarios, in which most of the coal will need to come from deep mining once the easily accessible surface mine deposits have become exhausted. Growth in future emissions from coal mining is therefore likely to be substantially lower than growth in coal production. Domestic and some industrial wastes contain organic matter that emits a combination of CO2 and CH4 on decomposition (IEA Greenhouse Gases R&D Programme, 1996b). If oxygen is present, most of the waste degrades by aerobic micro-organisms and the main product is CO2. If no oxygen is present, different micro-organisms become active and a mixture of CO2 and CH4 is produced. Decay by this mechanism can take months or even years (US EPA, 1994). Traditionally, waste has been dumped in open pits and this is still the main practice in most developing countries. Thus, oxygen is present and the main decay product is CO2. In recent decades, health and local environmental concerns in developed countries have resulted in better waste management, with lined pits and a cap of clay, for example, added regularly over newer dumps. This prevents fresh supplies of oxygen becoming available so the subsequent decay process is anaerobic and CH4 is produced. Williams (1993) notes that landfill sites are complex and highly variable biologic systems and many factors can lead to a wide variability in CH4 production. For the future, increasing wealth and urbanization in developing countries may lead to more managed landfill sites and to more CH4 production. However, the CH4 produced can be captured and utilized as a valuable energy source, or at least flared for pollution and safety reasons; indeed, this is a legal requirement in the USA for large landfills. Future emissions are therefore unlikely to evolve linearly with population growth and waste generation, but the scenario literature is extremely sparse on this subject – the major source remains the previous IS92 scenario series (Pepper et al., 1992). Different methods are used to treat domestic sewage, some of which involve anaerobic decomposition and the production of CH4. Again, capture and use of some of the CH4 produced limits emissions. For the future, emissions will depend on the extension of sewage treatment in developing countries, the extent to which the techniques used enhance or limit CH4 production, and the extent to which the CH4 produced is captured and used. Several authors, including Rudd et al. (1993) and Fearnside (1995), note that some hydroelectric schemes result in emissions of CH4 from decaying vegetation trapped by water as the dams fill; these emissions climatically exceed those of a thermopower plant delivering the same electricity. Rosa et al. (1996), Rosa and Schaffer (1994), and Gagnon and van de Vate (1997) point out that the two schemes discussed by Rudd et al. (1993) and Fearnside (1995) may be exceptional, with very large reservoir surface areas, a high density of organic matter, and low power output. Gagnon and van de Vate (1997) estimate the combined CH4 and N2O emissions from hydroelectric schemes at 5.5 gC equivalent per kWh compared to a range of 80 to 200 gC equivalent per kWh for a modern fossil power station (Rogner and Khan, 1998); that is, hydroelectric power emits less than 3% and 7%, respectively. While some GHG emissions from new hydroelectric schemes are expected in the future, especially in tropical settings (Galy-Lacaux et al., 1999), in the absence of more comprehensive field data, such schemes are regarded as a lower source of CH4 emissions compared to those of other energy sector or agricultural activities. Hydroelectric power is therefore not treated as a separate emission category in SRES. In summary, numerous factors could lead to increases in emissions of CH4 in the future, primarily related to the expansion of agricultural production and greater fossil fuel use. Recent studies also identify a number of processes and trends that could reduce CH4 emission factors and hence may lead to reduced emissions in the future. These trends are not yet sufficiently accounted for in the literature, in which CH4 emission factors typically are held constant. The overall consequence is to introduce additional uncertainty into projections, as the future evolution of such emission factors is unclear. However, from the above discussion, the least likely future is one of constant emission factors and the range of future emissions is likely to be lower than those projected in previous scenarios with comparable growth in primary activity drivers. 3.6.4. Sulfur Dioxide Two major sets of driving forces influence future SO2 emissions: • Level and structure of energy supply and end-use, and (to a lesser extent) levels of industrial output and process mix. • The degree of SO2-control factors and the range of future emissions is likely to be lower than those projected in previous scenarios with comparable growth in primary activity drivers. 3.6.4. Sulfur Dioxide Two major sets of driving forces influence future SO₂ emissions: • Level and structure of energy supply and end-use, and (to a lesser extent) levels of industrial output and process mix. • The degree of SO₂-control policy intervention assumed (i.e., level of environmental policies implemented to limit SO₂ emissions). Grübler (1998c) reviewed the literature and empirical evidence, and showed that both clusters of driving forces are linked to the level of economic development. With increasing affluence, energy use per capita rises and its structure changes away from traditional solid fuels (coal, lignite, peat, fuelwood) toward cleaner fuels (gas or electricity) at the point of end-use. This structural shift combined with the greater emphasis on urban air quality that accompanies rising incomes results in a roughly inverted U (IU) pattern of SO₂ emissions and/or concentrations. Emissions rise initially (with growing per capita energy use), pass through a maximum, and decline at higher income levels due to structural change in the end-use fuel mix and also control measures for large point sources. This pattern emerges also from the literature on environmental Kuznets curves (e.g., World Bank, 1992; IIASA-WEC, 1995) and is corroborated by both longitudinal and cross-sectional empirical data reviewed in detail in Grübler (1998c). Historically, the decline in sulfur pollution levels was achieved simply by dispersion of pollutants (tall stacks policy). Subsequently, the actual emissions also started to decline, as a result of both structural change (substitution of solids by gas and electricity as end-use fuels) and sulfur reduction measures (oil product desulfurization and scrubbing of large point sources). Emissions for 1990 reported in the scenarios reviewed in Chapter 2 and in Grübler (1998c) indicate a range from 55 to 91 MtS. The upper range is explained largely by a lack of complete coverage of SO₂ emission sources in long-term scenario studies and models. Lower values correspond to studies that include only the dominant energy sector emissions (range of 59.7 to 65.4 MtS), and higher estimates also include other sources, most notably metallurgical and from biomass burning. None of the long-term scenario studies appears to include SO₂ emissions from international bunker (shipping) fuels, estimated at 3 ± 1 MtS in 1990 (Olivier et al., 1996; Corbett et al., 1999; Smith et al., 2000). Historical global sulfur emissions estimates are given in Dignon and Hameed (1989). Grübler (1998c) also argues that SO₂ control and intervention policies in many rapidly industrializing countries (particularly those with high population densities) are highly likely to be phased in more quickly than the historical experience of Europe, North America, Japan, or Korea. This analysis is supported by existing policies and trends in Brazil, China, and India (Shukla et al., 1999; Rosa and Schechtman, 1996; Qian and Zhang, 1998). Most recent SO₂ emission inventory data suggest that since 1990 SO₂ emission growth has significantly slowed in East Asia compared to earlier forecasts, in response to the first SO₂ control measures implemented in China, South Korea and Thailand (Streets and Waldhoff, 2000). Dadi et al. (1998) estimate that in 1995 about 11% (1.5 MtS of a total of 13.5 MtS gross emissions) of China's SO₂ emissions were removed through various control measures. The evaluation of the IS92 scenarios (Alcamo et al., 1995) concluded that the projected SO₂ emissions in the IS92 scenarios do not reflect recent changes in sulfur-related environmental legislation, in particular the amendments to the Clean Air Act in the USA, and the Second European Sulfur Protocol. Increasingly, many developing countries are adopting sulfur control legislation that ranges from reduction of sulfur contents in oil products (e.g. China, Thailand, and India; see Streets et al., 2000), through a maximum sulfur content in coal (e.g. in China; see Streets and Waldhoff, 2000), to SO₂ controls at coal-fired power plants (e.g. China, South Korea, Thailand; for a review see IEA, 1999). For instance, an estimated 3575 MW of coal-fired electricity in China is generated by plants already equipped with sulfur control devices (IEA, 1999). Since publication of the IS92 scenarios a number of important new sulfur impact studies have become available, and analyzed in particular: • Implications of acidic deposition levels of high SO₂ emissions scenarios such as IS92a (Amann et al., 1995; Posch et al., 1996). • Aggregate ecosystems impacts, especially whether critical loads for acidification are exceeded given deposition levels and different buffering capacities of soils (Amann et al., 1995; Posch et al., 1996). • Direct vegetation damage, particularly on food crops (Fischer and Rosenzweig, 1996). These studies provide further information on the impacts of high concentrations and deposition of SO₂ emissions, beyond the well-documented impacts on human health, ecosystems productivity, and material damages (for reviews see Crutzen and Graedel, 1986; WHO and UNEP, 1993; WMO, 1997). These studies are particularly important because they document environmental changes of high-emission scenarios by using detailed representations of the numerous non-linear dose-response relationships between emissions, atmospheric concentrations, deposition, ecosystems sensitivity thresholds, and impacts. All recent studies agree that unabated high SO₂ emissions along the lines of IS92a or even above would yield high impacts not only for natural ecosystems and forests, but also for economically important food crops and human health, especially in Asia where emissions growth is projected to be particularly high. A representative result (based on Amann et al., 1995) is shown in Figure 3-17, which contrasts 1990 European sulfur deposition levels with those of Asia by 2050 in a high SO₂ emission scenario (very close to IS92a). Typically, in such scenarios, SO₂ emissions in Asia alone could surpass current global levels as early as 2020 (Amann et al., 1995; Posch et al., 1996). Sulfur deposition above 5 g/m² per year occurred in Europe in 1990 in the area of the borders of the Czech Republic, Poland, and Germany (the former GDR), often referred to as the "black triangle." In view of its ecological impacts it was officially designated by UNEP as an "ecological disaster zone." In a scenario such as IS92a (or even higher emissions), similar high sulfur deposition would occur by around 2020 over more than half of Eastern China, large parts of southern Korea, and some smaller parts of Thailand and southern Japan. Fischer and Rosenzweig (1996) assessed the combined impacts of climate change and acidification of agricultural crops in Asia for such a scenario. Their overall conclusion was that the projected likely regional climate change would largely benefit agricultural output in China, whereas it would lower agricultural productivity on the Indian subcontinent (the combined effect of projected temperature and precipitation changes would have differential impacts across various crops and subregions). However, projected high levels of acidic deposition in China would reduce agricultural output to an extent that would more than offset any possible beneficial impacts of regional climate change. This is primarily because sulfur (and nitrogen) deposition, while acting as fertilizer for plant growth at lower deposition levels, negatively affects plant growth at higher deposition levels. Projections in a scenario such as IS92a are that the threshold levels will be surpassed between 2020 and 2050 for all major Asian food crops. The review of recent literature on acidification impact studies given in Grübler (1998c) concludes that the impacts on human health, on economically important food crops, and on ecosystems are so substantial as to render any scenario with SO₂ emissions as high as, or higher than, IS92a very unlikely. Grübler (1998c) carried out a detailed comparison of SO₂ emissions scenarios at the global and regional level. He concluded that the range of future SO₂ emissions spanned by the previous high-demand IPCC scenarios (all IS92 scenarios except IS92c and IS92d) corresponded well with scenarios available in the literature that do not include any direct sulfur-emissions control or indirect intervention measures and policies (Figure 3-18). Typically, in such scenarios, global SO₂ emissions could rise to between 130 and 250 MtS by 2100, and in some older scenarios (Matsuoka et al., 1994; Morita et al., 1994) are projected to rise above that level. Interestingly, all long-term sulfur scenarios published since 1995 do not judge this to be a likely (not to mention environmentally desirable) possibility. Representative sulfur-emissions control and intervention scenarios (Amann et al., 1995; Posch et al., 1996; Nakicenovic et al., 1998a) suggest instead an upper range of global emissions below 100 MtS by 2050 and below 120 MtS by 2100, a range covered in the two low variants IS92c and IS92d only. These patterns were also confirmed by Pepper et al. (1998) in a recent re-analysis of the previous IS92 scenarios. Using the same methodology as deployed in developing the IS92 scenarios, the revised scenarios have maximum global SO₂ emissions below 142 MtS by 2020, and 56 MtS by 2100 (EPA3 and EPA5 scenarios, respectively). The median from the more recent scenario literature analyzed in Grübler (1998c) indicates near-constant global SO₂ emissions – 77 MtS by 2020, 68 MtS by 2060, and 57 MtS by 2100. This global stability, however, masks decisive regional differences (discussed above). Emissions in the OECD countries will continue their declining trends in line with their sulfur reduction policies. Emissions outside OECD will rise initially with increasing energy demand, but sulfur controls will be progressively phased in to mitigate against impacts of high unabated SO₂ emissions on health, agriculture, ecosystems, and tourism. The need to abate local MtS by 2060, and 57 MtS by 2100. This global stability, however, masks decisive regional differences (discussed above). Emissions in the OECD countries will continue their declining trends in line with their sulfur reduction policies. Emissions outside OECD will rise initially with increasing energy demand, but sulfur controls will be progressively phased in to mitigate against impacts of high unabated SO2 emissions on health, agriculture, ecosystems, and tourism. The need to abate local air pollution, including SO2 emissions, is not only environmental, but also economic. For example, according to the World Bank (1997c, 1997d) the current damage by environmental pollution is about 8% of GDP in China (and up to 20% of production in urban areas), while abatement costs would be between 1 and 2.5% of GDP. According to one World Bank (1997c) report, the costs are “so high under the business-as-usual scenario that it is hardly necessary to consider the amenity and ecosystem benefits of cleaner air to justify action.” Therefore, it is no surprise that in several developing regions, policies are already being developed and implemented to abate SO2 emissions. In China, by 1995 coal-cleaning technology had been developed, and de-sulfurizing technology introduced and applied (Government of People’s Republic of China, 1996). The SO2 emissions target set by the Chinese government is 12.3 MtS by 2000 as compared to 11.9 MtS in 1995. Economic instruments, such as pollution charges, pricing policy, favorable terms of investment for environmental technology, market creation, and ecological compensation fees, are being introduced in China now (UNEP, 1999). By June 1997, some 64,000 enterprises with heavy pollutant emissions had been closed for refurbishment or had ceased production. As a consequence, ambient concentrations of sulfur have been relatively stable in medium-size and small cities, and they have actually decreased in large cities. This change is occurring at significantly lower levels of income as compared to income levels in the USA and Europe at the time when their sulfur abatement started. In India, several sulfur policies are being introduced currently, including mandatory washing of coal used 500 km away from the mine mouth, a policy that is expected to significantly reduce SO2 emissions from coal use. Some refineries have already advertised their investments (and efforts) to meet this standard. In a landmark case on the Taj trapezium (a 10,400 km² area surrounding the Taj Mahal), the Supreme Court of India has ordered a limit on the sulfur content of diesel sold in this area to within 0.25% (Shukla, personal communication). The Indian government has spent US$1.34 billion to reduce the sulfur content in diesel from 1% to 0.25% by weight (Mr. K.P. Shahi, Advisor to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, as quoted in Down to Earth, February 15, 1999, page 15). These policies already have had an effect on emissions. Streets et al. (2000) analyzed the impact since 1990 of these policies and new energy and emissions factor data on emissions in Asia.¹ They found that emissions may have increased in Asia from 16.9 MtS in 1990 to only 19.3 MtS in 1995, rather than to the 26.7 MtS projected in the earlier studies with the RAINS-ASIA model. The authors conclude that SO2 emissions in Asia have not grown nearly as fast as was thought likely in the early 1990s, with major implications for projections beyond the year 2000. It is probable that the emissions trajectory will be even lower as a result of increasing environmental awareness in many countries of Southeast Asia and East Asia, the implementation of China’s “two-control-zone” policy, and the downturn of Southeast Asia economies in the late 1990s (Streets et al., 2000). In Latin America, the contribution of coal-fired power plants to total power generation is relatively low and consequently SO2 emissions are lower than those in other regions. This contribution is not expected to increase significantly in the future. It is expected that the rate of increase of SO2 emissions in Latin America will be reduced because environmental agencies in several Latin American countries are already enforcing strict SO2 emissions standards. Also, increases in power generation are expected to be mainly from combined cycle natural gas plants (La Rovere and Americano, 1998). Different methodologies have been developed to assess the sulfur control scenarios in integrated assessment models. Grübler (1998c) has summarized the literature, and classifies three main modeling approaches: • Ecological targets, and analysis of events when critical acidification loads are exceeded (e.g., Amann et al., 1995; Foell et al., 1995; Hettelingh et al., 1995; Posch et al., 1996; Nakicenovic et al., 1997). • The pollutant burden approach (e.g., Alcamo et al., 1997). • Income driven approaches (e.g., Smith et al., 2000). Although models differ in their analytical representation of the driving forces of sulfur reduction policies and also provide a range of possible futures, invariably all scenarios yield comparatively low future SO2 emissions. Alcamo et al. (1997) estimates a 95% probability that global SO2 emissions will be below 120 MtS by 2050 and decline thereafter. Their 50% probability level suggests emissions of 90 MtS by 2050 and 57 MtS by 2100, the latter being identical to the median from the scenario literature analyzed in Chapter 2. Increasingly, energy sector and integrated assessment models are able to link regional acidification models with simplified climate models, which enables joint analysis of sulfur and climate policies and impacts. Examples include the IMAGE model (Posch et al., 1996) and the IIASA model (Rogner and Nakicenovic, 1996; McDonald, 1999; Riahi and Roehl, 2000), which are linked with the acidification model RAINS for Europe and Asia, or the AIM (Morita et al., 1994) model for Asia. These models extend earlier energy sector models that dealt with a comparative costs assessment of isolated sulfur and carbon reductions and joint mitigation, such as the OECD GREEN model (Complainville and Martins, 1994) or the IIASA MESSAGE model (Grübler, 1998b; Nakicenovic et al., 1998a). The state of knowledge and availability of models to study the joint benefits of sulfur and carbon emission reductions was reviewed in the 1995 IPCC SAR WGIII Report (Bruce et al., 1996) and is expanding rapidly (CIRED et al., 1997; Nakicenovic et al., 1997; Grübler, 1998c). 3.6.5. Ozone Precursors IPCC Working Group I (WGI) SAR (Houghton et al., 1996) confirmed the importance of tropospheric ozone as a greenhouse gas. Ozone is produced in the troposphere in a complex chain of reactions that involve the ozone precursors nitrogen oxides (NOx), non-CH4 hydrocarbons or volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), and CO. Therefore, it is important to explore possible future developments of emissions of these substances to analyze the evolution of tropospheric ozone levels. 3.6.5.1. Nitrogen Oxides NOx are released through fossil fuel combustion (24 MtN per year around 1990), natural and anthropogenic soil release (12 MtN per year), biomass burning (8 MtN per year), lightning (5 MtN per year), NH3 oxidation (3 MtN per year), aircraft (0.4 MtN/year), and transport from the stratosphere (0.1 MtN per year). These figures are mean estimates within a range; for fossil fuel combustion, aircraft emissions, and stratospheric input the ranges may be as narrow as 30%, but for natural sources the ranges may be up to a factor of 2 (Prather et al., 1995). The uncertainties in the estimates are illustrated by comparison of the detailed emissions inventory of Olivier et al. (1996) with the 1994 IPCC estimates – while global total emissions estimates by source are very similar, at the regional level emissions estimates show pronounced differences, particularly in Asia. Fossil fuel combustion in the electric power and transport sectors is the largest source. Emissions from fossil fuel use in North America and Europe have barely increased since 1979 because fossil fuel consumption leveled off and air quality abatement was enacted, but in Asia emissions are believed to increase by 4% annually (Prather et al., 1995). As a result of the first NOx Protocol in Europe, NOx emissions in Europe had decreased from 1987 levels by 13% in 1994, but the European Union is unlikely to meet its target of the 5th European Action Plan of a 30% reduction (EEA, 1999). An important reason is that it is difficult to abate NOx emissions in the growing transport sector. Perhaps critically, there are significant differences between the characteristics of abatement of SO2 and NOx emissions. While both substances have regional acidification effects, a priority for SO2 abatement is induced by its important local health effects. Also, whereas SO2 emissions relate closely to the type of fuel, NOx emissions are more dependent on the combustion technology and conditions. Few scenarios for NOx emissions exist beyond the studies for Europe, North America, and Japan (IS92 scenarios are a notable exception). New scenarios, such as those by Bouwman and van Vuuren (1999) and Collins et al. (1999) often still use IS92a as a “loose” baseline, with new abatement policies added as they were introduced in the OECD countries after 1992, according to current reduction plans (CRP). Collins et al. (1999) also explore a maximum feasible reduction scenario, in which European NOx emissions decrease by 60% by 2015 and North American emissions by 5%. In the related CRP scenario of Bouwman and van Vuuren (1999), NOx emissions in the developing countries are assumed to decrease also (by more than 10%) by 2015. These studies, however, should be used with care as the ¹ East Asia including China, Southeast Asia, and the Indian subcontinent according to current reduction plans (CRP). Collins et al. (1999) also explore a maximum feasible reduction scenario, in which European NOx emissions decrease by 60% by 2015 and North American emissions by 5%. In the related CRP scenario of Bouwman and van Vuuren (1999), NOx emissions in the developing countries are assumed to decrease also (by more than 10%) by 2015. These studies, however, should be used with care as the authors developed their somewhat arbitrary scenarios primarily for atmospheric chemistry analysis; they are not based on an in-depth analysis of the characteristics of the emissions sources and potential policies in the various regions outside the OECD. 3.6.5.2. Carbon Monoxide and Non-Methane Hydrocarbons Prather et al. (1995) estimates the total global emissions of CO at 1800 to 2700 MtC per year in the decade before 1994. The most important of the approximately 1000 TgC anthropogenic sources are technological (300 to 550 MtC per year) and biomass burning (300 to 700 MtC per year). Technological sources dominate in the northern hemisphere, and include transport, combustion, industrial processes, and refuse incineration. Biomass burning dominates in the southern hemisphere, and includes burning of agricultural waste, savanna burning, and deforestation. The detailed, geographically explicit EDGAR database (Olivier et al., 1996) has similar emissions estimates for CO. Other sources are biogenics (60 to 160 MtC per year), oceans (20 to 200 MtC per year), and oxidation of CH4 (400 to 1000 MtC per year) and of NMVOCs (200 to 600 MtC per year). To a large extent, this oxidation may be considered anthropogenic in origin because many emissions sources of CH4 and NMVOCs are of an anthropogenic nature. Global emissions estimates of NMVOCs are also very uncertain. Prather et al. (1995) indicate a global total for anthropogenic NMVOCs of about 140 MtC per year, from road transport (25%), solvent use (14%), fuel production and distribution (13%), fuel consumption (34%), and the rest from uncontrolled burning and other sources. The EDGAR inventory by Olivier et al. (1996) suggests that global emissions may be higher (178 MtC per year) because of higher estimates of emissions from energy production and use. As with CO, emissions in the northern hemisphere are dominated by transport and industry, while in the southern hemisphere biomass and biofuel burning is often the dominant source. In Europe, emissions of NMVOCs are controlled under the 5th Environmental Action Programme of the European Union and the VOC Protocol of the UN Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. However, for reasons similar to those for NOx, the current reduction of 11% with respect to 1990 levels and 15% with respect to 1987 levels suggests that the planned reduction to 30% in 1999 may not be reached (EEA, 1999). As a consequence, threshold values for ozone continue to be exceeded in Europe. No long-term global scenarios for emissions of NMVOCs and CO were identified beyond IS92, which assumes increasing emissions. The important role of biomass combustion in these emissions means that a scenario with low carbon emissions because of an increased use of biomass energy does not automatically lead to low emissions of NMVOCs and CO. Also, emissions trends are influenced significantly by assumptions as to the type of combustion or other conversion technology (e.g., gasification) deployed in the future. If biomass fuel is used in modern large power plants or boilers, or is to be converted into modern energy carriers, CO emissions will be almost negligible compared to those of traditional uses. As with sulfur, however, it seems plausible that with rising incomes, abatement of the ozone precursors may be initiated in non-OECD regions to address local and particularly regional air pollution (photochemical smog). Since control of these substances is more difficult than that of sulfur, it may not be implemented until later. 3.6.6. Halocarbons and Other Industrial Gases This category of GHG emissions comprises a wide basket of different gas species that originate from a multitude of processes. Generally, their common characteristic is that they are released into the atmosphere in comparatively small amounts, but on a molecular basis most of the gases are long-lived, with atmospheric lifetimes up to 50,000 years. Generally they have a strong greenhouse forcing per molecule (see Chapter 5, Table 5-7). Anthropogenic emissions of gases that cause stratospheric ozone depletion (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), halons, methylchloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and methylbromide) are controlled by consumption restrictions (production plus imports minus exports) in the Montreal Protocol. No special SRES scenarios were developed for these gases because their future emission levels (phase out) are primarily policy driven and hence unrelated to scenario variations of important driving-force variables such as population, economic growth, or industrial output. Instead, the Montreal Protocol scenario (A3, maximum allowed production scenario) from the 1998 WMO/UNEP Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion is used (WMO/UNEP, 1998). The procedures for constructing scenarios for hydrofluorocarbon (HFC), polyfluorocarbon (PFC), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) emissions - for which there is an extreme paucity of scenario literature - are based on Fenhann (2000) and are described in greater detail in Chapter 5, Section 5.3.3. In this approach, future total demand for CFCs, HFCs, and other CFC substitutes is estimated on the basis of historical trends. HFC emissions are calculated using an assumed future replacement of CFCs by HFCs and other substitutes. The main drivers for the emissions are population and GDP growth. The sparse literature available (reviewed in Fenhann, 2000) indicates that emissions are related non-linearly to these driving forces, with important possibilities for saturation effects and long-term decoupling between growth in driving force variables and emissions. The emissions have been tuned to agree with emissions scenarios presented at the joint IPCC-TEAP expert meeting (WMO/UNEP, 1999). Material from the March Consulting Group (1999) has also been used. For PFCs (CF4 and C2F6) the emissions driver is primary aluminum production, which is generally modeled using GDP and a consumption elasticity. Recycling rates are increasingly important, as reflected in the SRES scenarios (see Chapter 5). Aluminum production by the Soederberg process resulted, on average, in the emission of 0.45 kg CF4 per tAl and 0.02 kg C2F6 per tAl in 1998 in Norway. The effect of future technological change on the emissions factor can be assumed to be large, since the costs of modifications in process technology can be offset by the costs of saved energy. A considerable reduction in the emission factors has already taken place and the present emission factor of 0.5 kg CF4 per tAl is expected to fall to 0.15 kg CF4 per tAl at various rates (see Chapter 5). An emission factor for C2F6, 10 times lower than that of CF4 was used in the calculations. The present trend of not replacing CFCs and HCFCs with high global warming compounds like PFCs (or SF6) is also assumed to continue, which might underestimate the effect of future emissions. The only other source included for PFC emissions is semiconductor manufacturing, for which the industry has globally adopted a voluntary agreement to reduce its PFC emissions by 10% in 2010 relative to 1995 levels. SF6 emissions originate from two main activities - the use of SF6 as a gas insulator in high-voltage electricity equipment, and its use in magnesium foundries, in which SF6 prevents the oxidation of molten magnesium. The driver for the former is electricity demand and for the latter it is future magnesium production, which will depend on GDP and a consumption elasticity. Emission factor reductions over time that result from more careful handling, recovery, recycling, and substitution of SF6 are assumed for both sources. Fenhann (2000) assumes that in low future scenarios SF6 emissions factors decline to one-tenth their present values between 2020 and 2090. In high future scenarios, Fenhann (2000) assumes reduction levels are somewhat lower, ranging from 55% to 90% depending on the region. In the absence of scenario literature, these assumptions are retained here (see Chapter 5). Other applications of SF6 include as a tracer gas in medical surgery and the production of semiconductors, and as an insulator in some windows. However, these sources are assumed to cause less than 1% of the global emissions. 3.7. Policies 3.7.1. Introduction "Policies" in this report are government policies. They are formulated against the larger background of national and international events and trends, and result from millions of decisions within the existing and only slowly changing cultural, economic, and military balances. Their implementation often poses considerable problems if they represent longer-term interests and insights. Government policies are among the dynamics that influence population growth, economic and social development, technological change, resource exploitation, and pollution management. While the role of policy has been touched upon occasionally in earlier sections, government policy development can be thought of as a process in itself. The role of policies in SRES needs to be considered, partly because governments are one of the primary audiences for the scenarios and partly because the scenarios are intended to form a reference against which mitigation strategies can be assessed (although, as stated earlier, the SRES terms of reference require the SRES scenarios to not consider any explicit climate policies). GHG emissions are affected by policies designed for a wide variety of purposes. Perhaps the most obvious are energy policies, but other important policy areas are those of economic development, technology development, education, health, social welfare, transport, industry, agriculture, and forestry. Policies in each of these areas also affect other areas. In each policy area various instruments are used. The choice of instrument may influence both the policy's success in achieving its primary objective and its effect on GHG emissions. Taxes, subsidies, of purposes. Perhaps the most obvious are energy policies, but other important policy areas are those of economic development, technology development, education, health, social welfare, transport, industry, agriculture, and forestry. Policies in each of these areas also affect other areas. In each policy area various instruments are used. The choice of instrument may influence both the policy's success in achieving its primary objective and its effect on GHG emissions. Taxes, subsidies, regulations, information-based instruments, and R&D all bring different mechanisms into play and so have different effects. The remainder of this section is organized around specific policy areas or objectives. It considers major policy issues in each area, and discusses the possible implications for GHG emissions in reference (non-mitigation) scenarios. 3.7.2. Policy Areas 3.7.2.1. Population and Social Welfare Policies Given the interactions between demographics and social and economic development discussed in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, population and social welfare policies that currently exist or are options for various countries can also be viewed as “non-climate” policies (in the sense that they are not motivated by climate concerns, but will affect future GHG emissions). Studies support the notion that reduced population growth significantly abates GHG emissions. Indeed, some integrated assessment models suggest that emissions scenarios may be more sensitive to population changes, with respect to normalized uncertainty analysis, than to other factors that affect emissions (Nordhaus, 1993). Therefore, social policies that affect fertility rates (and mortality and migration rates) also could have a significant impact on future emissions. By the same token, demographic policies for health and education may also affect productivity growth in a positive manner. Thus, the desirable objective to further development may result in higher economic growth, consumption, and emissions per capita. The overall effects are likely to vary from country to country. For instance, efforts can be made to help women avoid unwanted pregnancies or to reduce infant mortality. Demographic health surveys suggest that more than 100 million women in less developed countries do not want to become pregnant, but they do not practice contraception (Bongaarts, 1994). The Cairo Program of Action (UN, 1995) estimates that US$17 billion annually would successfully deliver family planning and reproductive health services to the majority of people in developing countries who desire them. Family planning assistance today contributes to the observed recent declines in fertility rates in many developing countries. In one study, it was estimated that such programs over the past two decades reduced the present population by about 40 million persons, which in itself may reduce future population levels by some 400 million people in the year 2100 (Bongaarts et al., 1990). Other policy measures are less direct, but also exert important influences on fertility rates. These include improvements in health care and female education, especially primary school education, which is a factor that correlates highly with fertility rates in young women (Bongaarts, 1994). Similarly, measures that improve gender equality reduce fertility rates as they encourage non-maternal roles and increase employment and empowerment opportunities for women. Their implementation is currently unrelated to concerns about global warming, yet their effect on this environmental issue may be significant. 3.7.2.2. Policies that Target Economic Development and Technological Innovation A wide range of policies and circumstances may contribute toward the desirable objective of furthering development and economic growth (see Section 3.3). In the short term, fiscal, monetary, and interest rate management policies are among the main instruments used by governments. In the longer term, economic growth may be affected more by measures that influence fundamental capabilities, such as policies in education, and in the development of physical infrastructure, social and economic institutions, and national systems for innovation. As emphasized in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, the effects of economic growth on GHG emissions depend on economic structure and technology. Governments generally aim to encourage the development of particular sectors that are perceived to contribute to national goals for security, food and energy supply, high employment, and long-term economic growth (Maddison, 1995). The encouragement may take many forms, such as direct subsidies and protection from foreign competition, public investment in infrastructure, training, or R&D, and support for collaborative development programs and information networks (OECD, 1997a). If governments support sectors that are fossil-fuel intensive, the tendency to increase GHG emissions is clear. However, protectionist policies may also reduce national economic efficiency, which dampens income growth and tends to restrict growth in GHG emissions. Conversely, if governments support the development of rapid-growth sectors, the tendency may be to promote long-term economic growth, increase household income and consumption, and hence increase GHG emissions. Over a period of 100 years the policies that most influence the development of GHG emissions are probably those that contribute to the processes of technical and social innovation, which themselves contribute to economic development. Innovation policies mostly emphasize the development of technologies that improve international competitiveness with new products and improved performance or reduced costs of existing products. The policies are not usually designed to achieve these and other (e.g., environmental and social) objectives in an integrated way (OECD, 1998b). Hence, their impact on GHG emissions is hard to predict, but as currently constituted many national systems for innovation could tend to increase emissions by stimulating economic growth. 3.7.2.3. Energy, Agriculture and Other Resource Management Policies Government policies on energy and agriculture have, on the whole, paralleled global trends during the 20th century. Early in the century there was a move toward protectionism, which aimed to secure national self-sufficiency, especially in food and energy. Governments established import quotas and tariffs, subsidies for domestic production, and research and investment programs to improve agricultural productivity and develop new energy sources. During the 1980s policy emphasis shifted in many countries, and has continued into the 1990s, toward open borders and reduced subsidies and R&D. Nonetheless, numerous energy and agricultural policies persist that influence production and trade patterns and hence also GHG emissions. 3.7.2.3.1. Energy policies Various policies exist to promote energy efficiency and the adoption of energy-efficient technologies and practices. Government standards, such as appliance efficiency standards, motors standards, and the automobile fuel economy standards in the US, prescribe the energy consumption levels of particular commodities. Residential and commercial building standards require the use of energy-efficient construction practices and components. Information dissemination programs, such as the Green Lights program in the USA or similar programs in other countries, provide consumers with the information required to make purchase decisions as well as to install and operate energy-efficient equipment. Subsidy or investment credit programs are often used to promote the adoption of a particular technology; combined heat and power was promoted in The Netherlands through such a program in the 1980s (Parla and Blok, 1995). Other energy efficiency policies or programs include audits and assessments, rebate programs, government procurement programs, benchmarking programs, labeling programs, and technology demonstration programs (Worrell et al., 1997). Many reports point to government subsidies as a major impediment to cleaner production of energy (Burniaux et al., 1992; Larsen and Shah, 1992; de Moor and Calamai, 1996; Roodman, 1996; Greenpeace, 1997). In addition to direct subsidies, governments use a wide variety of measures to support domestic or regional industries, or to protect legal monopolies. These policies inhibit innovation and can lead to higher levels of pollution or resource intensity than would occur in a less constrained market. A recent OECD study found that reform of supports to coal, electricity, and transport could substantially reduce CO2 and acid rain emissions in some countries (OECD, 1997a). In other countries, subsidy reform would have minimal direct environmental benefits, but would increase the effectiveness or reduce the cost of environmental policies such as eco-taxes and emission limits. Where subsidies support nuclear power or other non-fossil energy sources, their reform could conversely lead to increased GHG emissions. Energy taxes also have an important influence on energy demand and hence GHG emissions. The majority of energy taxes are intended as a pure fiscal instrument or, in the case of road fuel taxes in some countries, to raise funds for road provision and maintenance. Many countries are raising these taxes, or considering doing so. 3.7.2.3.2. Agriculture policies Agricultural policy reform has received more attention than energy policy reform in recent years. Most OECD countries support domestic agriculture, whether through direct subsidies, import tariffs, or price controls. The general trend is toward a reduction in these supports, in part as a result of trade negotiations, but also as part of the broader trend toward policies that reduce budget deficits and improve market efficiency. Supports are also being reformed to reduce their linkage to production volumes. Where subsidies are linked to the volume of production, they provide an incentive to increase output beyond the level of demand, which leads to surpluses. This incentive may tend to increase GHG emissions as a result of soil carbon depletion and oxidation, excessive use of nitrogen fertilizer leading to N2O emissions, and over-intensive animal farming that results in excess CH4 emissions from manure and from the animals themselves (OECD, 1997b; Storey, 1997). The overall impact of agriculture subsidy reforms on GHG emissions will depend on provide an incentive to increase output beyond the level of demand, which leads to surpluses. This incentive may tend to increase GHG emissions as a result of soil carbon depletion and oxidation, excessive use of nitrogen fertilizer leading to N2O emissions, and over-intensive animal farming that results in excess CH4 emissions from manure and from the animals themselves (OECD, 1997b; Storey, 1997). The overall impact of agriculture subsidy reforms on GHG emissions will depend on associated fiscal changes in other parts of the economy. Overproduction in one country may be compensated to some extent by lower production elsewhere. However, in general, incentives for higher agricultural output are likely to lead to more production globally, with a shift from consumption of plant products to animal products, which are land-, resource-, and GHG-intensive. In a few industrialized countries a small trend has developed to support organic farming and regional marketing of foods. Future policies may thus lead to agricultural subsidies that are linked more to ecological and social factors than to the volume of production. 3.7.2.3.3. Dematerialization policies GHG emissions are likely to be reduced by other policies for the sustainable use of resources, such as land, forest ecosystems, mineral resources, water, and soil. Instruments may include direct planning, regulations, establishing property rights and obligations, information, education, and persuasion, and a broad range of policies to support or influence the innovation process to encourage dematerialization (OECD, 1998b). 3.7.2.4. Environmental Policies While environmental objectives often form part of the rationale for agriculture and energy policy reforms, many instruments are focused entirely on environmental objectives. The most obvious of these are pollution regulations and standards, eco-taxes, and voluntary and other measures. In the context of non-mitigation GHG emission scenarios, probably the most important environmental policies are those related to sulfur emissions (see Section 3.4.3). Sulfur emissions are controlled for local and regional environmental reasons, but sulfur oxides do have a radiative impact, and sulfur controls can lead to the switching of fuel away from coal and oil. Thus, almost paradoxically, environmental policies to combat urban air pollution and acid rain may (via reduced sulfate aerosol “cooling”) exacerbate climate change. Most sulfur control policies to date have involved either regulations that limit the concentration of sulfur oxides in flue gas from large combustion plants, or give standards for the sulfur content of fuel. Recently, sulfur control policies have become more sophisticated, and aim to limit aggregate emissions on a national or regional basis to minimize acidic deposition in a trans-national context. New policy instruments have also been introduced. The USA has pioneered a “cap and trade” system with tradable emission permits (for a review see Joskow et al., 1998). Other environmental policies with a greenhouse impact include controls on ODSs; urban air pollution precursor compounds (CO, NOx, CH4, and NMVOCs), especially from transport and domestic solid fuels; and controls on agricultural practice to reduce water pollution and soil erosion. Policies in all of these areas are likely to contribute to GHG mitigation. However, some options, such as an accelerated shift to electric vehicles to reduce local air pollution, could result in higher GHG emissions in the short term in certain circumstances (Michaelis et al., 1996). 3.7.2.5. Transportation and Infrastructure Policies Policies on infrastructure may have a very long-term influence on GHG emissions, although in many cases the causal relationships are complex and not understood well enough to justify quantitative analyses of the policy options. These include urban planning guidance, construction regulations, policies on ownership and financing of infrastructure, and user pricing for roads and parking. The most significant impacts on GHG emissions are likely to derive from policies that influence demand for travel by car and for freight transport by truck (Newman and Kenworthy, 1990; Michaelis et al., 1996; Watson et al., 1996), those that influence energy use in buildings (Levine et al., 1996; Watson et al., 1996), and those that influence the conversion of forest for agriculture, or agricultural land for urban development. 3.7.3. Quantification of Impacts and Implementation of Policies in SRES Few of the policies and instruments identified above can be represented directly in the models typically used to produce GHG emission scenarios. In general, the impacts of policies are highly uncertain (Houghton et al., 1996). Price-based instruments have been analyzed in greater detail than other types of measure, and many empirical studies have been carried out to determine the response to price changes of demand for various commodities, especially energy. However, such research and analysis usually yields very large ranges of uncertainty in the magnitude of the price response, and often reveals a strong dependence on specific circumstances. Even for price-based policies, national and global effects over 20–100 years are very uncertain. For the SRES, it is not possible to make a precise link between governments’ application of specific policies and the outcome in the various scenarios. Instead, the qualitative SRES scenario storylines give a broad characterization of the areas of policy emphasis thought to be associated with particular economic, technological, and environmental outcomes, as reflected in alternative scenario assumptions in the models used to generate long-term GHG emission scenarios. In some selected areas, such as sulfur control policies, a wide body of literature can be drawn upon to derive specific pollution control levels or maximum emission trajectories consistent with a particular interpretation of a scenario storyline. In other areas, such as GHG gases controlled by the Montreal Protocol, existing scenarios that reflect the most up-to-date information are used as direct input to SRES. References: Abramovitz, M., 1986: Catching Up and Falling Behind. Economic Research Report No. 1, Trade Union Institute for Economic Research, Stockholm, Sweden. Abramovitz, M., 1993: The search for the sources of growth: Areas of ignorance, old and new. Journal of Economic History, 52(2), 217–243. Adelman, M.A., and M.C. Lynch, 1997: Fixed view of resource limits creates undue pessimism. Oil and Gas Journal, April, 56–60. Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grübler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios. In Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 233–304. Alcamo, J., and G.J.J. Kreileman, 1996: Emission scenarios and global climate protection. Global Environmental Change, 6(4), 305–334. Alcamo, J., G.J.J. Kreileman, J.C. Bollen, G.J. van den Born, R. Gerlagh, M.S. Krol, A.M.C. Toet, and H.J.M. de Vries, 1996: Baseline scenarios of global environmental change. Global Environmental Change, 6(4), 261–303. Alcamo, J., Onigkeit, J., and Kaspar, F., 1997: The Pollutant Burden Approach for Computing Global and Regional Emissions of Sulfur Dioxide. Center for Environmental Systems Research, University of Kassel, Germany. Alcamo, J., and R. Swart, 1998: Future trends of land-use emissions of major greenhouse gases. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2–4), 343–381. Alcamo, J., E. Kreileman, M. Krol, R. Leemans, J. Bollen, J. van Minnen, M. Schäfer, S. Toet, and B. de Vries, 1998: Global modelling of environmental change: an overview of IMAGE 2.1. In Global change scenarios of the 21st century: Results from the IMAGE 2.1 Model, J. Alcamo, R. Leemans, to the Swedish model of welfare research. In The Quality of Life. M. Nussbaum, A.K. Sen, (eds.), Clarendon Press, Oxford, pp. 88-94. Amann, M., J. Cofala, P. Dorfner, F. Gyarfas, and W. Schopp, 1995. Impacts of energy scenarios on regional acidifications. In WEC Project 4 on Environment, Working Group C, Local and Regional Energy Related Environmental Issues. World Energy Council, London, pp. 291-317. Andersen, E.S., 1994. Evolutionary Economics: Post-Schumpeterian Contributions. Pinter, London. Ang, B.W., and G. Pandiyan, 1997. Decomposition of energy-induced CO2 emissions in manufacturing. Energy Economics, 19, 363-374. Ansuategi, A., E. Barbier, and C. Perrings, 1997. The Environmental Kuznets Curve. USF Workshop on Economic Modelling of Sustainable Development Between Theory and Practice, Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam. Arrow, K., 1962. The economic implications of learning by doing. Review of Economic Studies, 29, 155-173. Arthur, W.B., 1989. Competing technologies, increasing returns, and lock in by historical events. The Economic Journal, 99, 116-131. Arthur, W.B., 1994. Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy. Michigan University Press, Ann Arbor, MI. Ausubel, J.H., A. Grübler, and N. Nakicenovic, 1988. Carbon dioxide emissions in a methane economy. Climatic Change, 12, 245-263. Ausubel, J.H., and A. Grübler, 1995. Working less and living longer: Long-term trends in working time and time budgets. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 50(3), 195-213. Ayres, R.U., 1989. Energy Efficiency in the US Economy: A New Case for Conservation, RR-89-12, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Azar, C., 1996. Technological Change and the Long Run Cost of Reducing CO2 Emissions. Working Paper 96/84/EPS, INSEAD Centre for the Management of Environmental Resources, Fontainebleau, France. Azar, C., and G. Berndes, 1999. The implication of CO2-abatement policies on food prices. In Sustainable Agriculture and Environment: Globalization and Trade Liberalisation Impacts. A. Dragun, C. Tisdell (eds.), Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., Cheltenham, UK. Barnes, D.W., and J.A. Edmonds, 1990. An Evaluation of the Relationship Between the Production and Use of Energy and Atmospheric Methane Emissions. Report DOE/NBB-0088P, US Department of Energy, Washington, D.C. Barro, R.J., and X. Sala-I-Martin, 1995. Economic Growth. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. Barro, R.J., 1997. Determinants of Economic Growth. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Baumol, W.J., 1993. Social Wants and Dismal Science: the Curious Case of the Climbing Costs of Health and Teaching. WP-84-93, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, Milan, Italy. Birdsall, N., 1994. Another look at population and global warming. In Population, Environment and Development. Proceedings of the United Nations Expert Group Meeting on Population, Environment and Development, United Nations Headquarters, New York, NY, 20-24 January 1992, pp. 39-54. Blanchet, D., 1991. Estimating the relationship between population growth and aggregate economic growth in developing countries: Methodological problems. In Consequences of Rapid Population Growth in Developing Countries. United Nations (ed.), Taylor & Francis, New York, NY, pp. 67-98. Boden, T.A., D.P. Kaiser, R.J. Sepanski, and F.W. Stoss (eds.), 1994. Carbon Dioxide Emissions Trends 93. A compendium of data on global change, Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, World Data Center A for Atmospheric Trace Gases, Center for Global Environmental Studies, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN. Bogner, J., M. Meadows, and P. Czepiel, 1997. Fluxes of methane between landfills and the atmosphere: natural and engineering controls. Soil Use and Management, 13, 268-277. Bongaarts, J., W.P. Mauldin, and J.R. Phillips, 1990. The demographic impact of family planning programs. Studies in Family Planning, 21(29), 299-310. Bongaarts, J., 1994. Population policy options in the developing world. Science, 263, 771-776. Bongaarts, J., 1996. Global trends in AIDS mortality. Population and Development Review, 22(1), 21-45. Bongaarts, J., 1998. Global population growth: Demographic consequences of declining fertility. Science, 282, 419-420. Bos, E., M.T. Vu, E. Massiah, and R. Bulatao, 1994. World Population Projections 1994-95 Edition. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. Bouwman, A.F., and D.P. van Vuuren, 1999. Global Assessment of Acidification and Eutrophication of Natural Ecosystems. RIVM Report No. 802001012, RIVM, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. BP (British Petroleum), 1996. BP Statistical Review of World Energy 1996. British Petroleum, London (http://www.bp.com). BP (British Petroleum), 1997. BP Statistical Review of World Energy 1997. British Petroleum, London (http://www.bp.com). Brown, L.R., and H. Kane, 1995. Full House: Reassessing the Earth’s Population Carrying Capacity. (eds), 1996 Climate Change 1995 Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change Contribution of Working Group III to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Buchanan, R. A., 1992 The Power of the Machine The Impact of Technology from 1700 to the Present Penguin Books, London Burniaux, J.-M., J. Martin, and J. Oliveira-Martins, 1992 The effects of existing distortions in energy markets on the cost of policies to reduce CO₂ emissions Evidence from GREEN OECD Economic Studies, Winter, pp. 141-165 Campbell, J., 1959 The Masks of God Primitive Mythology, 1-4 Arkana, Penguin Group, New York, NY Campbell, C. J., 1997 Better understanding urged for rapidly depleting reserves Oil and Gas Journal, 7 April, 51-54 Chemical Week, 1994 Sixth international workshop on N₂O emissions N₂O abatement by adipic acid producers Chemical Week, 13, 95-96 Chenery, H., S. Robinson, and M. Syrquin (eds), 1986 Industrialization and Growth A Comparative Study Oxford University Press, Oxford Scenario Driving Forces 159 Christiansson, L., 1995 Diffusion and Learning Curves of Renewable Energy Technologies WP-95-126, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria CIRED (Centre International de Recherche sur l'Environnement et le Développement), IVM, IIASA, SMASH, RUA, 1997 Integrated Assessment Modelling of Global Environmental Policies and Decision Patterns Interim Report ENV4-CT96-0197, CIRED, Paris Collins, W. J., D. E. Stevenson, C. E. Johnson, and R. G. Derwent, 1999 The European Regional Ozone Distribution and its Links with the Global Scale for the Years 1992 and 2015 Climate Research Division, Meteorological Office, Bracknell, UK Complainville, C., and J. O. Martins, 1994 NOₓ and SOₓ Emissions and carbon Abatement Economic Department Working Paper 151, OECD, Paris Corbett, J. J., P. Fischbeck, and S. N. Pandis, 1999 Global nitrogen and sulfur inventories for oceangoing ships Journal of Geophysical Research, 104(D3), 3457-3470 Courbage, Y., 1998 Nuovi Scenari Demografici Mediterranei Fondazione Giovanni Agnelli, Turin, Italy Crutzen, P. J., and T. E. Graedel, 1986 The role of atmospheric chemistry in environment-development interactions In Sustainable Development of the Biosphere W. C. Clark, T. Munn (eds), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 213-250 Dadi, Z., L. Xueyi, and X. Huaqing, 1998 Estimation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions in China in 1990 and 1995 Energy Research Institute Beijing, China Darmstadter, J., J. Dunkerley, and J. Alterman, 1977 How Industrial Societies Use Energy A comparative analysis Resources for the Future John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD David, P. A., 1990 The dynamo and the computer A historical perspective on the modern productivity paradox American Economic Review, 80(2), 355-361 Davis, D. D., and D. R. Kemp, 1991 Adipic Acid In Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 4th Edition Dawkins, R., 1986 The Blind Watchmaker Longman, London Delsey, J., 1991 How to Reduce Fuel Consumption of Road Vehicles In Low Consumption/Low Emission Automobile Proceedings of an expert panel Rome 14th-15th February 1990, OECD/IEA, Paris Denison, E. E., 1962 The Sources of Economic Growth in the United States and the Alternatives Before Us Supplementary Paper No. 13, Committee for Economic Development, New York, NY Denison, E. E., 1985 Trends in American Economic Growth 1929-1982 The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. De Bruyn, S. M., and J. B. Opschoor, 1994 Is the Economy Ecologizing? De-coupling Economic Development with Environmental Pressure TRACE Discussion Paper TI 94 65, Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam De Bruyn, S. M., J. van den Bergh, and J. B. Opschoor, 1995 Empirical Investigations in Environmental Economic Relationships Reconsidering the Empirical Basis of Environmental Kuznets Curves and the Delinking of Pollution from Economic Growth TRACE Discussion Paper TI-95-140, Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam De Moor, A., and P. Calamai, 1996 Subs and A. M. C. Toet, 1994. Model for calculating regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 76, 79-131. De Vries, B., M. Janssen, and A. Beusen, 1999. Perspectives on energy. Energy Policy, 27(8), 477-494. Difiglio, C., K. G. Duleep, and D. L. Greene, 1990. Cost effectiveness of future fuel economy improvements. The Energy Journal, 11(1), 65-86. Dignon, J., and S. Hameed, 1989. Global emissions of nitrogen and sulfur oxides from 1860 to 1980. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association, 39(2), 180-186. Disney, R., 1996. Can We Afford to Grow Older? MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Dosi, G., 1988. The nature of the innovation process (Chapter 10). In Technical Change and Economic Theory, G. Dosi, C. Freeman, R. Nelson, G. Silverberg, and L. Soete (eds.), Pinter, London/New York, NY. Dosi, G., K. Pavitt, and L. Soete, 1990. The Economics of Technical Change and International Trade. Harvester Wheatsheaf, London. Douglas, M., D. Gasper, S. Ney and M. Thompson, 1998. Human needs and wants. In Human Choice and Climate Change, 1(3), S. Rayner, E. L. Malone (eds.), The Societal Framework, Battelle Press, Columbus, OH, pp. 195-263. Easterlin, R. A., 1978. The economics and sociology of fertility: A synthesis. In Historical Studies of Changing Fertility, C. Tilly (ed.), Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 57-113. Eberstadt, N., 1997. World Population Implosion? Public Interest, 129, 3-22. Edmonds, J. A., and D. W. Barns, 1992. Factors affecting the long-term cost of fossil fuel CO2 emissions reductions. International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 4(3), 140-166. EEA (European Environmental Agency), 1999. Environment in the European Union at the Turn of the Century. EEA, Copenhagen. ENDS, 1998. Renewables Win Major Boost under Largest NFFO Order. The ENDS Report 284, Environmental Data Services Ltd, London. Engelman, R., 1994. Stabilizing the Atmosphere: Population, Consumption and Greenhouse Gases. Population Action International, Washington, DC. Enquete-Kommission, 1990. Protection of the Atmosphere. Report of the "Enquête Kommission Schutz der Erdatmosphäre" of the German Parliament, Economica Verlag, Bonn. Environment Canada, 1997. Canada’s Second Report on Climate Change. Environment Canada, Ottawa and Secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Bonn. FAO (UN Food and Agriculture Organization), 1963-1996. Production Yearbook (yearly volumes). FAO, Rome. Farla, J. C. M., and K. Blok, 1995. Energy conservation investment of firms: Analysis of investments in energy efficiency in the Netherlands in the 1980s. In Proceedings of the American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy 1995 Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Industry, ACEEE, Washington, DC. Fenhann, J., 2000. Industrial non-energy, non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Fearnside, P. M., 1995. Hydroelectric dams in the Brazilian Amazon as sources of greenhouse gases. Environmental Conservation, 22(1), 7-19. FETC (Federal Energy Technology Center), 1997. Fuel Cell Overview. USDOE/EIA, Washington, DC. Fischer, G., and C. Rosenzweig, 1996. The Impacts of Climate Change, CO2 and SO2 on Agricultural Supply and Trade. WP-96-5, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Foell, W., M. Amann, G. Carmichael, M. Chadwick, J. P. Hettelingh, L. Hordijk, and Z. Dianwu, 1995. RAINS Asia: An assessment model for air pollution in Asia. Report on the World Bank sponsored project "Acid Rain and Emission Reductions in Asia", World Bank, Washington, DC. Fogel, R. W., 1970. Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Economic History. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. Frankel, M., 1955. Obsolescence and technological change in a maturing economy. American Economic Review, 45, 296-319. Freeman, C., and C. Perez, 1988. Structural crises of adjustment, business cycles and investment behaviour (Chapter 3). In Technical Change and Economic Theory, G. Dosi et al. (eds.), Pinter, London, pp. 38-66. Freeman, C., 1990. Schumpeter's business cycles revisited. In Evolving Technology and Market Structure — Studies in Schumpeterian Economics, A. Heertje, M. Perlman (eds.), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, pp. 17-38. Freeman, C., 1994. The economics of technical change. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 18, 463-514. Freeman, C. (ed.), 1996. Long Wave Theory. Elgar Reference, Cheltenham, UK. R., 1998. World population projections for greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2–4), 133–170. Gaffin, S. R., and B. C. O'Neill, 1998. Combat climate change by reducing fertility. Nature, 396(6709), 307. Gagnon, L., and J. F. van de Vate, 1997. Greenhouse gas emissions from hydropower. Energy Policy, 25(1), 7–13. Galeotti, M., and A. Lanza, 1999. Desperately Seeking (Environmental) Kuznets. WP 2.99, Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei, Milan, Italy. Galy-Lacaux, C., R. Delmas, G. Kouadio, S. Richard, and P. Gosse, 1999. Long term greenhouse gas emissions from hydroelectric reservoirs in tropical forest regions. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 13(2), 503–517. Goldemberg, J., T. B. Johansson, A. K. Reddy, and R. H. Williams, 1988. Energy for a Sustainable World. Wiley Eastern, New Delhi. Goldemberg, J., 1991. Leap-frogging: A new energy policy for developing countries. WEC Journal, December, 27–30. Golove, W., and L. Schipper, 1997. Restraining carbon emissions: Measuring energy use and efficiency in the U.S.A. Energy Policy, 25(7–9), 803–812. Goulder, L. H., and K. Mathai, 1998. Optimal CO₂ Abatement in the Presence of Induced Technological Change. WP 6494, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge, MA. Government of Russian Federation, 1995. Russian Economic Trends 1995, 4(1–2). Whurr Publishers, London. Government of the People's Republic of China, 1996. National Report on Sustainable Development. http://www.acca21.edu.cn/report.html Greene, D. L., and K. G. Duleep, 1993. Costs and benefits of automotive fuel economy improvement: A partial analysis. Transportation Research-A, 27A(3), 217–235. Greening, L. A., and H. T. Jeng, 1994. Life-cycle analysis of gasoline expenditure patterns. Energy Economics, 16(3), 217–228. Greening, L. A., H. T. Jeng, J. Formby, and D. C. Cheng, 1994. Use of region, life-cycle and role variables in the short-run estimation of the demand for gasoline and miles travelled. Applied Economics, 27(7), 643–655. Greenpeace, 1997. Energy Subsidies in Europe: How Governments Use Taxpayers’ Money to Promote Climate Change and Nuclear Risk. Greenpeace International Climate Campaign, Amsterdam. Gregory, K., 1998. Factors affecting future emissions of methane from non-land use sources. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2–4), 321–341. Gregory, K., and H.-H. Rogner, 1998. Energy resources and conversion technologies for the 21st century. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2–4), 171–229. Griliches, Z., 1996. The discovery of the residual: A historical note. Journal of Economic Literature, 34 (September), 1324–1330. Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman, 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman, 1993. Endogenous Innovation in the Theory of Growth. WP 4527, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge, MA. Grubb, M. J., and N. I. Meyer, 1993. Wind energy resources, systems and regional strategies. In Renewable Energy Sources for Fuels and Electricity. T. B. Johansson, H. Kelly, A. K. N. Reddy, R. H. Williams (eds.), Island Press, Washington, D.C. Grubler, A., and N. Nakicenovic, 1991. Evolution of Transport Systems: Past and Future. RR-91-8, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Grubler, A., S. Messner, L. Schrattenholzer, and A. Schafer, 1993a. Emission reduction at the global level. Energy, 18(5), 539–581. Grubler, A., N. Nakicenovic, and A. Schafer, 1993b. Dynamics of Transport and Energy Systems: History of development and a scenario for the future. RR-93-19, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Grubler, A., 1994. A Comparison of Global and Regional Energy Emission Scenarios. WP-94-132, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Grubler, A., and S. Messner, 1996. Technological uncertainty. In Climate Change: Integrating Science, Economics, and Policy. CP-96-1, N. Nakicenovic, W. D. Nordhaus, R. Richels, F. L. Toth (eds.), International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 295–314. Grubler, A., 1998a. Technology and Global Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Grubler, A., 1998b. Integrated Assessment Modelling of Global Environmental Policies and Decision Patterns. Report to EC DG XII/D-5 No ENV4-CT-96-0197, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Grubler, A., 1998c. A review of global and regional sulfur emission scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2–4), 383–418. Gurer, N., and J. Ban, 1997. Factors affecting energy related An Urbanizing World: Global Report on Human Settlements 1996. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Hafele, W., J. Anderer, A. McDonald, and N. Nakicenovic, 1982. Energy in a Finite World: Paths to a Sustainable Future. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA. Hall, D. O., and K. K. Rao, 1994. Photosynthesis, 5th Edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Hall, D. O., and F. Rosillo-Calle, 1998. Biomass Resources Other than Wood. World Energy Council, London. Hammer, J. S., 1985. Population Growth and Savings in Developing Countries. WP 687, World Bank Staff, Population and Development Series 12, World Bank, Washington, D.C. Han, X., and L. Chatterjee, 1997. Impacts of growth and structural change on CO2 emissions of developing countries. World Development, 5(2), 395-407. Hatfield, C. B., 1997. Oil back on the global agenda. Nature, 387(8 May), 121. Haub, C., 1997. New UN projections depict a variety of demographic futures. Population Today: News, Numbers and Analysis, 25(4), 1-3. Hayami, Y., and V. W. Ruttan, 1985. Agricultural Development: An International Perspective, Revised 2nd Edition. John Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD. Hayek, F., 1967. Notes on the Evolution of Systems of Rules of Conduct. In Studies in Philosophy, Politics and Economics, Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, pp. 66-81. Hensher, D. A., F. W. Milthorpe, and N. C. Smith, 1990. The demand for vehicle use in the urban household sector: Theory and empirical evidence. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, 24(2), 119-137. Hettelingh, J. P., M. J. Chadwick, H. Sverdrup, and D. Zhao, 1995. Assessment of environmental effects of acidic deposition. In RAINS Asia: An assessment model for air pollution in Asia. W. Foell, M. Amann, G. Carmichael, M. Chadwick, J.-P. Hettelingh, L. Hordijk, and Z. Dianwu (eds.), Report on the World Bank sponsored project "Acid Rain and Emission Reductions in Asia", World Bank, Washington, D.C., pp. VI-1-64. Higgins, M., and J. G. Williamson, 1997. Age structure dynamics in Asia and dependence on foreign capital. Population and Development Review 23(2), 261-293. Hill, C., 1975. The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas During the English Revolution. Penguin Books, London. Houghton, J. T., G. J. Jenkins, and J. J. Ephraums (eds.), 1990. Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Houghton, R. A., 1991. Tropical deforestation and climate change. Climatic Change 19, 99-118. Houghton, J. T., B. A. Callander, and S. K. Varney (eds.), 1992. Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Houghton, J. T., L. G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B. A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1995. Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emissions Scenarios. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Houghton, J. T., L. G. Meira Filho, B. A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1996. Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Huntington, S. P., 1996. The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order. Simon & Schuster, New York, N.Y. ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization), 1995a. Outlook for Air Transport to the Year 2003. Circular 252 AT/103, Montreal, Canada. ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization), 1995b. Civil Aviation Statistics of the World, 1994. Doc 9180/20, Montreal, Canada. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1993. Cars and Climate Change. OECD, Paris. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1995. World Energy Outlook, 1995 Edition. IEA/OECD, Paris. Scenario Driving Forces 161 IEA (International Energy Agency), 1997a. Energy Balances of OECD Countries, 1960-1995. IEA/OECD, Paris. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1997b. Energy Balances of Non-OECD Countries 1960-1995. IEA/OECD, Paris. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1997c. Indicators of Energy Use and Efficiency: Understanding the Link Between Energy and Human Activity. IEA/OECD, Paris. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1999. Non-OECD coal fired power generation - trends in the 1990s. IEA Coal Research, London. IEA CIAB (Coal Industry Advisory Board), 1992. Gl Greenhouse Gases R&D Programme, 1996b. Methane Emissions from Land Disposal of Solid Waste. IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, Stoke Orchard, Cheltenham, UK. IEA Greenhouse Gases R&D Programme, 1997. Methane Emissions from the Oil and Gas Industry. IEA Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme, Stoke Orchard, Cheltenham, UK. IGU (International Gas Union), 1997a. World Gas Prospects, Strategies and Economics. Proceedings of the 20th World Gas Conference, Copenhagen (http://www.wgc.org/proceedings). IGU (International Gas Union), 1997b. Gas and the Environment - Methane Emissions. Report of IGU Task Force I, 20th World Gas Conference Proceedings, Copenhagen (http://www.wgc.org/proceedings/rep/tf1r.html). IIASA-WEC (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis - World Energy Council), 1995. Global Energy Perspectives to 2050 and Beyond. WEC, London. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1995. Greenhouse Gas Inventory Reporting Instructions, Workbook and Reference Manual. IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Vols. 1-3. UNEP, WHO, OECD, IEA, Geneva. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1996. Greenhouse Gas Inventory Reference Manual. Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Vol. 3. IPCC/OECD/IEA, Geneva. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 2000. IPCC Special Report on Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology Transfer. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (In press). Ironmonger, D., C. Aitken, and B. Erbas, 1995. Economies of scale in energy use in adult-only households. Energy Economics, 17(4), 301-310. Ishitani, H., and T. B. Johansson, 1996. Energy supply mitigation options. In Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptation and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analysis. R. T. Watson, M. C. Zinyowera, R. H. Moss (eds.), IPCC, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 589-647. Ivanhoe, L. F., and G. G. Leckie, 1993. Global oil, gas fields, sizes tallied, analyzed. Oil and Gas Journal, 91(7), 87-91. Jansson, J. O., 1989. Car demand modelling and forecasting. Journal of Transport Economics and Policy, 23(2), 125-140. Jefferson, M., 1983. Economic uncertainty and business decision-making. In Beyond Positive Economics? J. Wiseman (ed.), Macmillan Press, London, pp. 122-159. Jepma, C. J., 1995. Tropical Deforestation: A Socio-Economic Approach. Earthscan, London. Jochem, E., 1989. Rationelle Energienutzung in den Industrieländern - Praxis und zukünftige Chancen. Vol. 53. Physikertagung der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellschaft, Bonn. Johansson, T. B., H. Kelly, A. K. N. Reddy, and R. H. Williams, 1993. Renewable fuels and electricity for a growing world economy: Defining and achieving the potential. In Renewable Energy: Sources for Fuels and Electricity. T. B. Johansson, H. Kelly, A. K. N. Reddy, R. H. Williams, Island Press, Washington, DC. Joskow, P. L., R. Schmalensee, and E. M. Bailey, 1998. The market for sulfur dioxide emissions. American Economic Review, 88(4), 669-685. Judson, R. A., R. Schmalensee, and T. M. Stoker, 1999. Economic development and the structure of the demand for commercial energy. The Energy Journal, 20(2), 29-57. Jung, T. Y., E. Lebre La Rovere, H. Gaj, P. R. Shukla, and D. Zhou, 2000. Structural changes in developing countries and their implication to energy related CO2 emissions. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Kato, N., 1996. Analysis of structure of energy consumption and dynamics of emission of atmospheric species related to global environmental change (SO2, NOx, CO2) in Asia. Atmospheric Environment, 30(5), 757-785. Kaya, Y., 1990. Impact of Carbon Dioxide Emission Control on GNP Growth: Interpretation of Proposed Scenarios. Paper presented to the IPCC Energy and Industry Subgroup, Response Strategies Working Group, Paris (mimeo). Keepin, B., 1986. A review of global energy and carbon dioxide projections. Annual Review of Energy, 11, 357-392. Kelley, A., 1988. Economic Consequences of Population Change in the Third World. Journal of Economic Literature, 26(4), 685-728. Kendall, H. W., and D. Pimentel, 1994. Constraints on the expansion of the global food supply. Ambio, 23(3), 198-205. Kolsrud, G., and B. B. Torrey, 1992. The importance of population growth in future commercial energy consumption. In Global Climate Change: Linking Energy, Environment, Economy and Equity. J. C. White (ed.), Plenum, New York, NY. Kondratiev, N. D., 1926. Die langen Wellen in der Konjunktur. Archiv für Sozialwis… T., L. Schipper, and O. Sezgen, 1998: Carbon dioxide emissions in OECD service sectors: the critical role of electricity. Energy Policy 26(15), 1137-1152. See also Krackeler, T., L. Schipper, and O. Sezgen, 1998: The Dynamics of Service Sector Carbon Dioxide Emissions and the Critical Role of Electricity Use: A Comparative Analysis of 13 OECD Countries from 1973-1995. LBNL 41882, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. Kroeze, C., 1993: Global Warming and Nitrous Oxide. Dissertation, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Kuznets, S. S., 1958: Six Lectures on Economic Growth. Free Press, New York, N.Y. Laherrere, J., 1994: Published figures and political reserves. World Oil, January, 33. Landes, D. S., 1969: The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Lane, D., and R. Maxfield, 1995: Foresight, Complexity and Strategy. Santa Fe Institute, New Mexico, U.S.A. La Rovere, E. L., and B. Americano, 1998: Environmental Impacts of Privatizing the Brazilian Power Sector. Proceedings of the International Association of Impact Assessment Annual Meeting, Christchurch, New Zealand, April 1998. Larson, B., and A. Shah, 1992: World Fossil Fuel Subsidies and Global Carbon Emissions, Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 1002, World Bank, Washington DC, U.S.A. Lashof, D., and Tirpak, D. A., 1990: Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate. 21P-2003, US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington D.C. Lazarus, M. L., L. Greber, J. Hall, C. Bartels, S. Bernow, E. Hansen, P. Raskin, and D. von Hippel, 1993: Towards a Fossil Free Energy Future: The Next Energy Transition. A Technical Analysis for Greenpeace International, Stockholm Environmental Institute Boston Center, Boston, MA. LBNL (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory), 1998: OECD Database. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, International Energy Studies, Berkeley, CA. Leemans, R., 1996: Mitigation: Cross-sectional and other issues. In Climate Change 1995, Impacts, Adaptation and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analysis, R. T. Watson, M. C. Zinyowera, R. H. Moss (eds.), Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 801-819. Leemans, R., van Amstel, A., Battjes, C., Kreileman, E., and S. Toet, 1996: The land cover and carbon cycle consequences of large scale utilizations of biomass as an energy source. Global Environmental Change 6(4), 335-357. Leggett, J., W. J. Pepper, and R. J. Swart, 1992: Emissions scenarios for IPCC: An update. In Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J. T. Houghton, B. A. Callander, S. K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Levine, M. D., H. Akbari, J. Busch, G. Dutt, K. Hogan, P. Komor, S. Meyeres, and H. Tsuchiya, 1996: Mitigation Options for Human Settlements, Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses. Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, R. T. Watson, M. C. Zinyowera, R. H. Moss (eds.), Cambridge and New York, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., pp. 399-426. Lovins, A. B., and L. H. Lovins, 1991: Least-cost climatic stabilization. Annual Review of Energy, 16, 433-531. Lovins, A. B., J. W. Barnett, and L. H. Lovins, 1993: Supercars: The Coming Light-Vehicle Revolution. Rocky Mountain Institute, Snowmass, CO. Lucas, R., 1988: On the mechanics of economic development. Journal of Monetary Economics, 22(1), 3-42. Lutz, W., 1993: Population and environment - What do we need more urgently: Better data, better models, or better questions? In Environment and Population Change, B. Zaba, J. Clarke (eds.), Derouaux Ordina Editions, Liege, Belgium. Lutz, W. (ed.), 1994: The Future Population of the World: What can we assume today? 1st Edition, Earthscan, London. Lutz, W. (ed.), 1996: The Future Population of the World: What can we assume today? 2nd Edition, Earthscan, London. Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, S. Scherbov, and A. Goujon, 1996: World population scenarios in the 21st century. In The Future Population of the World: What Can We Assume Today? 2nd Rev. ed., W. Lutz (ed.), Earthscan, London, pp. 361-396. Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov, 1997: Doubling of world population unlikely. Nature, 387(6635), 803-805. MacKellar, F. L., W. Lutz, C. Prinz, and A. Goujon, 1995: Population, households and and A. Goujon, 1995: Population, households and CO2 emissions. Population and Development Review, 21(4), 849-865. Maddison, A., 1989: The World Economy in the 20th Century. OECD Development Centre Studies, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris. Maddison, A., 1991: Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development: A Long-run Comparative View. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Maddison, A., 1995: Monitoring the World Economy 1820-1992. OECD Development Centre Studies, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris. Maddison, A., 1998: Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run. OECD Development Centre Studies, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris. Manne, A., and R. Richels, 1994: The costs of stabilizing global CO2 emissions: A probabilistic analysis based on expert judgements. The Energy Journal, 15(1), 31-56. March Consulting Group, 1999: Opportunities to Minimize Emissions of HFCs from EU. European Communities DG III, Brussels. Marchand, O., 1992: Une comparaison internationale de temps de travail. Futuribles, 165-166(5-6), 29-39. Marchetti, C., 1980: Society as a learning system: discovery, invention, and innovation cycles revisited. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 18, 267-282. Marland, G., R. J. Andres, T. A. Boden, C. Johnston, and A. Brenkert, 1998: Global, Regional and National CO2 Emissions Estimates from Fossil Fuel Burning, Cement Production and Gas Flaring 1951-1995 (revised January 1998). Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory/U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, TN. Martin, J. M., 1988: L'intensité énergétique de l'activité économique dans les pays industrialisés: Les évolutions de très longue période livrent-elles des enseignements utiles? Economies et Sociétés, 4, 9-27. Martin, D. J., and R. A. W. Shock, 1989: Energy Use and Energy Efficiency in UK Transport up to the Year 2010. Energy Efficiency Series No. 10, Energy Efficiency Office, Department of Energy, H.M.S.O., London. Martinerie, P., G. Brasseur, and C. Granier, 1995: The chemical composition of ancient atmospheres: A model study constrained by ice core data. Journal of Geophysical Research, 100, 14,291-14,304. Maslow, A., 1954: Motivation and Personality. Harper and Row, New York, N.Y. Masters, C. D., E. D. Attanasi, W. D. Dietzman, R. F. Meyer, R. W. Mitchell, and D. H. Root, 1987: World Resources of Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Natural Bitumen and Shale Oil. Proceedings of the 12th World Petroleum Congress, Houston, TX. Masters, C. D., E. D. Attanasi, and D. H. Root, 1994: World petroleum assessment and analysis. Proceedings of the 14th World Petroleum Congress, Stavanger, Norway, John Wiley, Chichester, U.K., pp. 1-13. Matsuoka, Y., and T. Morita, 1994: Estimation of Carbon Dioxide Flux from Tropical Deforestation. CGER 1013-94, Center for Global Environmental Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. Matsuoka, Y., M. Kainuma, and T. Morita, 1994: Scenario analysis of global warming using the Asian-Pacific integrated model (AIM). Energy Policy, 23(4/5), 357-371. Matthews, R. C. O., 1984: Darwinism and economic change. In Economic Theory and Hicksian Themes, D. A. Collard, N. H. Dimsdale, C. L. Gilbert, D. R. Helm, M. F. G. Scott, A. K. Sen (eds.), Oxford University Press, Oxford. McDevitt, T. M., 1996: World Population Profile. Report WP/96, U.S. Bureau of Census, Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. McDonald, A., 1999: Combating acid deposition and climate change. Environment, 41(3), 4-11, 43-47. Messner, S., A. Golodnikov, and A. Gritsevskii, 1996: A Stochastic Version of the Dynamic Linear Programming Model MESSAGE III. RR-97-002, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Messner, S., 1997: Endogenized technological learning in an energy systems model. Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 7(3), 291-313. Michaelis, L., 1996: CO2 Emissions from Road Vehicles: Policies and Measures for Common Action under the UNFCCC. Working Paper 1 in the Series on Policies and Measures for Common Action Under the UNFCCC, OECD, Paris. Michaelis, L., D. L. Bleviss, J. P. Orfeuil, and R. Pischinger, 1996: Mitigation Options in the Transportation Sector. In Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses. Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, R. T. Watson, M. C. Zinyowera, R. H. Moss (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 679-712. Michaelis, L., 1997a: Special Issues in Carbon/Energy Taxation: Carbon Charges on Aviation Fuels. Working Paper 12 in the Series on Policies and Measures for Common Action Under the UNFCCC, OECD, Paris. Michaelis, L., 1997b: Case study on electricity in the United Kingdom. In Supports to the Coal Industry and the Elect… 1997c: Technical and behavioral change: Implications for energy end-use. In Energy Modelling Beyond Economics and Technology. B. Giovannini, A. Baranzini (eds.), International Academy of the Environment, Centre for Energy Studies, University of Geneva, Geneva. Millward, R., 1990: Productivity in the UK services sector: Historical trends 1865-1985 and comparisons with the USA 1950-85. Oxford Bulletin Economic Stat., 52(4), 423-436. Mokyr, J., 1990: The Lever of Riches: Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Moll, H.C., 1989: Aanbod van en vraag naar metalen, ontwikkelingen, implicaties en relaties: een methodische assessment omtrent substitutie van materialen. Working report no. 9, Institute for Energy and Environment (IVEM), University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. Morita, Y., Y. Matsuoka, M. Kainuma, and H. Harasawa, 1994: AIM: Asian Pacific integrated model for evaluating policy options to reduce GHG emissions and global warming impacts. In Global Warming Issues in Asia. S. Bhattacharya et al. (eds.), AIT, Bangkok, pp. 254-273. Mosier, A., C. Kroeze, C. Nevison, O. Oenema, S. Seitzinger, and O. van Cleemput, 1998: Closing the global N2O budget: nitrous oxide emissions through the agricultural nitrogen cycle. OECD APCC/IEA phase II development of IPCC guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventory methodology. Nutrient Cycling in Agrosystems, 52, 225-248. Mumford, L., 1934: Technics and Civilization. Harcourt, New York, NY. Scenario Driving Forces 163 Murthy, N.S., M. Panda, and J.K. Parikh, 1997: Economic development, poverty reduction and carbon emissions in India. Energy Economics, 19, 327-354. Nadel, S.M., D. Fridley, J. Sinton, Y. Zhirong, and L. Hong, 1997: Energy Efficiency Opportunities in the Chinese Building Sector. American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, Washington, DC. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, A. Inaba, S. Messner, S. Nilson, et al., 1993: Long-term strategies for mitigating global warming. Energy, 18(5), 401-609. Nakicenovic, N., 1996: Technological change and learning. In Climate Change: Integrating Science, Economics, and Policy. N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus, R. Richels, F.L. Toth (eds.). International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 271-294. Nakicenovic, N., and A. Grübler, 1996: Energy and the Protection of the Atmosphere. United Nations Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development, New York, NY. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, H. Ishitani, T. Johansson, G. Marland, J.R. Moreira, and H.-H. Rogner, 1996: Energy primer. In Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. R. Watson, M.C. Zinyowera, R. Moss (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 75-92. Nakicenovic, N., M. Amann, and G. Fischer, 1997: Global Energy Supply and Demand and their Environmental Effects. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria (see also: McDonald, 1999). Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, and A. McDonald (eds.), 1998a: Global Energy Perspectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Nakicenovic, N., N. Victor, and T. Morita, 1998b: Emissions scenarios database and review of scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 95-131. National Research Council, 1986: Population Growth and Economic Development: Policy Questions. National Academy Press, Washington, DC. Neij, L., 1997: Use of experience curves to analyse the prospects for diffusion and adoption of renewable energy technology. Energy Policy, 23(13), 1099-1107. Nelson, R.R., M.J. Peck, and E.D. Kalachek, 1967: Technology, Economic Growth and Public Policy. The Brookings Institute, Washington, DC. Nelson, R.R., and S.G. Winter, 1982: An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. Newman, P., and M. Kenworthy, 1990: Cities and Automobile Dependence. Gower, London. Nordhaus, W.D., 1993: Rolling the DICE: An optimal transition path for controlling greenhouse gases. Resource and Energy Economics, 15, 27-50. Nordhaus, W.D., and G.W. Yohe, 1983: Future paths of energy and carbon dioxide emissions. In Changing Climate – Report of the Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee. National Academy Press, Washington, DC. Nriagu, J.O., 1996: A history of global metal pollution. Science, 272, 223-224. Odell, P.R., 1997: Oil reserves: Much more than meets the eye. Petroleum Economist, 64, 29-31. Odell, P.R., 1998: Fossil Fuel Resources in the 21st Century. Report submitted to the International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria (see also Odell, 1999). Odell, P.R., 1999: Dynamics of energy technologies and global change. Energy Policy, 27, 737-742. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), 1996: Values, Wel for Economic Co-operation and Development), 1996: Values, Welfare and Quality of Life. Final Report of the First OECD Workshop on Individual Travel Behaviour, OCDE/GD(96)199, OECD, Paris. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), 1997a: Environmental Implications of Energy and Transport Subsidies. OECD, Paris. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), 1997b: Agriculture and Forestry: Identification of Options for Net Greenhouse Gas Reduction. Annex I, Expert Group on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, WP 7, OCDE/GD(97)74, OECD, Paris. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), 1998a: Twenty First Century Technologies: Promises and Perils of a Dynamic Future. OECD, Paris. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), 1998b: Eco-Efficiency. OECD, Paris. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), 1998c: Projected Costs of Generating Electricity – Update 1998. Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA), International Energy Agency (IEA) and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris. Ogawa, Y., 1991: Economic activity and greenhouse effect. The Energy Journal, 12(1), 23-34. Olivier, J.G.J., A.F. Bouwman, C.W.M. van der Maas, J.J.M. Berdowski, C. Veldt, J.R.J. Bloos, A.J.H. Visschedijk, P.Y.J. Zandveld, and J.L. Haverlag, 1996: Description of EDGAR Version 2.0: A Set of Global Emission Inventories of Greenhouse Gases and Ozone-depleting Substances for all Anthropogenic and most Natural Sources on a per Country Basis and on a 1° × 1° Grid. RIVM Report 771060 002, RIVM, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. O'Neill, B.C., 1996: Greenhouse Gases: Time scales, Response Functions and the Role of Population Growth in Future Emissions. PhD dissertation, New York University, New York, NY. O'Neill, B.C., F.L. MacKellar, and W. Lutz, 2000: Population and Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. (In press). Ouellette, N., H.-H. Rogner, and D.S. Scott, 1995: Hydrogen from remote excess hydro-electricity. Part I: Production plant capacity and production costs. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 20(11), 865-872. Palo, M., E. Lehto, and E.E. Enroth, 1997: Scenarios on Tropical Deforestation and Carbon Fluxes. Paper presented at the Global Modelling Forum, Tokyo, Japan. Parikh, J.K., K.S. Parikh, S. Gokarn, J.P. Painuly, B. Saha, and V. Shukla, 1991: Consumption Patterns: The Driving Force of Environmental Stress. Report prepared for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), IGIDR-PP-014, Indira Gandhi Institute for Development Research, Mumbai, India. Parikh, J.K., 1992: IPCC strategies unfair to the south. Nature, 360 (10 December), 507-508. Parikh, J.K., 1994: North-south issues for climate change. Economic and Political Weekly, November 5-12, 2940-2943. Parikh, J.K., R. Culpeper, D. Runnalls, and J.R. Painuly (eds.), 1997: Climate Change and North-South Cooperation. Indo-Canadian Cooperation in Joint Implementation. Tata McGraw Hill Publishing, New Delhi. Pearce, D., 1995: Blueprint 4: Capturing Global Environmental Value. Earthscan, London. Penner, S.S. et al., 1995: Commercialization of fuel cells. Energy, 20(5), 331-470. Pepper, W.J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992: Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC. An update: Assumptions, methodology, and results. Support document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander, S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pepper, W.J., W. Barbour, A. Sankovski, and B. Braaz, 1998: No-policy greenhouse gas emission scenarios: revisiting IPCC 1992. Environmental Science & Policy, 1, 289-312. Posch, M., J.-P. Hettelingh, J. Alcamo, and M. Krol, 1996: Integrated scenarios of acidification and climate change in Asia and Europe. Global Environmental Change, 6(4), 375-394. Prather, M., R. Derwent, D. Ehhalt, P. Fraser, E. Sanhueza, and X. Zhou, 1995: Other trace gases and atmospheric chemistry. In Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change, IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) and Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 73-126. Preston, S.H., 1996: The effect of population growth on environmental quality. Population Research and Policy Review, 15, 95-108. Price, L., L. Michaelis, E. Worrell, and M. Khrushch, 1998: Sectoral trends and driving forces of global energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 263-319. Qian, J., and Zhang, K., 1998: China's desulfurization potential. Energy Policy, 26(4), 345-351. Ramanathan, R., and J.K. Parikh, 1999: Transport sector in India: An analysis in the context of sustainable development. Transport Policy, 6(1), 35-45. West. Chicago University Press, Chicago, USA. Riahi, K., and R.A. Roehrl, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in a dynamics-as-usual scenario of economic and energy development. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Rogner, H.-H., 1996: An Assessment of World Hydrocarbon Resources. WP-96-56, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Rogner, H.-H., and N. Nakicenovic, 1996: Zur Rolle des Schwefels in der Klimadebatte. Energiewirtschaftliche Tagesfragen, 46(11), 731-736. Rogner, H.-H., 1997: An assessment of world hydrocarbon resources. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 22, 217-262. Rogner, H.-H., and Khan, A.M., 1998: Comparing energy options. IAEA Bulletin, 39(2), 2-6. Romer, P.M., 1986: Increasing returns and long-run growth. Journal of Political Economy, 94(5), 1002-1037. Roodman, D., 1996: Paying the Piper: Subsidies, Politics, and the Environment. WorldWatch Paper 133, The WorldWatch Institute, Washington, D.C. Rosa, L.P., and R. Schaffer, 1994: Greenhouse gas emissions from hydroelectric reservoirs. Ambio, 23(2), 164-165. Rosa, L.P., and R. Schechtman, 1996: Avaliação de Custos Ambientais da Geração Termelétrica: inserção de variáveis ambientais no planejamento da expansão do setor elétrico. Cadernos de Energia, 2(9), Edição Especial, PPE/COPPE/UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Rosa, L.P., R. Schaffer, and M.A. dos Santos, 1996: Comment – Are hydroelectric dams in the Brazilian Amazon significant sources of greenhouse gases? Environmental Conservation, 23(1), 2-6. Rosegrant, M.W., M.A. Sombilla, R.V. Gerpacio, and C. Ringler, 1997: Global Food Markets and US Exports in the 21st Century. Revisions of a paper presented at the Illinois World Food and Sustainable Agriculture Program Conference “Meeting the Demand for Food in the 21st Century: Challenges and Opportunities for Illinois Agriculture (IFPRI)”, Washington, D.C. Rosenberg, N., 1982: Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Rosenberg, N., and C. Frischtak, 1984: Technological innovation and long waves. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 8(1), 7-24. Rosenberg, N., and L.E. Birdzell, 1986: How the West Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation of the Industrial World. I.B. Tauris & Co., London. Rosenberg, N., and L.E. Birdzell, 1990: Science, Technology, and the Western Miracle. Scientific American, 263, 18-25. Rosenberg, N., 1994: Exploring the Black Box: Technology, Economics and History. University Press, Cambridge. Rosenberg, N., 1997: Economic development and the transfer of technology: some historical perspectives. In Technology and the West. T.S. Reynolds, S.H. Cutcliffe (eds.), University Press, Chicago, IL, pp. 251-276. Ross, M.H., and D. Steinmeyer, 1990: Energy for industry. Scientific American, 263, 89-98. Rostow, W.W., 1978: The World Economy: History and Prospect. University of Texas Press, Austin, TX. Rostow, W.W., 1990: The Stages of Economic Growth, Third Edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Rotmans, J., and H.J.M. de Vries (eds.), 1997: Perspectives on Global Futures: The TARGETS approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Rudd, J.W.M., R. Harris, C.A. Kelly, and R.E. Hecky, 1993: Are hydroelectric reservoirs significant sources of greenhouse gases? Ambio, 22, (4 June), 246-248. Sathar, Z.A., and J.B. Casterline, 1998: The onset of fertility transition in Pakistan. Population and Development Review, 24(4), 773-796. Sathaye, J., A. Ketoff, L. Schipper, and S. Lele, 1989: An End-Use Approach to Development of Long-Term Energy Demand Scenarios for Developing Countries, LBL-25611. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. Sathaye, J., and A. Ketoff, 1991: CO2 emissions from major developing countries: Better understanding the role of energy in the long term. The Energy Journal, 12(1), 161-196. Schimel, D., D. Alves, I. Enting, M. Hermann, F. Joos, D. Raynaud, T. Wigley, M. Prather, R. Derwent, D. Ehhalt, P. Fraser, E. Sanhueza, X. Zhou, P. Jonas, R. Charlson, H. Rodhe, S. Sadasivan, K.P. Shine, Y. Fouquart, V. Ramaswamy, S. Solomon, J. Srinivasan, D. Albritton, I. Isaksen, M. Lal, and D. Wuebbles, 1995: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change. In Climate Change 1995 – The Science of Climate Change, IPCC, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 65-131. Schipper, L., M.J. Figueroa, L. Price, and M. Espey, 1993: Mind the gap: the vicious circle of measuring automobile fuel use. Energy Policy, 21, 1173-1190. Schipper, L.J., 1996: Excel spreadsheets containing transport energy data, PASSUM.XLS and FRTSUM.XLS. Versions of 9 February 1996, International Energy Agency, Paris, France/Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA (Personal communication). Schipper, L., R. Haas, and C. Sheinbaum, 1996: Recent trends in residential energy use in OECD countries and their impact on carbon dioxide emissions: A comparative analysis of the period 1973-1992. Journal of Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1, 167-196. Schipper, L., M. Ting, M. Khrushch, and W. Golove, 1997a: The evolution of carbon dioxide emissions from energy use in industrial countries: An end-use analysis. Energy Policy, 25(7-9), 651-672. Schipper, L., L. Scholl, and L. Price, 1997b: L., L. Scholl, and L. Price, 1997b: Energy use and carbon emissions from freight in 10 industrial countries. An analysis of trends from 1973 to 1992. Transportation Research - D, 20(1), 57-76. Schmalensee, R., T. Stoker, and R. Judson, 1998: World carbon dioxide emissions: 1950-2050. The Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXX(1), 15-27. Schumpeter, J., 1935: The analysis of economic change. Review of Economic Statistics, May, 2-10. Schumpeter, J., 1943: Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. Harper & Brothers, New York, NY. Schollenberger, W. E., 1998: Gedanken über die Kohlenwasserstoffreserven der Erde. Wie lange können sie vorhalten? In Energievorräte und mineralische Rohstoffe. Wie lange noch? J. Zeemann (ed.), Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, pp. 75-126. Sheinbaum, C., and Rodriguez, L., 1997: Recent trends in Mexican industrial energy use and their impact on carbon dioxide emissions. Energy Policy, 25(7-9), 825-831. Shell International Ltd., 1996: The Evolution of the World’s Energy Systems. Shell International Ltd., The Hague. Shell International Ltd., 1998: People and the Environment. The 1997 Shell International Exploration and Production Health, Safety and Environment Report, Shell International Ltd., The Hague. Shukla, P. R., W. Chandler, D. Ghosh, and J. Logan, 1999: Developing Countries and Global Climate Change - Electric Power Choices for India. Report for the Pew Center on Global Climate Change by the Indian Institute of Management and Battelle Advanced International Studies Unit, (Photocopy, publication forthcoming in 2000). Silverberg, G., 1988: Modelling economic dynamics and technical change. Mathematical approaches to self-organisation and evolution (Chapter 24). In Technical Change and Economic Theory. G. C. Dosi, C. Freeman, R. Nelson, G. Silverberg, L. Soete (eds.), Pinter, London/New York, NY, pp. 531-559. Smith, A., 1970: The Wealth of Nations. Penguin, Harmondsworth, UK, 538 pp. Smith, N. J., and G. H. Robinson, 1997: Technology pushes reserves “crunch” date back in time. Oil and Gas Journal, April 7, 43-50. Smith, S., H. Pitcher, and T. M. L. Wigley, 2000: Global and regional anthropogenic sulfur dioxide emissions. Global Biogeochemical Cycles (In press). Solow, R., 1956: A contribution to the theory of economic growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70, 56-94. Solow, R., 1957: Technical change and the aggregate production function. Review of Economics and Statistics, 39, 312-320. Stern, D. I., and R. K. Kaufmann, 1998: Estimates of global anthropogenic methane emissions: 1860-1994. In Trends Online: A Compendium of Data on Global Change. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, TN. Stevens III, W. R., 1993: Abatement of nitrous oxide emissions produced in the adipic acid industry. In White House Conference on Global Climate Change, Nitrous Oxide Workshop, June 11, 1993. The DuPont Company, Wilmington, DE (mimeo). Stoll, H., and D. M. Todd, 1996: Current IGCC Market Competitiveness. General Electric Co., Schenectady, NY. Storey, M., 1996: Policies and Measures for Common Action: Demand Side Efficiency, Voluntary Agreements with Industry. Annex 1 Expert Group on the UNFCCC, WP 8, OECD, Paris. Storey, M., 1997: The Climate Implications of Agricultural Policy Reform. Annex I Expert Group on the UNFCCC, WP16, OECD, Paris. Strang, V., 1997: Cultural theory and modelling practice. In Energy Modelling Beyond Economics and Technology. B. Giovannini, A. Baianzini (eds.), International Academy of the Environment, Geneva, and the Centre for Energy Studies of the University of Geneva, Geneva, pp. 53-70. Streets, D. G., and S. T. Waldhoff, 2000: Present and future emissions of air pollutants in China: SO2, NOx, and CO. Atmospheric Environment, 34(3), 363-374. Streets, D. G., N. Tsai, S. Waldhoff, H. Akimoto, and K. Oka, 2000: Sulfur Dioxide Emission Trends for Asian Countries 1985-1995, Proceedings of the Workshop on the Transport of Air Pollutants in Asia, July 22-23 1999, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. Suri, V., and D. Chapman, 1996: Economic Growth, Trade and Environment: An Econometric Evaluation of the Environmental Kuznets Curve. Working Paper WP-96-05, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY. Szargut, J., and D. R. Morris, 1987: Cumulative energy consumption and cumulative degree of perfection in chemical processes. Energy Research, 11, 245-261. Tainter, J., 1988: The Collapse of Complex Societies. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Tainter, J., 1996: Complexity, problem solving and sustainable societies. In Getting Down to Earth: Practical Applications of Ecological Economics. R. Costanza, O. Segura, J. Martinez-Alier (eds.), Island Press, Washington, DC, pp. 61-76. Teilhard de Chardin, P., 1959: T oxidising capacity of the earth's atmosphere: Probable past and future changes. Science, 1157-1165. Tilton, J. E., 1990. World Metal Demand: Trends and Prospects. Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C. Tinbergen, J., 1942. Zur Theorie des langfristigen Wirtschaftsentwicklung. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 1, 511-549. Tiwari, P., and J. K. Parikh, 1995. Cost of carbon dioxide reduction in building construction. Energy - The International Journal, 20(6), 531-547. Trexler, M. C., and C. Haugen, 1995. Keeping it Green: Tropical Forestry Opportunities for Mitigating Climate Change. WRI/IEPA, Washington D.C. UN (United Nations), 1992. Long Range World Population Projections: Two Centuries of Population Growth 1950-2150. Department of International Economic and Social Affairs, UN, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1993. Integrated Environmental and Economic Accounting, Studies in Methods, Series F, No. 61, Handbook of National Accounting. UN, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1995. Population and Development. Program of Action adopted at the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994, 1, United Nations Publication no. E.95.XIII.7, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1996. World Population Prospects: 1996 Revision. United Nations, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1997a. Proceedings of Expert Group Meeting on Below Replacement Fertility. United Nations Population Division, United Nations Publication no. ESA/P/WP140, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1997b. Critical Trends: Global Change and Sustainable Development, United Nations Publication no. ST/ESA/255, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1997c. Report of the Secretary General on Progress on Work in the Field of Population in 1996. United Nations Commission on Population and Development, Thirteenth Session. United Nations Publication, New York, N.Y., pp. 8-10. UN (United Nations), 1998. World Population Projections to 2150. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York, N.Y. UNAIDS and WHO, 1998. Report on the Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic. UNAIDS and WHO, Geneva, Switzerland. UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 1993. Human Development Report 1993, Oxford University Press, New York, N.Y. UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 1997. Human Development Report 1997, Oxford University Press, New York, N.Y. UNEP (United Nations Environmental Programme), 1993. Environmental Data Report 1993-1994. Blackwell Publishers, Oxford. UNEP, 1999. Global Environmental Outlook 2000. UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya. UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1997. Second National Communication of France under the Climate Convention. Secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Bonn. US Council of Economic Advisors, 1997. Excerpts on the challenge of an aging population. Population and Development Review, 23(2), 443-451. US DOC (US Department of Commerce), 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States: Colonial Times to 1970, Vols I and II. US DOC, Washington, D.C. US DOE (US Department of Energy), 1994. Technology Characterizations. US DOE Office of Utility Technologies, Washington, D.C. US EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 1994. International Anthropogenic Methane Emissions: Estimates for 1990. EPA 230-R-93-010, US EPA Office of Policy Planning and Evaluation, Washington, D.C. Van Vuuren, D. P., B. Strengers, and H. J. M. de Vries, 2000. Long term perspectives on world metal use - a systems dynamics model. Resource Policy (accepted for publication). Viguier, L., 1999. Emissions of SO2, NOx, and CO2 in transition economies: Emission inventories and Divisia index analysis. Energy Economics, 20(2), 59-75. VROM (Netherlands Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment), 1997. Second Netherlands National Communication on Climate Change Policies. Distribution Centre of Government Policies, Zoetermeer, the Netherlands and Secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, Bonn. Waggoner, P. E., 1996. How much land can ten billion people spare for nature? Daedalus, 125(3), 73-93. Wallace, D., 1995. Environmental Policy and Industrial Innovation: Strategies in Europe, the USA, and Japan. Earthscan, London. Walls, M. A., A. J. Krupnick, and H. C. Hood, 1993. Estimatin Nationwide Personal Transportation Survey. Resources for the Future discussion paper ENR 93-25, Resources for the Future (RFF), Washington, D.C. Walsh, M.P., 1993: Highway vehicle activity trends and their implications for global warming: the United States in an international context. In Transportation and Global Climate Change. D.L. Greene, D.J. Santini (eds.), American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy, Washington, D.C. Wassmann, R., P. Papen, and H. Rennenberg, 1993: Methane emission from rice paddies and possible mitigation strategies. Chemosphere 26(1-4), 2010-2117. Wassmann, R., H.K. Kludze, W. Bujun, and R.S. Lantin, 1997: Factors and processes controlling methane emissions from rice fields. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 49(1-3), 111-117. Wassmann, R., H.U. Neue, C. Bueno, R.S. Lantin, M.C.R. Alberto, L.V. Buendia, K. Bronson, H. Papen, and H. Rennenberg, 1998: Methane production capacities in different rice soils derived from inherent and exogenous substrates. Plant and Soil, 203(2), 227-237. Watanabe, C. (Tokyo Institute for Technology), 1997: Personal communication. Watson, R., M.C. Zinyowera, and R. Moss (eds.), 1996: Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 861 pp. WEC (World Energy Council), 1993: Energy for Tomorrow's World: The Realities, the Real Options and the Agenda for Achievements. Kogan Page, London. WEC (World Energy Council), 1994: New Renewable Energy Resources. World Energy Council (WEC), London. WEC (World Energy Council), 1995a: Survey of Energy Resources. World Energy Council (WEC), London. WEC (World Energy Council), 1995b: Energy Efficiency Utilizing High Technology: An Assessment of Energy Use in Industry and Buildings. Prepared by M.D. Levine, E. Worrell, N. Martin, and L. Price, World Energy Council (WEC), London. WEC (World Energy Council), 1998: Survey of Energy Resources. World Energy Council (WEC), London. Wernick, I., 1996: Consuming materials: The American way. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 53(1), 111-122. Wexler, L., 1996: Improving Population Assumptions in Greenhouse Emissions Models, WP-96-099, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. WHO (World Health Organization) and UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme), 1993: Urban Air Pollution in Megacities of the World, 2nd Edition, Blackwell Publishers, Oxford. Wilber, K., 1981: Up From Eden: A Transpersonal View of Human Evolution. Quest Books, Wheaton, IL. Wilhite, H., 1997: Framing the socio-cultural context for analyzing energy consumption. In Energy Modelling Beyond Economics and Technology. B. Giovannini, A. Baranzini (eds.), International Academy of the Environment, Geneva, and the Centre for Energy Studies of the University of Geneva, Geneva, pp. 35-52. Willerboer, W., 1997: Future IGCC Concepts. Demkolec BV, Moerdijk, the Netherlands. Williams, A. (ed.), 1993: Methane Emissions. The Watt Committee on Energy, London. Williams, R.H., 1998: Fuel decarbonization for fuel cell applications and sequestration of the separated CO₂. In Ecorestructuring: Implications for Sustainable Development. R.U. Ayres, P.M. Weaver (eds.), United Nations University Press, Tokyo, pp. 180-222. Williams, R.H., E.D. Larson, and M.H. Ross, 1987: Materials, affluence, and industrial energy use. Ann. Rev. Energy, 12, 99-144. WMO (World Meteorological Organisation) (D.M. Whelpdale and M.S. Kaiser, eds.), 1997: Global Acid Deposition Assessment. WMO Global Atmospheric Watch No. 106, WMO, Geneva. WMO/UNEP (World Meteorological Organisation and United Nations Environment Programme), 1998: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1998. WMO Global Ozone Research & Monitoring, World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), Geneva. WMO/UNEP, 1999: Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs. Proceedings of the Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting, Petten, the Netherlands, 26-28 May, 1999. World Bank, 1991: World Development Report 1991: The Challenge of Development. Oxford University Press, Oxford. World Bank, 1992: World Development Report 1992: Development and the Environment. Oxford University Press, Oxford. World Bank, 1997a: Monitoring Environmental Progress, Expanding the Measure of Wealth. World Bank, Washington, D.C. World Bank, 1997b: World Development Indicators 1997. World Bank, Washington, D.C. World Bank, 1997c: Can the Environment Wait? Priorities for East Asia. World Bank, Washington, D.C. World Bank, 1997d: Clear Water, Blue Skies. Chi Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries: Beyond Financial Crisis. World Bank, Washington, D.C. World Bank, 1999: 1999 World Development Indicators. World Bank, Washington, D.C. Worrell, E., M.D. Levine, L. Price, N. Martin, R. van den Broek, and K. Blok, 1997: Potentials and Policy Implications of Energy and Material Efficiency Improvement. United Nations Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development, New York, N.Y. WRI (World Resources Institute), 1997a: World Resources 1996-97. WRI, Washington, D.C. WRI (World Resources Institute), 1997b: Resource Flows: The Material Basis of Industrial Economies. WRI, Washington, D.C. Zachariah, K.C., and M.T. Vu, 1988: World Population Projections 1987-88 Edition. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Md. 4 An Overview of Scenarios CONTENTS 4.1. Introduction 4.2. Scenario Taxonomy 4.2.1. Storylines 4.2.2. Scenarios 4.3. Scenario Storylines 4.3.1. A1 Storyline and Scenario Family 4.3.2. A2 Storyline and Scenario Family 4.3.3. B1 Storyline and Scenario Family 4.3.4. B2 Storyline and Scenario Family 4.4. Scenario Quantification and Overview 4.4.1. Scenario Terminology 4.4.2. Translation of Storylines into Scenario Drivers 4.4.2.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.2.2. A2 Scenarios 4.4.2.3. B1 Scenarios 4.4.2.4. B2 Scenarios 4.4.3. Population Prospects 4.4.3.1. A1 and B1 Scenarios 4.4.3.2. A2 Scenarios 4.4.3.3. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios 4.4.3.4. B2 Scenarios 4.4.4. Economic Development 4.4.4.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.4.2. Harmonized and Other A1 Scenarios 4.4.4.3. A2 Scenarios 4.4.4.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios 4.4.4.5. B1 Scenarios 4.4.4.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios 4.4.4.7. B2 Scenarios 4.4.4.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios 4.4.5. Energy Intensities, Energy Demand, and Structure of Energy Use 4.4.5.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.5.2. Harmonized and Other A1 Scenarios 4.4.5.3. A2 Scenarios 4.4.5.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios 4.4.5.5. B1 Scenarios 4.4.5.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios 4.4.5.7. B2 Scenarios 4.4.5.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios 4.4.6. Resource Availability 4.4.6.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.6.2. A1 Scenario Groups 4.4.6.3. A2 Scenarios 4.4.6.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios 4.4.6.5. B1 Scenarios 4.4.6.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios 4.4.6.7. B2 Scenarios 4.4.6.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios 4.4.7. Technological Change 4.4.7.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.7.2. A1 Scenario Groups 4.4.7.3. A2 Scenarios 4.4.7.4. B1 Scenarios 4.4.7.5. B2 Scenarios 4.4.7.6. Harmonized and Other Scenarios 4.4.8. Prospects for Future Energy Systems 4.4.8.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.8.2. A1 Scenario Groups 4.4.8.3. A2 Scenarios 4.4.8.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios 4.4.8.5. B1 Scenarios 4.4.8.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios 4.4.8.7. B2 Scenarios 4.4.8.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios 4.4.9. Land-Use Changes 4.4.9.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.9.2. Harmonized and Other A1 Scenarios 4.4.9.3. A2 Scenarios 4.4.9.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios 4.4.9.5. B1 Scenarios 4.4.9.6. B2 Scenarios 4.4.9.7. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios 4.4.10. Environmental Policies 4.4.10.1. A1 Scenarios 4.4.10.2. A2 Scenarios 4.4.10.3. B1 Scenarios 4.4.10.4. B2 Scenarios 4.5. Regional Scenario Patterns 4.6. A Roadmap to the SRES Scenarios References 4.1. Introduction In Chapter 4 the main characteristics of the scenarios developed for the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES scenarios) are presented. These scenarios cover a wide range of driving forces from demographic to social and economic developments, and they encompass a wide range of future greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (see Chapter 5). Chapters 2 and 3 provide an overview and assessment of the scenario literature, the main driving forces of future GHG emissions, and their relationships. How the driving forces are combined to produce a set of scenarios that cover the ranges of GHG emissions from the literature is described in this chapter. Chapters 2 and 3 demonstrate the large uncertainty in the literature that surrounds both future emissions and the possible developments of their underlying driving forces. The uncertainties range from inadequate scientific understanding of the problems, through data gaps or lack of data, to the inherent uncertainties of future events in general. Hence alternative scenarios are used to describe the range of possible future emissions. The SRES approach involved the development of a set of four alternative scenario “families” (see Chapter 1, Section 1.7.2). Each family of SRES scenarios includes a descriptive part (called a “storyline”) and a number of alternative interpretations and quantifications of each storyline developed by six different modeling approaches (see also Box 1-1 on terminology). Each storyline describes a demographic, social, economic, technological, and policy future for each of the scenario families. Within each family different scenarios explore variations of global and regional developments and their implications for GHG, ozone precursors, and sulfur emissions. Each of these scenarios is consistent with the broad framework specified by the storyline of the scenario family. Each storyline is basically a short “history” of a possible future development expressed as a combination of key scenario characteristics. These descriptions are stylized and designed to facilitate specification and further interpretation of scenario quantifications. The storylines identify particular dynamics, visible in the world today, that might have important influences on future GHG emissions. They deliberately explore what might happen if social, economic, technical, and policy developments take a particular direction at the global level; they also pay attention to regional differences and interactions, especially between developing and industrialized countries. The broad consensus among the SRES writing team is that the current literature analysis suggests the future is inherently unpredictable and so views will differ as to which of the storylines and representative scenarios could be more or less likely. Therefore, the development of a single “best guess” or “business-as-usual” scenario is neither desirable nor possible. Nor should the storylines and scenarios be taken as policy recommendations. The storylines represent the playing out of certain social, economic, technological, and environmental paradigms, which will be viewed positively by some people and negatively by others. The SRES writing team decided on four storylines – an even number helps to avoid the impression of a “central” or “most likely” case. The team wanted more than two storylines to help illustrate that the future depends on many different underlying dynamics; the team wanted no more than four to avoid complicating the process with too many alternatives. The scenarios cover a wide range of, but not all possible, futures. In particular, it was decided that possible “surprises” would not be considered and that there would be no “disaster” scenarios. The team decided to carry out sensitivity tests within some of the storylines by considering alternative scenarios with different fossil-fuel reserves, rates of economic growth, or rates of technical change. These sensitivity analyses resulted in groups of scenarios within a given scenario family and alternative scenario interpretations within a scenario group or family (see Section 4.2 below for a description of scenario terminology and taxonomy). The titles of the storylines are deliberately simple – A1, A2, B1, and B2. There is no particular order among the storylines (they are listed alphabetically). Figure 4-1 shows that the SRES scenarios build on the main driving forces of GHG emissions. Each scenario family is based on a common specification of the main driving forces. All four storylines and scenario families describe future worlds that are generally more affluent compared to the current situation. They range from very rapid economic growth and technologic change to high levels of environmental protection, from low-to-high global populations, and from high-to-low GHG emissions. Perhaps more importantly, all the storylines describe dynamic changes and of GHG emissions. Each scenario family is based on a common specification of the main driving forces. All four storylines and scenario families describe future worlds that are generally more affluent compared to the current situation. They range from very rapid economic growth and technologic change to high levels of environmental protection, from low-to-high global populations, and from high-to-low GHG emissions. Perhaps more importantly, all the storylines describe dynamic changes and transitions in generally different directions. The storylines do not include specific climate-change policies, but they do include numerous other socio-economic developments and non-climate environmental policies. As time progresses, the storylines diverge from each other in many of their characteristic features. In this way they span the relevant range of GHG emissions and different combinations of their main sources. After the basic features and driving forces for each of the four storylines had been determined, the team quantified the storylines into individual scenarios with the help of formal (computer) models. While the writing team and the modeling groups included experts from around the world, all six modeling groups are based in Europe, North America, and Japan. As indicated above, each model quantification of a storyline constitutes a scenario, and all scenarios of one storyline constitute a "scenario family." The six models are representative of different approaches to emissions-scenario modeling and different integrated assessment frameworks in the literature, and include so-called top-down and bottom-up models. The use of different models reflects the SRES Terms of Reference call for methodological pluralism and for an open process (see Appendix I). The number and type of models chosen in the open process was on a voluntary basis. In January 1997 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Working Group II Technical Support Unit (IPCC WGII TSU) sent letters to Governments asking for nominations of modeling teams to contribute to SRES and advertised in a number of scientific journals for modelers to participate in SRES. Six different modeling groups from Europe, North America, and Japan volunteered to participate in the formulation and development of the scenarios in response to the call. It is fortunate that they are from three different continents and also include different methodological approaches used in the literature to develop quantitative emissions scenarios. The six models have different regional aggregations. The writing team decided to group the various global regions into four "macro-regions" common to all the regional aggregations across the six models (Box 4-1). In response to a number of requests from potential user groups within IPCC and in accordance with a decision of the IPCC Bureau in 1998 to release draft scenarios to climate modellers for their input in the Third Assessment Report, the writing team chose one model run to characterize each scenario family. Scenarios resulting from these runs are called "marker" scenarios or simply "markers." There are four marker scenarios, each considered characteristic for one of the four scenario families. The rationale and process for designating marker scenarios is discussed in more detail in Section 4.4.1. The SRES scenario quantifications of the main indicators (such as population and economic growth, characteristics of the energy system, and the associated GHG emissions) all fall within the range of studies published in the literature and scenarios documented in the SRES database (see Chapter 2). Quantitative indicators form an important part of each scenario description. These indicators include gross world product, population, supply and demand for principal energy forms, energy resource characteristics, the breakdown of land use, and emissions of various GHGs. The scenarios are designed so that the evolution of their indicators over the 21st century falls well within the range represented by scenarios from the literature and included in the SRES database (see Chapter 2 and Morita and Lee, 1998; Nakicenovic, et al., 1998). More importantly, they correspond to the qualitative characteristics of the respective storylines. Also, they were revised iteratively within the six modeling approaches to achieve internal consistency on the basis of inputs from the entire SRES writing team and the SRES open process. Each storyline was characterized initially by two quantitative "targets," namely global population (15, 10, and 7 billion by 2100 in scenarios A2, B2, and both A1 and B1, respectively) and global gross domestic product (GDP) by 2100 (in 1990 US dollars, US$550 trillion for A1, US$250 trillion for A2, US$350 trillion for B1, and US$250 trillion for B2). These quantitative targets guided the subsequent quantification of the SRES scenarios with different model approaches. Generally, the orders of magnitude of these original quantitative scenario "guideposts" are reflected in the final SRES scenarios (see Table 4-2) and have been adopted in a majority of SRES scenarios. Evidently, the quantitative characteristics of the four SRES scenario families comprise many more dimensions than this, in particular regional patterns, differences in resource and technology availability, land-use changes, non-carbon dioxide (CO2) GHGs, etc. These are discussed in the subsequent Sections. 4.2. SRES Scenario Taxonomy 4.2.1. Storylines The primary purpose of developing multiple scenario families was to explore the uncertainties behind potential trends in global developments and GHG emissions, as well as the key drivers that influence these (see also Chapter 1, Section 1.7.2). The writing team decided that narrative storylines, based on the futures and scenario literature, would be the most coherent way to describe their scenarios, for the following reasons. • To help the team to think more coherently about the complex interplay between scenario driving forces within and across alternative scenarios and to enhance the consistency in assumptions for different parameters. • To make it easier to explain the scenarios to the various user communities by providing a narrative description of alternative futures that goes beyond quantitative scenario features. • To make the scenarios more useful, in particular, to analysts contributing to IPCC WGs II and III. The demographic, social, political, and technological contexts described in the scenario storylines are all-important in the analysis of the effects of policies to either adapt to climate change or to reduce GHG emissions. • To provide a guide for additional assumptions to be made in detailed climate-impact and mitigation analyses, because at present no model or scenario can possibly respond to the wide variety of informational and data needs of the different user communities of long-term emissions scenarios. The four scenario families presented in this report are representative of a broad range of scenarios found in the literature, but they are not directly based on any particular published scenario taxonomy or set of scenarios. Rather, the storylines of each scenario family were developed on the basis of the general knowledge of this literature, and on the personal experience and creativity within the writing team. The writing team spent the better part of the first year (1997) formulating the storylines, which during the following two years were revised iteratively with Annex I countries of the UNFCCC. 172 An Overview of Scenarios of the general knowledge of this literature, and on the personal experience and creativity within the writing team. The writing team spent the better part of the first year (1997) formulating the storylines, which during the following two years were revised iteratively with the scenario development until the completion of the report. Four brief "future histories" captured by the SRES storylines differ in how global regions interrelate, how new technologies diffuse, how regional economic activities evolve, how protection of local and regional environments is implemented, and how demographic structure changes. The "qualitative" storyline characteristics include various political, social, cultural, and educational conditions (e.g., type of governance, social structure, and educational level) that often cannot be defined in strictly quantitative terms and do not directly "drive" GHG emissions. These qualitative variables, however, participate in complex "cause-effect" relationships with quantitative emission drivers (e.g., economic activities, population levels, energy consumption). Their explicit inclusion in the scenario development process not only makes scenarios more "plausible" and "believable," but also ensures they do not become an arbitrary numeric combination of quantitative parameters. The SRES storylines do not include explicit policies to limit GHG emissions or to adapt to the expected global climate change, reflecting the SRES Terms of Reference (see Appendix I). However, the storyline demographic, social, economic and technological profiles can be used in other studies to develop and evaluate climate-change mitigation and adaptation measures and policies. Such evaluation would require additional (prescriptive) assumptions about policies and measures to affect future climates and human responses to climate change now absent from the storylines. All four SRES "futures" represented by the distinct storylines are treated as equally possible and there are no "central," "business-as-usual," "surprise," or "disaster" futures (examples of which are given in Box 4-2). All of the storylines have features that can be interpreted as "positive" or "negative" and Box 4-2: "Neutrality" of the SRES Scenarios they play out different tendencies and changes in part visible in the world today. To avoid the tendency to overemphasize "positive" or "negative" features of individual storylines, their titles were kept simple. Many attempts were made to capture the spirit of each storyline with a short and snappy title, but no single title was found to reflect adequately the complex mix of characteristics of any storyline. By 2100 the world will have changed in ways that are difficult to imagine, as difficult as it was at the end of the 19th century to imagine the changes of the 20th century. However, each storyline takes a different direction of future developments so that they differ in an increasingly irreversible way. They describe divergent futures that reflect a significant portion of the underlying uncertainties in the main driving forces. The differences among the storylines cover a wide range of the key "future" characteristics, such as technology, governance, and behavioral patterns. Hence the plausibility or feasibility of the storyline assumptions should be viewed with an "open mind," not from a narrow interpretation of current situations and trends in economic conditions, technology developments, and social and governing structures. The main characteristics of future developments that take distinct development paths in the four storylines include (see also Table 4-2 for an overview): • Nature of the global and regional demographic developments in relation to other characteristics of the storyline. • Extent to which economic globalization and increased social and cultural interactions continue over the 21st century. • Rates of global and regional economic developments and trade patterns in relation to the other characteristics of the storyline. • Rates and direction of global and regional technological change, especially in relation to the economic development prospects. • Extent to which local and regional environmental concerns shape the direction of future development and environmental controls. • Degree to which human and natural resources are mobilized globally and regionally to achieve multiple development objectives of each storyline. • Balance of economic, social, technological, or environmental objectives in the choices made by consumers, governments, enterprises, and other stakeholders. Thus, the storylines describe developments in many different economic, technical, environmental, and social dimensions. Consequently, they occupy a multidimensional space and no simple metric can be used to classify them. Even though they occupy such a multidimensional space along many driving forces relevant for GHG emissions, it is useful here to highlight just two dimensions. The first refers to the extent of economic convergence and social and cultural interactions across the regions and the second to the balance between economic objectives and environmental and equity objectives. Possible names for these two dimensions could be "globalization" (Box 4-3) and "sustainability," respectively (Box 4-4). As these two expressions are not necessarily viewed by everyone as being value-free, the two dimensions could alternatively be designated simply as a more global or more regional orientation and as a more economic or a more environmental orientation (see Figure 4-1). These dimensions are important in the SRES scenarios. Nevertheless, there was considerable resistance in the SRES writing team against such a simplistic classification of storylines, so it is presented here for illustrative purposes only. These distinctions are, in a sense, artificial. For example, both economic and environmental objectives are pursued in all scenarios, albeit with different levels of relative emphasis. The extent to which the currently observed global and regional orientations will prevail in the 21st century is pertinent to the distinction between the A1 and B1 scenario families on one side and A2 and B2 families on the other side. While the A1 and B1 storylines, to different degrees, emphasize successful Box 4-3: Globalization Issues With the convergence in governments' economic policies in the 1990s, combined with the rapid development of communication networks, it is perhaps not surprising that an extensive poll of scenarios by the Millennium Institute suggested "globalization" as the main driving force that will shape the future (Glenn and Gordon, 1997, 1999). However, some scenarios in the literature explore the possibility that unfettered markets, usually seen as an integral element of "globalization," might destabilize society in ways that endanger the process (Mohan Rao, 1998). In UNESCO's 1998 World Culture Report, it is noted that communities are increasingly emphasizing their cultural individuality; meanwhile, communication and travel are resulting in interactions between communities that result in the evolution of new "local" cultures (UNESCO, 1998). Huntington (1996) asserts that continental regional cultures may determine the shape of future geopolitical developments rather than globalization. Box 4-4: Sustainability Issues Recent decades have seen considerable growth in discourse of environmental and social issues, represented at the global level by several high-level United Nations (UN) meetings on social and economic development and environmental sustainability (UNCED, 1992; UN, 1994, 1995; Leach, 1998; Munasinghe and Swart, 2000). The range of participants has expanded from the most closely involved government ministries, businesses, and environmental NGOs to include a broad range of representation by different ministries, local government, businesses, professions, and community groups. Increased interest in sustainability issues can lead to all kinds of socio-economic and technological changes that may not be aimed explicitly at reducing GHG emissions, but which may in effect contribute significantly to such reductions. economic global convergence and social and cultural interactions, A2 and B2 focus on a blossoming of diverse regional development pathways (see Box 4-3). The extent to which the currently observed economic and environmental orientations will prevail in the 21st century is pertinent to the distinction between A1 and A2 scenario families on one side and B1 and B2 scenario families on the other side. In the B1 and B2 storylines this transition is pursued, to different degrees, through a successful translation of global concerns into local actions to promote environmental sustainability. Alternatively, in the A1 and A2 storylines the emphasis remains, again to different degrees, on sustained economic development and achievement of high levels of affluence throughout the world, where environmental priorities are perceived as less important than those of economic development (see Box 4-4). In short, each of the storylines can be summarized as follows: • The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world of very rapid economic growth, low population growth, and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying themes are convergence among regions, capacity building, and increased cultural and social interactions, with a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita income. The A1 scenario family develops into four groups that describe alternative directions of be summarized as follows: • The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world of very rapid economic growth, low population growth, and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying themes are convergence among regions, capacity building, and increased cultural and social interactions, with a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita income. The A1 scenario family develops into four groups that describe alternative directions of technological change in the energy system.1 1 During the approval process of the Summary for Policymakers at the 5th Session of WGIII of the IPCC from 8–11 March 2000 in Katmandu, Nepal, it was decided to combine two of these groups (A1C and A1G) into one “fossil intensive” group A1FI, in contrast to the non-fossil group A1T, and to select two illustrative scenarios from these two A1 groups to facilitate use by modelers and policy makers. This leads to six scenario groups that constitute the four scenario families, three of which are in the A1 family. All scenarios are equally sound. An Overview of Scenarios • The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance and preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across regions converge very slowly, which results in high population growth. Economic development is primarily regionally oriented and per capita economic growth and technological change are more fragmented and slower than in other storylines. • The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a convergent world with the same low population growth as in the A1 storyline, but with rapid changes in economic structures toward a service and information economy, with reductions in material intensity, and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient technologies. The emphasis is on global solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability, including improved equity, but without additional climate initiatives. • The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability. It is a world with moderate population growth, intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented toward environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local and regional levels. These storylines are presented in more detail in Section 4.3, which includes their original quantitative indicators that served as input to the scenario quantification process. 4.2.2. Scenarios All SRES scenarios were designed as quantitative “interpretations” (quantifications) of the SRES qualitative storylines. Each scenario is a particular quantification of one of the four storylines. The quantitative inputs for each scenario involved, for instance, regionalized measures of population, economic development, and energy efficiency, the availability of various forms of energy, agricultural productivity, and local pollution controls. Each participating modeling group (see above) used computer models and their experience in the assessment of long-range development of economic, technological, and environmental systems to generate quantifications of the storylines. The models used to develop the scenarios are: • Asian Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) from the National Institute of Environmental Studies (NIES) in Japan (Morita et al., 1994). • Atmospheric Stabilization Framework Model (ASF) from ICF Consulting in the US (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990; Pepper et al., 1998; Sankovski et al., 2000). • Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect (IMAGE) from the National Institute for Public Health and Hygiene (RIVM) in the Netherlands (Alcamo et al., 1998; de Vries et al., 1994, 1999, 2000), used in connection with the Central Planning Bureau (CPB) WorldScan model (de Jong and Zalm, 1991), the Netherlands. • Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation (MARIA) from the Science University of Tokyo in Japan (Mori and Takahashi, 1999; Mori, 2000). • Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (MESSAGE) from the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria (Messner and Strubegger, 1995; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000). • The Mini Climate Assessment Model (MiniCAM) from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) in the USA (Edmonds et al., 1994, 1996a, 1996b). A more detailed description of the modeling approaches is given in Appendix IV. Some modeling teams developed scenarios that reflected all four storylines, while some presented scenarios for fewer storylines. Some scenarios share harmonized2 input assumptions of main scenario drivers, such as population, economic growth, and final energy use, with their respective designated marker scenarios of the four scenario families and underlying storylines (see Section 4.4.1). Others explore scenario sensitivities in these driving forces through alternative interpretations of the four scenario storylines. Table 4-1 lists all SRES scenarios, by modeling group and by scenario family, and indicates which scenarios share harmonized input assumptions of important driving forces of emissions at the global level and at the level of the four SRES regions. Altogether, the six modeling teams formulated 40 alternative SRES scenarios. All the qualitative and quantitative features of scenarios that belong to the same family were set to conform to the corresponding features of the underlying storyline. Quantitative storyline targets recommended for use in all scenarios within a given family included, in particular, population and GDP growth assumptions. Most scenarios developed within a given family follow these storyline recommendations, but some scenarios offer alternative interpretations. Scenarios within each family vary quite substantially in such characteristics as the assumptions about availability of fossil-fuel resources, the rate of energy-efficiency improvements, the extent of renewable-energy development, and, hence, resultant GHG emissions. This variation reflects the modeling teams’ alternative views on the plausible global and regional developments and also stems from differences in the underlying modeling approaches. After the modeling teams had quantified the key driving forces and made an effort to harmonize them with the storylines by 2 The harmonization criteria agreed by the writing team are indicated in Table 4-1. The classification of scenarios is quite robust against varying the percentage deviation harmonization criteria (see Section 4.4.1). An Overview of Scenarios Table 4-1: Characteristics of SRES scenario quantifications. Shown for each scenario is the name of the storyline and scenario family, full scenario name (ID), descriptive scenario name, and which of the driving forces are harmonized at the global and regional level, and on the global level only, respectively. The listed harmonized driving forces are population (POP), gross domestic product (GDP), and final energy (FE), see also Section 4.4.1. and Table 4-4. Marker scenarios are indicated in bold and are harmonized by definition, and additional illustrative scenarios, that are also harmonized are given in italics. The lower table indicates the harmonization criteria in terms of the maximum deviation (%) from the specified common population, gross world product, and final energy development at the global and regional levels. Storyline Scenario ID Scenario Name Harmonized Drivers (on World and SRES Regional Level) Harmonized Drivers (on World Level) A1 A1B-AIM A1 FE, GDP, POP by definition FE, GDP, POP by definition A1B-ASF A1 POP GDP, POP A1B-IMAGE A1 POP GDP, POP A1B-MARIA A1 — POP, GDP A1B-MESSAGE A1 FE, GDP, POP FE, GDP, POP A1B-MiniCAM A1 POP POP, GDP A1C-AIM A1 coal FE, GDP, POP coal FE, GDP, POP FE, GDP, POP A1C-MESSAGE A1 coal POP FE, GDP, POP A1C-MiniCAM A1 coal POP POP A1G-AIM A1 oil and gas FE, GDP, POP FE, GDP, POP A1G-MESSAGE A1 oil and gas POP FE, GDP, POP A1G-MiniCAM A1 oil and gas POP POP GDP A1T-AIM A1 technology GDP, POP GDP, POP A1T-MESSAGE A1 technology POP GDP, POP A1T-MARIA A1 technology — POP A1v1-MiniCAM A1v1 POP POP A1v2-MiniCAM A1v2 — — A2 A2-AIM A2 POP FE, POP A2-ASF A2 FE, GDP, POP by definition FE, GDP, POP by definition A2G-IMAGE A2 gas — POP A2-MESSAGE A2 FE, GDP, POP FE, GDP, POP A2-MiniCAM A2 POP POP A2-A1-MiniCAM A2-A1 — — B1 B1-AIM B1 POP GDP, POP B1-ASF B1 POP GDP, POP B1-IMAGE B1 FE, GDP, POP by definition FE, GDP, POP by definition B1-MARIA B1 — POP B1-MESSAGE B1 FE, GDP, POP FE, GDP, POP B1-MiniCAM B1 POP GDP, POP B1T-MESSAGE B1 technology FE, GDP, POP FE, GDP, POP B1High-MESSAGE B1 high POP GDP, POP B1High-MiniCAM B1 high POP POP B2 B2-AIM B2 FE, GDP, POP FE, GDP, POP B2-ASF B2 POP POP B2-IMAGE B2 — — B2-MARIA B2 — FE, GDP, POP B2-MESSAGE B2 FE, GDP, POP by definition FE, GDP, POP by definition B2-MiniCAM B2 — GDP B2C-MARIA B2 coal — FE, GDP, POP B2High-MiniCAM B2 high — GDP Table 4.1 continued Harmonization criteria: 1990-2020 2020-2050 2050-2100 Population World 5% 5% 5% 4 SRES regions 10% 10% 10% GDP World 10% 10% 10% 4 SRES regions 25% 25% 25% Final Energy World 15% 15% 15% 4 SRES regions 25% 20% 15% * The A1T scenarios explored cases of increased energy end-use efficiency and therefore share similar levels of energy services, but not final energy, with the A1 marker scenario. As this was an agreed upon (different) feature of this particular scenario group compared to that of the A1 marker, the final energy harmonization criteria does not apply by design. If final energy use is excluded as harmonization criteria for the scenarios of the A1T scenario group the number of harmonized scenarios increases to 13 (four SRES regions and world level) and 17 (world level only), respectively. ** A1v1-MiniCAM, A1v2-MiniCAM, and A2-A1-MiniCAM became available only late in the process (after the 15 July 1999 deadline). Intentionally, they describe futures that are quite different in character from the other scenarios in their respective families and are therefore only to a limited degree comparable to other scenarios of the A1 and A2 scenario families. *** The IMAGE-results for the A2 and B2 scenarios are based on preliminary model experiments done in March 1998. Due to limited resources it has not been possible to redo these experiments. Hence, the IMAGE-team is not able to provide background data and details for these scenario calculations and the population and economic growth assumptions are not fully harmonized, as is the case for the IMAGE A1 and B1 scenarios. **** Deviations from harmonization criteria in one time period are not considered in this classification. Adjusting control parameters, possible diversity still remained (see Section 4.4.1). In addition, the A1 scenario family developed into different distinct scenario groups, each based on the A1 storyline that describes alternative developments in future energy systems, from carbon-intensive development to decarbonization (see footnote 1). (Similar storyline variations were considered for other scenario families, but were pursued only to a limited degree in scenario sensitivity analysis in order to limit the number of scenarios.) This further increased the richness in different GHG emissions paths, because this variation in the structure of the future energy system in itself resulted in a range of emissions almost as large as that generated through the variation of other main driving forces, such as population and economic development. The differentiation into various scenario groups was introduced into the A1 storyline because of its “high growth with high technology” nature, in which differences in alternative technology developments translate into large differences in future GHG emission levels. As for the storylines, no single scenario was treated as more or less “probable” than others belonging to the same family. However, after requests from various user communities to reduce the number of scenarios to a manageable size, a single scenario within a family was selected as a representative case to illustrate a particular storyline on the basis of the modeling teams’ consensus. These scenarios were named “marker scenarios” or simply “markers” and were put on the SRES open process webpage for review. The marker scenario for the A1 scenario storyline was developed using the AIM model; for the A2 storyline using the ASF model; for the B1 storyline using the IMAGE model; and finally for the B2 storyline using the MESSAGE model (see Table 4-1). The choice of the markers was based on extensive discussion within the SRES team: • Which of the initial quantifications (by the models) reflected the story best. • Preference of some of the modeling teams and features of specific models. • Range of emissions across all the markers. • Use of different models for the four markers. In 1998, the preliminary descriptions and quantifications of the marker scenarios were posted on the SRES website for the open process and, in accordance with a decision of the IPCC Bureau, were in this way made available to climate modelers for their input in the Third Assessment Report. As a result of the inputs and comments received through the open process and by the entire writing team, the marker scenarios have been successively refined and improved without changing their fundamental characteristics in terms of important scenario driving forces (population, GDP) and order of magnitude of GHG emissions. Subsequently, additional scenarios within each scenario family were developed to explore the sensitivity of adopting alternative quantitative scenario input assumptions on future GHG emissions. As a result the markers are not necessarily the median or mean of a scenario family (nor would it be possible to construct such a median or mean scenario by taking all salient scenario characteristics and regional results into account). The markers are simply those scenarios considered by the SRES writing team as illustrative of a particular storyline. They are not singled out as more likely than alternative quantitative interpretations of a particular scenario family and its underlying storyline. Perhaps they may be best described as “first among equals.” However, as a result of time and resource limitations the marker scenarios have received the closest scrutiny from the entire writing team and through the SRES open process compared to other scenario quantifications. The marker scenarios are also the SRES scenarios most intensively tested in terms of reproducibility. As a rule, at least four different models were used in attempts to replicate the model quantification of a particular marker scenario. Available time and resources did not allow a similar exercise to be conducted for all SRES scenarios, albeit a more limited effort was devoted to reproduce the A1 scenario groups (next to the A1 marker) with different models. To enable a comparison of the resultant GHG emissions, the writing team decided to define a subset of harmonized scenarios within each family that share common main scenario driving-force assumptions, such as population or GDP growth. Two harmonization criteria were developed (see also Section 4.4.1). This procedure and the harmonization criteria were adopted in a joint agreement among the six SRES modeling teams. “Fully harmonized” scenarios are those that share important driving force variables, including population, GDP, and final energy use for each of the four SRES regions and the world (according to the quantitative criteria listed in Table 4-1). Fully harmonized scenarios by definition include the respective marker scenario. From 40 scenarios 11 are classified as scenarios with “full harmonization.” For each scenario family at least two scenarios are harmonized using the most restrictive criteria. This also applies to the scenario groups within the A1 scenario family, which correspondingly has the highest number of fully harmonized scenarios. This subset of “fully harmonized” scenarios serves to provide a better correspondence between the development of the three main driving forces and the resultant GHG emissions. The “fully harmonized” scenarios thus demonstrate the degree by which a particular marker scenario is reproducible by alternative modeling approaches. Therefore, “fully harmonized” scenarios are not independent from each other within a particular scenario family (or scenario group in case of A1). “Globally harmonized” scenarios are those that share global population and GDP profiles within the agreed upon bounds of 5% and 10%, respectively, over the period 1990-2100 (see Table 4-1). Altogether 26 scenarios are categorized into this category and can which a particular marker scenario is reproducible by alternative modeling approaches. Therefore, "fully harmonized" scenarios are not independent from each other within a particular scenario family (or scenario group in case of A1). "Globally harmonized" scenarios are those that share global population and GDP profiles within the agreed upon bounds of 5% and 10%, respectively, over the period 1990-2100 (see Table 4-1). Altogether 26 scenarios are categorized into this category and can be considered to capture the main global development characteristics over time for each respective scenario family and storyline. Again these 26 scenarios are not independent from each other, constituting seven distinct scenario groups (see also footnote 1). Thus, there are three different types of scenarios within each family: • One marker and a set of "fully harmonized" scenarios that attempt to replicate the marker scenario quantification. • A set of "globally harmonized" scenarios. • A set of non-harmonized scenarios. In addition, two illustrative scenarios have been selected in the Summary for Policymakers (SPM) from the additional A1 scenario groups (see also footnote 1). For the sake of simplicity, the term "harmonized" is used herein to describe global harmonization of population and GDP growth. "Fully harmonized" scenarios, for which the main objective is to assess the reproducibility of particular marker scenario quantifications and any remaining uncertainty in GHG emissions from internal model parametrizations, are referred to in the text where appropriate. Figure 4-3 shows the SRES scenarios as a set consisting of subsets that correspond to the four families. The A1 family is in addition divided into different groups of scenarios. The detailed descriptions of inputs and outputs (other than GHG emissions) of the SRES marker scenarios, other harmonized scenarios, and other scenarios are presented in Section 4.4 (see Appendix VII for further numeric detail). The emissions of GHGs and other radiatively important species of gases are described in Chapter 5 (more detail is again presented in Appendix VII). Table 4-2 summarizes the main characteristics of the four SRES scenario families and their scenario groups, and gives an overview about the number of scenarios that were developed for each scenario group (see also Table 4-1 and Section 4.4.1). 4.3. Scenario Storylines Although each of the four SRES storylines can unfold only if certain values are emphasized more than others, no explicit judgments have been made by the SRES team as to their desirability or probability. Storylines in the literature, however, are often explicitly intended by their authors to have a positive or negative connotation, and sometimes explicitly include assumed dominant or preferred types of governance. Thus, the four SRES storylines are fundamentally different in this respect compared to many narrative scenarios in the underlying literature. Two arguments are pertinent to the linkage between the scenario storylines and the underlying literature. First, a future regarded as negative by some people may be perceived as positive by others. Second, the storylines represent families of scenarios that can include both success and failure, depending on the perspective of the beholder. To quote Wilkerson (1995): "Like the real life from which they are drawn, the scenarios are mixed bags, at once wonderfully dreadful and dreadfully wonderful." Importantly, the "neutral" or "agnostic" character of SRES scenarios is an explicit departure from most of the underlying literature about storylines and narrative scenarios. Another important departure and an innovation unique to the SRES approach is the use of the storylines in conjunction with multiple (six) modeling approaches to develop and formulate a set of quantifications or scenarios that are overall consistent with the underlying storylines. This approach provides a rigorous modeling test of the underlying logic and structure of the storyline, while the narrative aspect of the storyline provides a broader, descriptive context for better understanding and interpretation of the scenarios. 4.3.1. A1 Storyline and Scenario Family The A1 storyline is a case of rapid and successful economic development, in which regional average income per capita converge – current distinctions between "poor" and "rich" countries eventually dissolve. The primary dynamics are: • Strong commitment to market-based solutions. • High savings and commitment to education at the household level. • High rates of investment and innovation in education, technology, and institutions at the national and international levels. • International mobility of people, ideas, and technology. The transition to economic convergence results from advances in transport and communication technology, shifts in national policies on immigration and education, and international cooperation in the development of national and international institutions that enhance productivity growth and technology diffusion. This may be the type of scenario best represented in recent literature (e.g., Shinn, 1985; UN, 1990; Schwartz, 1991; Peterson, 1994; Gallopin et al., 1997; Glenn and Gordon, 1997, 1999; Lawrence et al., 1997; Hammond, 1998; Raskin et al., 1998). Such scenarios are dominated by an American or European entrepreneurial, progress-oriented perspective in which technology, especially communication technology, plays a central role. Wilkerson (1995) designed various scenarios that share features with A1. They emphasize market-oriented solutions, high consumption of both tangible and intangible commodities, advanced technology, and intensive mobility and communication. In some examples of this type of scenario, high economic growth leads to shifts of economic power from traditional core countries to the current economic "periphery," as in the "Global Shift" scenario by CPB (1992) and de Jong and Zalm (1991). The Shell scenario "New Frontiers" (Shell, 1993) is also representative of this family. The IPCC Scenarios IS92a and IS92e are well-known examples of futures with high levels of economic growth (Leggett et al., 1992). IIASA and World Energy Council (WEC) jointly developed three High Growth Scenarios that share assumptions on rapid technological progress, liberalized trade markets, and rising income levels (Nakicenovic et al., 1998). In the A1 scenario family, demographic and economic trends are closely linked, as affluence is correlated with long life and small families (low mortality and low fertility). Global population grows to some nine billion by 2050 and declines to about seven billion by 2100. Average age increases, with the needs of retired people met mainly through their accumulated savings in private pension systems. The global economy expands at an average annual rate of about 3% to 2100, reaching around US$550 trillion (all dollar amounts herein are expressed in 1990 dollars, unless stated otherwise). This is approximately the same as average global growth since 1850, although the conditions that lead to this global growth in productivity and per capita incomes in the scenario are unparalleled in history. Global average income per capita reaches about US$21,000 by 2050. While the high average level of income per capita contributes to a great improvement in the overall health and social conditions of the majority of people, this 1990 dollars, unless stated otherwise). This is approximately the same as average global growth since 1850, although the conditions that lead to this global growth in productivity and per capita incomes in the scenario are unparalleled in history. Global average income per capita reaches about US$21,000 by 2050. While the high average level of income per capita contributes to a great improvement in the overall health and social conditions of the majority of people, this world is not necessarily devoid of problems. In particular, many communities could face some of the problems of social exclusion encountered in the wealthiest countries during the 20th century, and in many places income growth could produce increased pressure on the global commons. Energy and mineral resources are abundant in this scenario family because of rapid technical progress, which both reduces the resources needed to produce a given level of output and increases the economically recoverable reserves. Final energy intensity (energy use per unit of GDP) decreases at an average annual rate of 1.3%. Environmental amenities are valued and rapid technological progress "frees" natural resources currently devoted to provision of human needs for other purposes. The concept of environmental quality changes in this storyline from the current emphasis on "conservation" of nature to active "management" of natural and environmental services, which increases ecologic resilience. With the rapid increase in income, dietary patterns shift initially toward increased consumption of meat and dairy products, but may decrease subsequently with increasing emphasis on the health of an aging society. High incomes also translate into high car ownership, sprawling suburbia, and dense transport networks, nationally and internationally. Several scenario groups considered in the A1 scenario family reflect uncertainty in the development of energy sources and conversion technologies in this rapidly changing world. Some scenario groups evolve along the carbon-intensive energy path consistent with the current development strategy of countries with abundant domestic coal resources. Other scenario groups intensify the dependence on (unconventional) oil and (in the longer-run) natural-gas resources. A third group envisages a stronger shift toward renewable energy sources and conceivably also toward nuclear energy. A fourth group (which includes the A1B marker scenario) assumes a balanced mix of technologies and supply sources, with technology improvements and resource assumptions such that no single source of energy is overly dominant. The implications of these alternative development paths for future GHG emissions are challenging; the emissions vary from the carbon-intensive to decarbonization paths by at least as much as the variation of all the other driving forces across the other SRES scenarios. 4.3.2. A2 Storyline and Scenario Family The A2 scenario family represents a differentiated world. Compared to the A1 storyline it is characterized by lower trade flows, relatively slow capital stock turnover, and slower technological change. The A2 world "consolidates" into a series of economic regions. Self-reliance in terms of resources and less emphasis on economic, social, and cultural interactions between regions are characteristic for this future. Economic growth is uneven and the income gap between now-industrialized and developing parts of the world does not narrow, unlike in the A1 and B1 scenario families. The coal and gas/oil intensive groups were merged into one fossil-intensive group in the Summary for Policymakers. More detailed information on these two groups is presented here, in Chapter 5 and in Appendix VII. An Overview of Scenarios 181 The A2 world has less international cooperation than the A1 or B1 worlds. People, ideas, and capital are less mobile so that technology diffuses more slowly than in the other scenario families. International disparities in productivity, and hence income per capita, are largely maintained or increased in absolute terms. With the emphasis on family and community life, fertility rates decline relatively slowly, which makes the A2 population the largest among the storylines (15 billion by 2100). Global average per capita income in A2 is low relative to other storylines (especially A1 and B1), reaching about US$7200 per capita by 2050 and US$16,000 in 2100. By 2100 the global GDP reaches about US$250 trillion. Technological change in the A2 scenario world is also more heterogeneous than that in A1. It is more rapid than average in some regions and slower in others, as industry adjusts to local resource endowments, culture, and education levels. Regions with abundant energy and mineral resources evolve more resource-intensive economies, while those poor in resources place a very high priority on minimizing import dependence through technological innovation to improve resource efficiency and make use of substitute inputs. The fuel mix in different regions is determined primarily by resource availability. High-income but resource-poor regions shift toward advanced post-fossil technologies (renewables or nuclear), while low-income resource-rich regions generally rely on older fossil technologies. Final energy intensities in A2 decline with a pace of 0.5 to 0.7% per year. In the A2 world, social and political structures diversify; some regions move toward stronger welfare systems and reduced income inequality, while others move toward "leaner" government and more heterogeneous income distributions. With substantial food requirements, agricultural productivity in the A2 world is one of the main focus areas for innovation and research, development, and deployment (RD&D) efforts, and environmental concerns. Initial high levels of soil erosion and water pollution are eventually eased through the local development of more sustainable high-yield agriculture. Although attention is given to potential local and regional environmental damage, it is not uniform across regions. Global environmental concerns are relatively weak, although attempts are made to bring regional and local pollution under control and to maintain environmental amenities. As in other SRES storylines, the intention in this storyline is not to imply that the underlying dynamics of A2 are either good or bad. The literature suggests that such a world could have many positive aspects from the current perspective, such as the increasing tendency toward cultural pluralism with mutual acceptance of diversity and fundamental differences. Various scenarios from the literature may be grouped under this scenario family. For example, "New Empires" by Schwartz (1991) is an example of a society in which most nations protect their threatened cultural identities. Some regions might achieve relative stability while others suffer under civil disorders (Schwartz, 1996). In "European Renaissance" (de Jong and Zalm, 1991; CPB, 1992), economic growth slows down because of a strengthening of protectionist trade blocks. In "Imperial Harmonization" (Lawrence et al., 1997), major economic blocs impose standards and regulations on smaller countries. The Shell scenario "Global Mercantilism" (1989, see Schwartz, 1991) explores the possibility of regional spheres of influence, whereas "Barricades" (Shell, 1993) reflects resistance to globalization and liberalization of markets. Noting the tensions that arise as societies adopt western technology without western culture, Huntington (1996) suggests that conflicts between civilizations rather than globalizing economies may determine the geo-political future of the world. 4.3.3. B1 Storyline and Scenario Family The central elements of the B1 future are a high level of environmental and social consciousness combined with a globally coherent approach to a more sustainable development. Heightened environmental consciousness might be brought about by clear evidence that impacts of natural resource use, such as deforestation, soil depletion, over-fishing, and global and regional pollution, pose a serious threat to the continuation of human life on Earth. In the B1 storyline, governments, businesses, the media, and the public pay increased attention to the environmental and social aspects of development. Technological change plays an important role. At the same time, however, the storyline does not include any climate policies, to reflect the SRES terms of reference. Nevertheless, such a possible future cannot be ruled out. The "Conventional Worlds-Policy Reform" scenario by Gallopin et al. (1997) is a good example of such a future, although it includes climate policies. In "Ecotopia," Wilkerson (1995) describes a reaction to early decades of crime and chaos, in which community values triumph over individualist ones and lead to resource-friendly lifestyles based on clean and light technologies. This scenario includes a voluntary embrace of cohesion, cooperation, and reduced consumption, backed by legislation and even corporate policies (Wilkerson, 1995). In the normative "Human Development Success" (Glenn and Gordon, 1997), the world achieves an environmentally sustainable economy by 2050, primarily through education to develop human potential. In "Balanced Future" (de Jong and Zalm, 1991; CPB, 1992), economic equilibrium and innovation lead to sustainable development. The "Ecologically Driven" scenarios by WEC (1993) and IIASA-WEC (Nakicenovic et al., 1998) - with accelerated efficiency improvements in resource use - share several of the characteristics of the B1 type of future, as does the egalitarian utopia scenario in the TARGETS approach (Rotmans and de Vries, 1997). Many additional scenarios in the literature could be seen as examples of this family, but may describe the changes as more fundamental than those of B1. The "Transformed World" of Hammond (1998), based on the "Great Transitions" scenario of Gallopin et al. (1997), stresses the role of global technological innovation in addition to enlightened corporate actions, government policies, and empowerment of local groups. In 182 An Overview of Scenarios "Shared Space" by the Millennium Institute (Glenn and Gordon, 1997), resources are shared more equitably to the benefit of all and the greater safety of humanity. The Shell scenario "Sustainable World" (1989, see Schwartz, 1991) and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development scenarios (WBCSD, 1998), "Geopolity" and "Jazz," examine sustainable futures. Economic development in B1 is balanced, and efforts to achieve equitable income distribution are effective. As in A1, the B1 storyline describes a fast-changing and convergent world, but the priorities differ. Whereas the A1 world invests its gains from increased productivity and know-how primarily in further economic growth, the B1 world invests a large part of its gains in improved efficiency of resource use ("dematerialization"), equity, social institutions, and environmental protection. A strong welfare net prevents social exclusion on the basis of poverty. However, counter-currents may develop and in some places people may not conform to the main priorities differ. Whereas the A1 world invests its gains from increased productivity and know-how primarily in further economic growth, the B1 world invests a large part of its gains in improved efficiency of resource use ("dematerialization"), equity, social institutions, and environmental protection. A strong welfare net prevents social exclusion on the basis of poverty. However, counter-currents may develop and in some places people may not conform to the main social and environmental intentions of the mainstream in this scenario family. Massive income redistribution and presumably high taxation levels may adversely affect the economic efficiency and functioning of world markets. Particular effort is devoted to increases in resource efficiency to achieve the goals stated above. Incentive systems, combined with advances in international institutions, permit the rapid diffusion of cleaner technology. To this end, R&D is also enhanced, together with education and the capacity building for clean and equitable development. Organizational measures are adopted to reduce material wastage by maximizing reuse and recycling. The combination of technical and organizational change yields high levels of material and energy saving, as well as reductions in pollution. Labor productivity also improves as a by-product of these efforts. Alternative scenarios considered within the B1 family include different rates of GDP growth and dematerialization (e.g., decline in energy and material intensities). The demographic transition to low mortality and fertility occurs at the same rate as in A1, but for different reasons as it is motivated partly by social and environmental concerns. Global population reaches nine billion by 2050 and declines to about seven billion by 2100. This is a world with high levels of economic activity (a global GDP of around US$350 trillion by 2100) and significant and deliberate progress toward international and national income equality. Global income per capita in 2050 averages US$13,000, one-third lower than in A1. A higher proportion of this income is spent on services rather than on material goods, and on quality rather than quantity, because the emphasis on material goods is less and also resource prices are increased by environmental taxation. The B1 storyline sees a relatively smooth transition to alternative energy systems as conventional oil and gas resources decline. There is extensive use of conventional and unconventional gas as the cleanest fossil resource during the transition, but the major push is toward post-fossil technologies, driven in large part by environmental concerns. Given the high environmental consciousness and institutional effectiveness in the B1 storyline, environmental quality is high, as most potentially negative environmental aspects of rapid development are anticipated and effectively dealt with locally, nationally, and internationally. For example, transboundary air pollution (acid rain) is basically eliminated in the long term. Land use is managed carefully to counteract the impacts of activities potentially damaging to the environment. Cities are compact and designed for public and non-motorized transport, with suburban developments tightly controlled. Strong incentives for low-input, low-impact agriculture, along with maintenance of large areas of wilderness, contribute to high food prices with much lower levels of meat consumption than those in A1. These proactive local and regional environmental measures and policies also lead to relatively low GHG emissions, even in the absence of explicit interventions to mitigate climate change. 4.3.4. B2 Storyline and Scenario Family The B2 world is one of increased concern for environmental and social sustainability compared to the A2 storyline. Increasingly, government policies and business strategies at the national and local levels are influenced by environmentally aware citizens, with a trend toward local self-reliance and stronger communities. International institutions decline in importance, with a shift toward local and regional decision-making structures and institutions. Human welfare, equality, and environmental protection all have high priority, and they are addressed through community-based social solutions in addition to technical solutions, although implementation rates vary across regions. Like the other scenario families, the B2 scenario family includes futures that can be seen as positive or negative. While the B2 storyline is basically neutral, Kinsman (1990) in his "Caring Autonomy" scenario clearly paints a positive world with emphasis on decentralized governments and strong interpersonal relationships. In the "New Civics" scenario by Wilkerson (1995), values are only shared within small competing groups, which results in a decentralized world of tribes, clans, families, networks, and gangs. The IIASA-WEC "Middle Course" scenario (Nakicenovic et al., 1998), with slow removal of trade barriers, may also be grouped in this family. On the positive side, this storyline appears to be consistent with current institutional frameworks in the world and with the current technology dynamics. On the negative side is the relatively slow rate of development in general, but particularly in the currently developing parts of the world. Education and welfare programs are pursued widely, which reduces mortality and, to a lesser extent, fertility. The population reaches about 10 billion people by 2100, consistent with both the UN and IIASA median projections. Income per capita grows at an intermediate rate to reach about US$12,000 by 2050. By 2100 the global economy might expand to reach some US$250 trillion. International income differences decrease, although not as rapidly as in storylines of higher global convergence. Local inequity is reduced considerably through the development of stronger community-support networks. Generally, high educational levels promote both development and environmental protection. Indeed, environmental protection is one of the few truly international common priorities that remain in B2. However, strategies to address global environmental challenges are not of a central priority and are thus less successful compared to local and regional environmental response strategies. The governments have difficulty designing and implementing agreements that combine global environmental protection, even when this could be associated with mutual economic benefits. The B2 storyline presents a particularly favorable climate for community initiative and social innovation, especially in view of the high educational levels. Technological frontiers are pushed less than they are in A1 and B1, and innovations are also regionally more heterogeneous. Globally, investment in energy R&D continues its current declining trend (EIA, 1997, 1999), and mechanisms for international diffusion of technology and know-how remain weaker than in scenarios A1 and B1 (but higher than in A2). Some regions with rapid economic development and limited natural resources place particular emphasis on technology development and bilateral cooperation. Technical change is therefore uneven. The energy intensity of GDP declines at about 1% per year, in line with the average historical experience since 1800. Land-use management becomes better integrated at the local level in the B2 world. Urban and transport infrastructure is a particular focus of community innovation, and contributes to a low level of car dependence and less urban sprawl. An emphasis on food self-reliance contributes to a shift in dietary patterns toward local products, with relatively low meat consumption in countries with high population densities. Energy systems differ from region to region, depending on the availability of natural resources. The need to use energy and other resources more efficiently spurs the development of less carbon-intensive technology in some regions. Environment policy cooperation at the regional level leads to success in the management of some transboundary environmental problems, such as acidification caused by sulfur dioxide (SO2), especially to sustain regional self-reliance in agricultural production. Regional cooperation also results in lower emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which reduce the incidence of elevated tropospheric ozone levels. Although globally the energy system remains predominantly hydrocarbon-based to 2100, a gradual transition occurs away from the current share of fossil resources in world energy supply, with a corresponding reduction in carbon intensity. 4.4. Scenario Quantification and Overview 4.4.1. Scenario Terminology In this section representative quantifications of the four scenario storylines described in Section 4.3 are summarized, and the evolution of the main scenario driving forces and associated quantitative scenario characteristics are described. Their resultant GHG and other emissions are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5. To elucidate differences in uncertainties that stem both from adopting alternative (exogenous) scenario driving-force assumptions and from the uncertainties that arise from different model representations, alternative scenario quantifications are differentiated into harmonized and unharmonized scenarios (see Section 4.2, Tables 4-1 and 4-2, and Box 1-1 for terminology description). To achieve harmonization across six different modeling approaches is not a trivial task. For example, most of the models have different regional disaggregations, so that harmonization at the level of the four SRES regions required some "inverse" solutions, often achieved through iterative model runs and adjustments of input assumptions. Also, in some modeling frameworks the harmonized "input" parameters are actually outputs of components of the modeling framework (e.g., GDP as an output of economic general equilibrium models, or final energy as an output variable after considering endogenous energy prices and exogenously pre-specified energy-intensity improvement rates). Therefore, harmonization of important scenario driving-force inputs was neither possible for all scenarios and for all participating modeling teams, and nor was it judged desirable, as the adoption of any harmonization criterion somewhat artificially compresses uncertainty. This is also why simpler harmonization criteria were adopted (see Section 4.2 above) that focused on global population and GDP growth profiles. These are referred to as "globally harmonized" scenarios in the subsequent Subsections. From the 40 SRES scenarios, 26 are classified as "globally harmonized" scenarios and 14 are classified as "other" scenarios. (The latter category includes three scenarios that only deviate slightly from the harmonization criteria.) Harmonized scenarios are thus comparable in that they describe similar global development patterns with respect to demographics and economic growth. In the subsequent discussion of scenario driving forces a three-tiered structure is adopted. First, for each scenario family (and where applicable for each scenario group in the A1 scenario family), the discussion starts with a presentation of the respective marker and "fully harmonized" scenarios. Subsequently, "globally harmonized" scenarios and "other" scenarios are discussed. "Globally harmonized" scenarios shed additional light into uncertainties that stem from adopting different regional assumptions (see above). Finally, "other" scenarios are presented that offer a different quantitative interpretation of a discussion starts with a presentation of the respective marker and "fully harmonized" scenarios. Subsequently, "globally harmonized" scenarios and "other" scenarios are discussed. "Globally harmonized" scenarios shed additional light into uncertainties that stem from adopting different regional assumptions (see above). Finally, "other" scenarios are presented that offer a different quantitative interpretation of a particular scenario storyline compared to the previous scenario categories. In some cases, differences in interpretation relate to uncertainties in rates of change – "other" scenarios yield similar global demographic and economic outcomes by 2100 (e.g. the B2-ASF scenario compared to the B2 marker), but illustrate different dynamics of how these could unfold. In other cases, the "other" scenario category comprises scenario quantifications that deliberately explore alternative interpretations of a scenario storyline in terms of global population and GDP growth altogether (e.g. in the A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario). The reason is to indicate that quantitative scenario descriptions entail a high degree of uncertainty (and subjectivity from different modeling teams) when it comes to interpret the four different qualitative SRES scenario storylines and to translate them into the quantitative assumptions that drive emission models. When comparing GHG emissions results for the four SRES marker scenarios (see Chapter 5) with those of the other SRES scenarios, it is illustrative to distinguish the effects of different model methodologies and parametrizations from variations of important scenario drivers that often serve as exogenous input to models. Of the total of 40 SRES scenarios, 29 (including the marker scenarios) satisfy the harmonization criteria for population on the world level and for all four SRES regions, 12 scenarios are harmonized for population and GDP, and 11 (13 including the A1T scenario group) scenarios are harmonized for population, GDP and final energy (see Table 4-1). Also, 35 scenarios are harmonized for population on the world level and 26 scenarios are harmonized for global population and GDP (see Table 4-1). The status of harmonization is also relatively stable to changes in the harmonization criteria. For example, if the above harmonization criteria were increased by 50% (i.e. GDP for the four SRES regions may differ by up to ±38% from the respective GDP of the marker scenario), the sample of 11 harmonized scenarios does not change; however, the number of scenarios harmonized on the global level increases from 15 to 20. Thus, as mentioned above not all scenario quantifications comply with the adopted harmonization criteria differences in regional coverage and definition among models. In some instances modeling teams also deliberately chose not to follow harmonized input assumptions, but instead explored scenario sensitivities by emphasizing alternative developments than suggested in the marker scenario quantification. The writing team recognizes that this increases the number of scenarios as well as complexity in the interpretation of results. These additional scenarios are the result of the SRES terms of reference of proceeding via an open process soliciting as wide participation and viewpoints as possible and also serve the purpose of highlighting important uncertainties of the future that are necessarily compressed by limiting scenario quantification to four illustrative marker scenarios. Thus, while unharmonized scenarios illustrate the impact on GHG emissions of expanding the uncertainty range of main scenario drivers within any particular scenario family, the "globally harmonized" scenarios indicate the range of GHG emissions uncertainty that remains after most important global driving force assumptions (population and GDP) have been harmonized. (Finally, the range of GHG emissions resulting from comparing "fully harmonized" scenarios is indicative of the uncertainty of internal model parametrizations such as energy technology change, dietary patterns, and agricultural productivity changes that influence structural changes in energy supply and end-use and land-use changes, see Table 4-1.) Harmonization of input assumptions increases the comparability across scenarios and can serve as an additional guide for choosing a particular SRES scenario subset, and to illustrate different degrees of scenario uncertainty. The latter is an important aspect, considering the different user communities of SRES scenarios. Given the comparatively narrow variation as defined by the harmonization criteria, differences in population, GDP, and final energy use between harmonized scenarios of the same scenario family need not to be considered in subsequent analyses and are also not discussed separately below. In the A1 scenario family, the scenarios within one group were also harmonized. In one A1 scenario group the transition away from conventional oil and gas either leads to a massive development of unconventional oil and gas resources (A1G) or to a large-scale synfuel economy based on coal (A1C). Please note that A1C and A1G were combined into one fossil intensive group A1FI in the Summary for Policymakers during its approval process (see also footnote 1). GHG emissions in these scenarios approach emissions characteristic of the A2 scenario family (i.e. are much higher than in the case of the A1 marker scenario). In another A1 scenario group, dwindling conventional oil and gas resources lead to fast development of post-fossil alternatives and enhanced energy conservation. In this technology-intensive scenario group (A1T), energy demands are lower than in the other A1 scenario groups and, because of radical technological change in energy systems, GHG emissions are much lower than in the other A1 scenario groups (including the A1B marker scenario), approaching those of the B1 scenario family. The six modeling teams also produced other scenarios as part of the SRES open process. These modeling runs were generally not harmonized and are presented as appropriate later in the report. Table 4-3 gives an overview of the 40 SRES scenario quantifications as they were developed to describe the four scenario families and the seven different scenario groups. 4.4.2. Translation of Storylines into Scenario Drivers Table 4-4 gives a summary overview of the main scenario assumptions and characteristics (see also Table 4-2 above). To facilitate comparability, the summary format adopted is similar to the previous IS92 scenario series (Pepper et al., 1992). Specific assumptions about the quantification of particular scenario drivers, such as population and economic growth, technological change, resource availability, land-use changes, and local and regional environmental policies, are summarized in this Section (GHG emissions are reported in detail in Chapter 5). The assumptions are based on the range of driving forces identified in Chapter 2 and their relationships as summarized in Chapter 3. For simplicity these drivers are presented separately, but it is important to keep in mind that the evolution of these scenario drivers is to a large extent interrelated, as mind that the evolution of these scenario drivers is to a large extent interrelated, as reflected in the SRES scenarios. As discussed above, the SRES scenarios were designed to reflect inherent uncertainties of future developments by adopting a range of salient input assumptions, but without attempting to cover the extremes from the scenario literature. Given the nature of the SRES open process and its multi-model approach, as well as the need for documented input assumptions, published scenario extremes are difficult to reproduce using alternative model approaches or insufficiently documented input data. (For instance, many long-term emission scenarios do not report their underlying population assumptions (see Chapters 2 and 3), which is especially true for extreme scenarios that are usually performed within the context of model sensitivity analysis.) Compared to the previous IS92 scenario series there are important similarities, but also important differences. For instance, three different future population scenarios were adopted, albeit that the future population levels are somewhat lower and the range more compressed than those in IS92; this reflects advances in demographic modeling and population projections. Conversely, the range of assumptions that concern resource availability and future technological change is much wider compared to earlier scenarios, reflecting in particular the results of the IPCC WGII Second Assessment Report (SAR; Watson et al., 1996). Another distinguishing characteristic of the SRES scenarios is an attempt to reflect the most recent understanding on the relationships between important scenario driving-force variables. For instance, no scenario combines low fertility with high mortality assumptions, which reflects the consensus view from demographers (see Chapter 3). Equally, all SRES scenarios assume a qualitative relationship between demographics and social and economic development trends, which reflects both the literature (see Chapter 3) and the results of the evaluation of the IS92 scenario series (Alcamo et al., 1995). All else being equal, fertility and mortality trends are thus lower in scenarios with high-income growth assumptions, but the multidimensionality of the causal linkages must be recognized and so no particular cause-effect model is postulated here. Finally, the scenarios also attempt to reflect recent advances (as reviewed in Chapter 3) in understanding of the evolution of macro-economic and material productivity (e.g., their coupling via capital turnover rates), uncertainties in future levels of “dematerialization” (reflected in the difference between the B1 and A1 scenarios), and the likely evolution of local and regional environmental policies (e.g., all scenarios assume various degrees of sulfur-control policies). The main aspects of translating the storylines into scenario drivers are summarized below. For each scenario family an overview of all scenario quantifications is given. Scenarios that share harmonized input assumptions with the respective scenario marker in terms of global population and GDP profiles (see Tables 4-1 and 4-3) are indicated in italics in the subsequent discussion. Altogether, 26 scenarios in the four scenario families share similar assumptions about population and GDP at the global level. The other 14 scenarios either do not fully comply with the agreed common input assumptions concerning global population and GDP or explore important sensitivities of future demographic and economic developments beyond that described in the 24 scenarios. These sensitivities include resource availability, technology development, or land-use changes and describe similar demographic and economic development patterns as other scenarios within a family, even if they do not fall within the range suggested by the harmonization criteria (see Table 4-1). Combined, the SRES scenario set comprises 40 scenarios grouped into four scenario families and different scenario groups (see Table 4-3). Each scenario family is illustrated by a designated marker scenario. A marker is not necessarily the mean or mode of comparable scenario quantifications, nor would it be possible to construct an internally consistent scenario reflecting medians/modes of all salient scenario characteristics (both in terms of scenario input assumptions as well as scenario outcomes, i.e. emissions). Marker scenarios should also not be interpreted as being the more likely alternative scenario quantifications. However, only the four marker scenarios were subjected to the SRES open process through the SRES website and they have also received closest scrutiny by the entire writing team. 4.4.2.1. A1 Scenarios The A1 marker scenario (Jiang et al., 2000) was created with the AIM model, an integrated assessment model developed by NIES, Japan (see Appendix IV). The A1 scenario family is characterized by: • An affluent world, with a rapid demographic transition (declining mortality and fertility rates) and an increasing degree of international development equity. • Very high productivity and economic growth in all regions, with a considerable catch-up of developing countries. • Comparatively high energy and materials demands, moderated however by continuous structural change and the diffusion of more efficient technologies, consistent with the high productivity growth and capital turnover rates of the scenario. The first group of A1 scenarios, which includes the A1B marker, assumes “balanced” progress across all resources and technologies from energy supply to end use, as well as “balanced” land-use changes. Three other groups of A1 scenarios were identified which describe three alternative pathways according to different resource and technology development assumptions: • A1C: “clean coal” technologies that are generally environmentally friendly with the exception of GHG emissions. • A1G: an “oil- and gas-rich” future, with a swift transition from conventional resources to abundant unconventional resources including methane clathrates. • A1T: a “non-fossil” future, with rapid development of solar and nuclear technologies on the supply side and mini-turbines and fuel cells used in energy end-use applications. The divergence between the various scenario groups (in terms of resource availability and the direction of technological change) results in a wide range of GHG emissions. The two fossil-fuel dominated alternatives, A1C and A1G (combined into the fossil-intensive A1FI scenario group in the SPM, see Footnote 1), have higher, and the A1T alternatives have lower, GHG emissions than the A1 marker scenario (see Chapter 5). “Balanced” A1 scenarios quantifications were also calculated by the models A1B-ASF, A1B-IMAGE, A1B-MARIA, A1B-MESSAGE, and A1B-MiniCAM. Additional scenarios representing A1 scenario groups were developed using the AIM (A1C-AIM, A1G-AIM, A1T-AIM), MARIA (A1T-MARIA), MESSAGE (A1C-MESSAGE, A1G-MESSAGE, A1T-MESSAGE), and MiniCAM (A1C-MiniCAM, A1G-MiniCAM) models. The MiniCAM modeling team also evaluated alternative interpretations of the A1 scenario storyline with different demographic, economic, and energy development patterns (A1v1-MiniCAM and A1v2-MiniCAM) on top of the alternative technology-resource developments examined in the other A1 scenarios. * Different modeling teams provided different interpretations of what such a “balanced” resource-technology portfolio could be in the 21st century. The assumed rapid technology dynamics that underlie the A1 scenario storyline necessitate that technologies and resource exploitation profiles change significantly. Hence, the concept of “balanced” development does not necessarily apply to any particular future date, but rather to the entirety of the scenario’s development path throughout the 21st century. As a consequence of the slow turnover rates in the capital stock of the energy sector, all scenarios necessarily rely more heavily on currently dominant resources and technologies in the near-term and project more radical departures only in the long-term. ** Scenarios denoted by italics indicate scenario quantifications that share harmonized global population and GDP trajectories with the respective marker scenario (i.e. “globally harmonized” scenarios). *** By design, the A1T scenario group explores the possibility of technological change in energy end-use technologies and hence lower energy demand compared to the A1 marker scenario. Considering that these scenarios provide similar levels of energy service, albeit at lower levels of final energy use, they are classified as “harmonized” based on population and GDP profiles only. 4.4.2.2. A2 Scenarios The A2 marker scenario (A2-ASF) was developed using ASF (see Appendix IV), an integrated set of modeling tools that was also used to generate the first and the second sets of IPCC emission scenarios (SA90 and IS92). Overall, the A2-ASF quantification is based on the following assumptions (Sankovski et al., 2000): • Relatively slow demographic transition and relatively slow convergence in regional fertility patterns. • Relatively slow convergence in inter-regional GDP per capita differences. • Relatively slow end-use and supply-side energy efficiency improvements (compared to other storylines). • Delayed development of renewable energy. • No barriers to the use of nuclear energy. Additional scenario quantifications of A2 were developed using the AIM (A2-AIM), IMAGE (A2-IMAGE), MESSAGE (A2-MESSAGE), and MiniCAM (A2-MiniCAM) models. An alternative interpretation of the A2 scenario storyline in the form of a “delayed development” or “transitional” scenario between the A2 and A1 scenario families was developed by the MiniCAM modeling team (A2-A1-MiniCAM). 4.4 A2 were developed using the AIM (A2-AIM)9, IMAGE (A2-IMAGE),10 MESSAGE (A2-MESSAGE), and MiniCAM (A2-MiniCAM)11 models. An alternative interpretation of the A2 scenario storyline in the form of a "delayed development" or "transitional" scenario between the A2 and A1 scenario families was developed by the MiniCAM modeling team (A2-A1-MiniCAM). 4.4.2.3. B1 Scenarios The B1 marker scenario (de Vries et al., 2000) was developed using the IMAGE 2.1 model (see Appendix IV). Earlier versions of the model were used in the first IPCC scenario development effort (SA90). B1 illustrates the possible emissions implications of a scenario in which the world chooses consistently and effectively a development path that favors efficiency of resource use and "dematerialization" of economic activities. The scenario entails in particular: • Rapid demographic transition driven by rapid social development, including education. The scenario deviates only slightly from the global population and GDP assumptions of other "harmonized" scenarios within this scenario family. The IMAGE results for the A2 and B2 scenarios are based on preliminary model experiments carried out in March 1998. As a result of limited resources it has not been possible to redo these experiments. Hence, the IMAGE team is not able to provide background data and details for these scenario calculations and the population and economic growth assumptions are not fully harmonized, as is the case for the IMAGE A1 and B1 scenarios.11 The scenario deviates only slightly from the global population and GDP assumptions of other "harmonized" scenarios within this scenario family. An Overview of Scenarios • High economic growth in all regions, with significant catch-up in the presently less-developed regions that leads to a substantial reduction in present income disparities. • Comparatively small increase in energy demand because of dematerialization of economic activities, saturation of material- and energy-intensive activities (e.g., car ownership), and effective innovation and implementation of measures to improve energy efficiency. • Timely and effective development of non-fossil energy supply options in response to the desire for a clean local and regional environment and to the gradual depletion of conventional oil and gas supplies. Additional scenarios of B1 were developed using the AIM (B1-AIM), ASF (B1-ASF), MARIA (B1-MARIA), MESSAGE (B1-MESSAGE), and MiniCAM (B1-MiniCAM) models. Some of these scenarios explore alternative technological developments (akin to the A1 scenario, e.g., B1T-MESSAGE) or alternative interpretations on rates and potentials of future dematerialization and energy-intensity improvements (e.g., B1High-MESSAGE and B1High-MiniCAM explore scenario sensitivities of higher energy demand compared to the B1 marker). 4.4.2.4. B2 Scenarios The B2 marker scenario (Riahi and Roehrl, 2000) was developed using the MESSAGE model (see Appendix IV), an integrated set of energy-sector simulation and optimization models used to generate the IIASA-WEC long-term energy and emission scenarios (IIASA-WEC, 1995; Nakicenovic et al., 1998). Compared to the other storylines (A1 and B1), the B2 future unfolds with more gradual changes and less extreme developments in all respects, including geopolitics, demographics, productivity growth, technological dynamics, and other salient scenario characteristics. A more fragmented pattern of future development (not that different from present trends) precludes any particularly strong convergence tendencies in the scenario quantification: • Model parameter values for projections to 2100 were derived typically from long-term historical data series where applicable (Marchetti and Nakicenovic, 1979; Nakicenovic, 1987; Grübler, 1990; Nakicenovic et al., 1996; Grübler, 1998a; Nakicenovic et al., 1998), or adopted from the medians of the analysis of the scenario literature (see Chapter 2). • The scenario quantification assumes effective policies in solving local and regional problems such as traffic congestion, local air pollution, and acid rain impacts. Additional B2 scenarios were developed using the AIM (B2-AIM), ASF (B2-ASF),12 IMAGE (B2-IMAGE),10 MARIA (B2-MARIA; Mori, 2000), and MiniCAM (B2-MiniCAM)13 models. Again, more than one B2 scenario interpretation was generated. Some models (e.g., B2-MARIA or B2High-MiniCAM) offered additional perspectives of both inter- and intra-model variability in the interpretation of the B2 storyline, particularly with respect to resource availability and technology development assumptions (see Section 4.4.7) and their resultant impact on GHG emissions (see Chapter 5). Figure 4-4 summarizes the main global scenario indicators of the four SRES marker scenarios by 2100, including population and global GDP levels, final energy intensities, final energy use, corresponding carbon intensities, land-use changes, and energy-related CO2 emissions. It illustrates that the range of the most important scenario characteristics spanned by the four SRES marker scenarios and the entire SRES scenario set covers the uncertainty range well, as reflected in the scenario literature. The scenario space defined by the lines "SRES-max" and "SRES-min" lies well within the range spanned by the scenario literature contained in the SRES scenario database and analyzed in Chapter 2. The two exceptions are: • The low range of future CO2 emissions from the literature is not reflected in the SRES scenarios, consistent with the SRES Terms of Reference to consider only scenarios that assume no "additional climate policy initiatives" (see Appendix I). • The low end of the range of global GDP and energy use from the literature is equally not reflected in the SRES scenarios. Very low global GDP values arise from a combination of rapid demographic transition with low per capita productivity growth, a combination for which there is little theoretic or empiric support in the available literature on demographic and economic growth reviewed in Chapter 3. Low GDP scenarios can also reflect a combination of average population growth and low economic growth; this type of future usually depicts low-income, inequitable, and possibly unstable worlds that are not analyzed in this report (see Box 4-2). Equally, while the SRES scenarios cover the range from the literature, the four marker scenarios cannot and do not replicate the frequency distributions of individual scenario variables as discussed in Chapter 2. Nor can their quantitative characteristics segment the relevant distributions in approximately equal intervals. Two distinguishing features characterize the SRES scenarios. First, probabilities or likelihood are not assigned to any quantitative scenario characteristics (inputs or outputs). Thus, that two of the SRES marker scenarios deploy the same (low) demographic projection does not imply that such a scenario is considered more likely. It only indicates that such a demographic scenario was judged by the SRES writing team to be consistent with two of the four SRES storylines, as opposed to arbitrarily assigning different population projections to other "high" or "low" scenario characteristics. Second, the SRES scenarios incorporate current understanding of important interrelations between various scenario-driving forces (see Chapter 3). Thus, a "free," or "modeler's choice," numeric combination of scenario indicators is simply not possible. For instance, intermediary levels of global GDP or energy use could result both from a medium population projection combined with intermediate per capita GDP or energy use growth, or 12 The B2-ASF shares global population and GDP assumptions with the B2 marker by 2100, but explores different dynamics of growth in the intervening time period. 13 The scenario deviates only slightly from the global population and GDP assumptions of other "harmonized" scenarios within this scenario family. The dynamic profiles of land-use changes mean that scenario comparisons for any given year, such as 2100, are somewhat misleading. Hence, cumulative carbon emissions that result from land-use changes over the 1990 to 2100 period are used as a proxy indicator in Figure 4-4 (see Chapter 5 for a more detailed discussion). opposed to arbitrarily assigning different population projections to other "high" or "low" scenario characteristics. Second, the SRES scenarios incorporate current understanding of important interrelations between various scenario-driving forces (see Chapter 3). Thus, a "free," or "modeler's choice," numeric combination of scenario indicators is simply not possible. For instance, intermediary levels of global GDP or energy use could result both from a medium population projection combined with intermediate per capita GDP or energy use growth, or alternatively from low or high population projections combined with high or low GDP and energy per capita values, respectively. The fact that for some quantitative scenario characteristics a number of SRES marker scenarios cluster more toward the upper or lower range spanned by the scenario literature merely indicates the existence of important relationships between scenario characteristics. It also indicates that a limited number of scenarios (four markers) cannot replicate the distribution of individual scenario values arising out of an analysis of more than 400 scenarios published in the literature. Hence, it is important to consider always the entire range across all 40 SRES scenarios when analyzing uncertainties in all driving-force variables and the resultant emission categories. 4.4.3. Population Prospects For the SRES scenario quantification three different population trajectories were chosen to reflect future demographic uncertainties based on published population projections (Lutz, 1996; UN, 1998; see Chapter 3). Global population ranges between 7 and 15 billion people by 2100 (Figure 4-5) depending on the speed and extent of the demographic transition. Fertility rates were assumed to converge to replacement levels (UN, 1998 medium scenario) in the B2 scenario or to below replacement levels in the A1 and B1 scenario families that adopt a variant of the low population scenario of Lutz (1996). The A2 scenario family is based on the high population projection described in Lutz (1996), which is characterized by heterogeneous fertility patterns that remain above replacement levels in many regions but nonetheless decline compared to current levels. To address this issue, during the approval process of the Summary for Policymakers at the 5th Session of WGIII of the IPCC from 8-11 March 2000 in Katmandu, Nepal, it was decided to select two illustrative scenarios in the SPM from two additional A1 groups, in addition to the marker scenarios. Across all scenarios, the concentration of future population growth and its uncertainty lies primarily in the developing countries. An equally pervasive trend across all scenarios is urbanization (see Chapter 3). Since the population trajectories are exogenous input to all the models used for this report, and are subject to a stringent harmonization criterion across different models, no further demographic variants to these are reported here, with exception of the A2 scenario family. 4.4.3.1. A1 and B1 Scenarios The population trajectory assumed for the A1 and B1 scenario families is based on a variant of the low population projection reported in Lutz (1996), which combines low fertility with low mortality and central migration rate assumptions. As is the case for other population scenarios used in this report, it is well within the uncertainty ranges as discussed in the demographic literature and the UN (1998) long-range population projections. After peaking at 8.7 billion in the middle of the 21st century, world population declines to 7.1 billion in the year 2100 (for comparison, the lowest UN Long Range projection indicates 5.6 billion by 2100; UN, 1998). As discussed in Chapter 3, the scenario population is somewhat higher than the previous low population scenario used in the IS92 scenario series, as only a combination of low fertility with high mortality rates could result in a global population as low as six billion people by 2100. Such a development is judged to be inconsistent with demographic theory (see Chapter 3) and to be inconsistent with the scenario storylines (see Section 4.2). The pace of demographic transition in developing countries is fastest among all the SRES scenarios, reflecting the emphasis on social and educational development (scenario B1) and economic development (A1). The use of the same population projection for two SRES scenario families thus reflects different views of the driving forces of the demographic transition (with causality links in both directions), but it does not imply that such a demographic scenario is considered more likely compared to that of other projections. Better education and improved social development, in particular concerning the role of women in society, lead the demographic transition (and consequently also economic development) in scenario B1. Accelerated rates of economic development and its required favorable social environment (education, reduction of income disparities, etc.) in turn lead the demographic transition in scenario A1. In both scenarios, low (infant) mortality rates are a necessary precondition to lower fertility rates (consistent with the Cairo targets of the UN Conference on Population and Development, discussed in Chapter 2). A distinguishing feature of the IIASA low population projection is the assumption of below replacement fertility levels, on the basis of the actual experience of industrial countries. The implications of this trend are visible in both the absolute decline of global population (from its peak at 8.7 billion people in the middle of the 21st century) and the significant population aging. In the long-term this trend affects not only the industrialized countries but also the currently developing countries (see the discussion in Chapter 3). For A1 and B1 scenarios, regional population trajectories are (almost for all years) within the proposed 5% interval of their respective marker scenarios, except for two of the scenarios. The SRES writing team gratefully acknowledges the assistance of Anne Goujon of IIASA's Population Project in providing a numeric interpretation of the IIASA low population scenario that is consistent with the assumption of convergence of social and economic development underlying the B1 and A1 scenario storylines. Numeric scenario values and documentation is given in www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/POP/IPCC-special-report/. Scenarios A1v1-MiniCAM and A1v2-MiniCAM adopt a slightly different population projection, generated endogenously in the MiniCAM model. Its main differences are an asymptotic fertility rate of 1.75 compared to the 1.5 of Lutz et al. (1996) and a slightly different temporal pattern of the demographic transition. The resultant demographic projection is about 5% lower in the first half of the 21st century and about 10% higher toward 2100 compared to those of the other A1 family scenarios. As such, the demographic scenario is well within the uncertainty range characteristic of any long-term demographic projection. For a detailed description and the scenario's underlying assumptions and numeric values see www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/POP/IPCC-special-report. It was noted in the government review process that A2's population projection by 2050 is 11.3 billion people, higher than the highest UN projection (10.7 billion) published in the report The State of World Population 1999 (UNFPA, 1999). As this UN projection extends only to 2050, it is necessary to consider the corresponding UN long-range population projections that extend to 2150 (UN, 1998). In these, the corresponding high/medium scenario is projected to have 10.8 billion people by 2050, which increases to 14.6 billion by 2100. The UN presents two additional scenarios that result in yet higher population levels: the UN high scenario projects 11.2 billion people by 2050 and 17.5 billion by 2100, and the UN constant fertility scenario projects 14.9 and 57.2 billion people by 2050 and 2100, respectively. For comparison, the A2 population scenario adopted from Lutz et al. (1996) indicates population levels of 11.3 billion by 2050 and 15.1 billion by 2100. Thus, A2 population levels by 2050 are comparable to those of the UN high scenario but remain significantly below the UN constant fertility scenario. By 2100, A2's population assumption is comparable to that of the UN high/medium scenario (14.6 billion) and significantly below that of the other two UN scenarios (high and constant fertility, with 17.5 and 57.2 billion, respectively). Hence, the adopted values for the A2 scenario are well within the range of the UN long-range population projections. As discussed in Chapter 3, the reason for the comparatively higher 2050 population in the Lutz et al. (1996) UN high/medium scenario (14.6 billion) and significantly below that of the other two UN scenarios (high and constant fertility, with 17.5 and 57.2 billion, respectively). Hence, the adopted values for the A2 scenario are well within the range of the UN long-range population projections. As discussed in Chapter 3, the reason for the comparatively higher 2050 population in the Lutz et al. (1996) scenario is lower assumed mortality rates compared to the UN projections in the medium/high scenario. The lower mortality rates characteristic of A2's demographic scenario are judged to be more consistent with the A2 scenario storyline than alternative UN projections, such as the UN high/medium variant, that results in lower population by 2050, albeit at the expense of higher mortality. Yet by 2100 the differences in global population between the two scenarios is rather small (15.1 versus 14.6 billion, or 3%). An Overview of Scenarios corresponding uncertainties estimated by demographers (see Chapter 3). For instance, Lutz et al. (1997) attach a probability of about 90% that actual world population will be lower (and 10% that it will be higher) than the value adopted for the A2 scenario family. Thus, the scenario represents well an upper bound of population growth scenarios found in the current scenario literature, although higher population scenarios exist in the demographic literature (see Chapter 3). As mentioned above, the SRES writing team is not in a position to attach any judgment concerning probability or likelihood to this or to any other demographic scenario. Population growth in the A2 world remains uninterrupted across all the SRES regions (Figure 4-5). The average global population growth rate over the 21st century is 0.96% per year, half that observed during the period between 1950 and 1990 (1.86%; UN, 1998). In the A2 marker, fertility rates vary considerably from one region to another; this reflects the regional orientation toward specific values, lifestyles, etc. described in the A2 scenario storyline (see Section 4.3). In the A2 world, in the year 2100 less than one-tenth of the world population lives in OECD90 countries, and toward the end of the 21st century a pronounced shift occurs in the population distribution, from ASIA to the ALM region (specifically Africa). 4.4.3.3. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios The A2 scenarios share, with one exception, the same global population trajectory, but some of them show variation in population across the four SRES regions because of differences in the regional breakdown of the underlying models. For example, the A2-IMAGE scenario has a smaller population in the REF region as compared with the marker, 405 million versus 706 million in the marker. An alternative demographic interpretation at the global level was attempted in the “transitional” A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario, in which the implications of delayed development patterns are explored. In this scenario global population is assumed to reach 10 billion by 2050, and 12 billion by 2100 (see Box 4-6). 4.4.3.4. B2 Scenarios The B2 marker scenario adopted the UN median 1998 population projection (UN, 1998), wherein global population increases to about 9.4 billion people by 2050 and to about 10.4 billion by 2100^^. The scenario is characteristic of recent median global population projections (see discussion in Chapter 3), and describes a continuation of historical trends toward a completion of the demographic transition in the 21st century. The projection is consistent with recent demographic data and scenarios; it reflects faster declines in world fertility together with declining mortality rates. Hence, the scenario is somewhat lower than previous UN median projections, as used in the previous IS92 scenario series. A distinguishing feature of the UN population projections is the assumption that, in the long-term, fertility levels converge toward replacement levels globally (see Chapter 3). Future population growth is assumed to be slow in today’s industrialized countries. In Asia, population size stabilizes in the second half of the 21st century, and in the rest of the world population growth slows down toward the end of that century. The UN median population projection is shared across all B2 scenario quantifications, although differences remain at the regional level. The different regional aggregations used across various models did not coincide with the regional aggregation of the original UN projection, which suggests that a more detailed regional breakdown of demographic projections is highly desirable for long-term global scenario studies. 4.4.4. Economic Development The SRES scenarios span a wide range of future economic growth rates (Table 4-5) and resultant levels of economic output. The A1 scenario family, with a global GDP of US$520 to 550 trillion in 2100, delineates the SRES upper bound, whereas the A2 and B2 scenarios, with a range of US$230 to 250 trillion in 2100, represent its lower bound. The B1 scenario family is intermediary. Although the SRES scenarios span a wide range, both lower and higher global GDP levels can be found in the literature (see Chapter 2). Uncertainties in future GDP levels are governed by the rates of future productivity growth and population growth, especially those in developing countries. Different assumptions on conditions and possibilities for development “catch-up” and for narrower per capita income gaps in particular explain the wide range in projected future economic growth rates. Given the weak inverse relationship between population growth and per capita income growth discussed in Chapter 2, uncertainties in future population growth rates tend to restrict the range of associated GDP projections. High population growth, all else being equal, lowers per capita income growth, whereas low population growth tends to increase this growth. This relationship is evident in empiric data – high per capita income countries are generally also those that have completed their demographic transition. The affluent live long and generally have few children. Notable exceptions are countries with small populations and significant income from commodity exports. Yet even assuming this relationship holds for an extended time into the future, its quantification is subject to considerable theoretic and empiric uncertainties (Alcamo et al., 1995). As outlined above, two of the SRES scenarios explicitly explore alternative pathways of the gradual closure of existing income gaps. As a reflection of uncertainty, the development “catch-up” diverges in terms of geographically distinct economic growth patterns across the four SRES scenario families, as summarized in Tables 4-5, 4-6, and 4-7. The scenarios of rapid development and “catch-up” remain in An Overview of Scenarios 195 Table 4-5: Historical economic growth rates (% per annum) from 1950 (Maddison, 1989, 1995; UN, 1993a, 1993b), and SRES scenarios for 1990 to 2100. Growth rates were calculated on the basis of GDP at 1990 prices and market exchange rates**. Long-term growth rates are lower than those from 1950 to 1990 (e.g., the average annual growth rate for OECD90 countries from 1850 to 1990 was about 2.8%, and for the reforming economies in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union it was about 1%; Maddison, 1989). Numbers in brackets give the minimum and maximum values of all SRES scenarios. Economic Growth Rates (% per annum) \[ \begin{array}{lcccccccc} & 1950\text{-}1990 & \multicolumn{4}{c}{1990\text{-}2050} & \multicolumn{4}{c}{1990\text{-}2100} \\ \text{Region} & & A1 & A2 & B1 & B2 & A1 & A2 & B1 & B2 \\ \hline \text{OECD90} & 3.9 & 2.0 & 1.6 & 1.8 & 1.4 & 1.8 & 1.6 & 1.5 & 1.1 \\ & & (1.2\text{-}2.2) & (1.0\text{-}2.1) & (1.7\text{-}2.0) & (1.3\text{-}1.6) & (0.9\text{-}1.9) & (0.9\text{-}1.7) & (1.4\text{-}1.5) & (1.0\text{-}1.3) \\ \text{REF} & 4.8 & 4.1 & 2.3 & 3.1 & 3.0 & 3.1 & 2.5 & 2.7 & 2.3 \\ & & (2.8\text{-}4.6) & (0.6\text{-}2.3) & (2.7\text{-}3.7) & (1.9\text{-}3.3) & (2.2\text{-}3.5) & (1.6\text{-}2.5) & (2.4\text{-}2.7) & (1.6\text{-}2.5) \\ \text{IND} & 3.9 & 2.2 & 1.6 & 1.9 & 1.6 & 2.0 & 1.7 & 1.6 & \\ \end{array} \] IND 3.9 2.2 1.6 1.9 1.6 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.3 (1.4-2.4) (1.0-2.1) (1.8-2.0) (1.4-1.8) (1.1-2.1) (1.0-1.7) (1.5-1.6) (1.1-1.4) ASIA 6.4 6.2 3.9 5.5 5.5 4.5 3.3 3.9 3.8 (5.8-6.6) (3.8-4.8) (5.3-6.2) (4.2-5.7) (4.2-4.7) (3.3-3.7) (3.8-4.2) (3.6-3.9) ALM 4.0 5.5 3.8 5.0 4.1 4.1 3.2 3.7 3.2 (4.8-5.8) (3.3-4.1) (4.5-5.3) (3.3-4.4) (3.9-4.2) (3.1-3.4) (3.5-3.9) (3.0-3.6) DEV 4.8 5.9 3.8 5.2 4.9 4.3 3.3 3.8 3.5 (5.3-6.2) (3.5-4.4) (4.9-5.7) (3.7-5.0) (4.1-4.4) (3.3-3.6) (3.7-4.1) (3.3-3.7) WORLD 4.0 3.6 2.3 3.1 2.8 2.9 2.3 2.5 2.2 (2.9-3.7) (1.7-2.8) (2.9-3.5) (2.1-2.9) (2.5-3.0) (2.0-2.3) (2.5-2.6) (2.0-2.3) Note: independent rounding. * In the calculations the concept of logarithmic growth rates is used. Table 4-6: Income per capita (1000 US dollars at 1990 prices and exchange rates) in the world and by SRES region. Numbers in brackets give minimum and maximum values of the SRES scenarios. The range for 1990 illustrates differences in base-year calibration across models. Income per Capita by World and Regions (10³ 1990 US$ per capita) Region 1990 2050 2100 A1 A2 B1 B2 A1 A2 B1 B2 OECD90 17.8-20.6 50.1 34.6 49.8 39.2 109.2 58.5 79.7 61.0 (39.4-62.3) (32.3-54.0) (40.3-52.0) (35.1-42.2) (69.8-115.7) (48.0-78.7) (70.6-84.7) (50.1-73.2) REF 2.2-2.7 29.3 7.1 14.3 16.3 100.9 20.2 52.2 38.3 (13.5-32.5) (3.3-9.0) (12.4-23.4) (7.8-16.8) (39.9-119.3) (13.5-20.2) (41.2-56.4) (14.0-38.3) IND 12.8-14.4 44.2 26.1 39.1 32.5 107.3 46.2 72.8 54.4 (30.7-50.0) (22.4-41.9) (32.5-40.8) (27.0-34.7) (60.3-113.5) (37.1-64.5) (65.3-77.7) (42.4-61.1) ASIA 0.4-0.6 14.9 2.6 9.0 8.9 71.9 7.8 35.7 19.5 (10.8-15.7) (2.5-4.5) (7.2-14.3) (3.6-9.5) (38.8-76.8) (7.4-12.9) (35.7-46.1) (14.8-20.6) ALM 1.3-2.1 17.5 6.0 13.6 6.9 60.9 15.2 44.9 16.1 (12.2-18.0) (4.2-6.0) (8.0-15.3) (4.4-7.7) (44.2-69.5) (11.3-15.2) (41.3-45.8) (13.6-22.6) DEV 0.7-1.1 15.9 3.9 10.9 8.1 66.5 11.0 40.2 18.0 (11.4-16.7) (3.3-5.1) (7.5-14.8) (3.9-8.4) (41.4-69.8) (10.3-13.7) (40.2-45.2) (14.2-21.5) WORLD 3.7-4.0 20.8 7.2 15.6 11.7 74.9 16.1 46.6 22.6 (14.3-21.5) (6.0-9.9) (12.7-19.1) (7.7-11.9) (43.7-77.9) (15.9-16.9) (46.3-49.6) (19.2-24.5) Table 4-7: Growth rates (% per year) of income per capita (using GDP at 1990 prices and exchange rates) in the world and by region. Historical data from 1950 to 1990 from Maddison (1989, 1995), UN (1993a, 1993b), and Klein Goldewijk and Battjes (1995). Numbers in brackets give minimum and maximum values of all SRES scenarios. Growth Rates of Income Per Capita (%) Region 1950-1990 1990-2050 1990-2100 A1 A2 B1 B2 A1 A2 B1 B2 OECD90 2.8 1.6 1.1 1.5 1.2 1.6 1.1 1.2 1.1 (1.2-1.8) (0.8-1.6) (1.2-1.6) (1.0-1.4) (1.2-1.7) (0.8-1.2) (1.2-1.3) (0.9-1.3) REF 3.7 4.0 1.9 3.0 3.0 3.3 2.0 2.8 2.4 (2.8-4.5) (0.5-2.2) (2.7-3.6) (1.9-3.3) (2.5-3.4) (1.5-2.0) (2.6-2.8) (1.6-2.6) IND 2.9 2.0 1.2 1.7 1.4 1.9 1.2 1.5 1.2 (1.3-2.1) (0.8-1.8) (1.5-1.8) (1.1-1.6) (1.3-2.0) (0.9-1.4) (1.4-1.5) (1.0-1.4) ASIA 4.4 5.5 2.7 4.8 4.7 4.4 2.5 3.9 3.3 (5.1-5.9) (2.7-3.6) (4.6-5.5) (3.3-4.8) (3.9-4.7) (2.4-2.9) (3.8-4.2) (3.1-3.4) ALM 1.6 4.0 1.9 3.5 2.4 3.3 1.9 3.0 2.1 (3.5-4.4) (1.7-2.2) (3.1-3.9) (1.7-2.7) (3.1-3.5) (1.8-2.1) (2.8-3.2) (1.9-2.5) DEV 2.7 4.9 2.4 4.2 3.8 4.0 2.2 3.5 2.8 (4.4-5.2) (2.3-3.0) (3.9-4.8) (2.5-3.9) (3.6-4.1) (2.2-2.6) (3.4-3.7) (2.6-3.0) WORLD 2.2 2.8 1.1 2.3 1.8 2.7 1.3 2.2 1.6 (2.2-2.9) (0.7-1.5) (2.1-2.6) (1.1-1.9) (2.2-2.8) (1.3-1.5) (2.2-2.4) (1.4-1.7) ...dispute within the SRES writing team because they imply high productivity growth (see Box 4-5 and, for a contrasting viewpoint and scenario interpretation, Box 4-6). However, it is agreed that such scenarios of high productivity growth and smaller income-per-capita disparities cannot be ruled out, even if they certainly are very challenging from the perspective of recent growth experiences in a number of regions, most notably Africa. There is also agreement that the assumptions deployed for the SRES scenarios are within the range suggested by the literature (see Chapter 2). In this the highest GDP growth is up to US$700 trillion by 2100 compared to US$550 trillion in the highest SRES scenario. For scenarios developed within the context of sustainability analyses, reductions in per capita income gaps also occur faster than for any of the scenarios presented here. Important differences remain between models in terms of 1990 base-year data on economic activity levels. Even after differences in regional definitions are accounted for, 1990 regional GDP differences between models range up to ±32% in a few cases. Such differences are particularly pronounced for developing countries, where in many cases national currencies are not freely convertible and thus important uncertainties on the applicable conversion rates remain (World Bank, 1999). Differences for OECD countries are much smaller (±3% across the models) and because of their current dominance in global economic activity (and counterbalancing effects), 1990 global GDP numbers agree well across the models (±5%). Scenario comparisons, especially at the regional level, are therefore best based on a comparison of growth rates (see Chapter 2), and the SRES scenarios are no exception. Historical data indicate that, even though the process of economic growth is heterogeneous across countries and over time, the patterns of growth show certain similarities. Economic “catch-up” follows a general dynamic pattern, characterized by initially accelerating economic growth rates that pass through a maximum, and decline once the industrial base of an economy becomes established. This overall feature of growth dynamics is reflected in all the SRES scenarios, albeit timing and magnitude vary across the four scenario families. This variation reflects the scenario-specific storylines, as well as particular relationships to other driving-force variables, such as demographics, described in the scenario. 4.4.4.1. A1 Scenarios By design (see Section 4.3) the “High Growth” scenario family A1 explores a world in which future economic development follows the patterns of the most successful historical examples of economic development catch-up. Free trade, continued innovation, and a stable political and social climate enable developing regions to access knowledge, technology, and capital. Combined with a rapid demographic transition, this is assumed to lead to acceleration in time and space of economic growth compared to the historical OECD experience since the 19th century. The global economy is projected to expand at an average annual rate of 2.9% to 2100 (see Table 4-5), roughly in line with historical experience over the past 100 years (of 2.7% per year, see Chapter 3). Such growth rates are considered high by the current scenario literature (see Chapter 2). Compared to historical experience, however, the broad-based nature of economic development catch-up (i.e., no region “is left behind”) is without precedent. The 2.9% per year economic growth rate translates into a 25-fold expansion of global GDP that would reach US$529 trillion by 2100. As a byproduct of rapid economic development and fast demographic transition, income inequities between industrial and developing countries are virtually eradicated. Per capita income ratios are 1:1.6 in 2100, compared to a ratio of 1:16 in 1990 in terms of the GDP/capita difference between current developed (IND) and developing (DEV) regions across the four SRES regions. However, even if relative income differences are reduced drastically, absolute differences remain large, not least because of the high incomes characteristic of the A1 scenario family (per capita income differences are also larger when considered at a more disaggregated level). When measured across the four SRES regions in 1990, income per capita differences are nearly 1:40 (between ASIA and OECD90). Per capita income differences are yet higher for differences across countries or between different social strata. The poorest 20% of Bangladesh’s population, for instance, earn per capita incomes that are a factor of 700 lower than that of the 20% richest Swiss population (UNDP, 1993). A distinguishing feature of the A1 scenarios is to explore pathways of reductions in present disparities. In A1, per capita income in industrial countries (IND) increases to about US$107,300 and in now developing countries (DEV) to US$66,500. Non-OECD GDP growth rates rise to a peak of about 8% between 2010 to 2030... capita incomes that are a factor of 700 lower than that of the 20% richest Swiss population (UNDP, 1993). A distinguishing feature of the A1 scenarios is to explore pathways of reductions in present disparities. In A1, per capita income in industrial countries (IND) increases to about US$107,300 and in now developing countries (DEV) to US$66,500. Non-OECD GDP growth rates rise to a peak of about 8% between 2010 to 2030 in scenario A1, and decline once the industrial and infrastructural bases of their economies are established. By and large, the A1 scenario implies a replication across all developing regions of the post-World War II experience of Japan and Korea or the recent economic development of China. 4.4.4.2. Harmonized and Other A1 Scenarios The high economic growth characteristics of the A1B marker scenario reproduce well in the scenarios calculated with different models. The A1B-MESSAGE scenario tracks the A1B marker scenario closely at the global and regional levels (“fully harmonized” input assumptions). At the global GDP level, most growth trajectories agree within a range up to 15%, except the A1v2-MiniCAM scenario (see Box 4-5). Differences at the regional level are larger. All models with comparable regional aggregation levels agree well for ASIA (except A1v2-MiniCAM). Differences in economic growth prospects also agree well for OECD90 (except A1v2-MiniCAM). For REF the A1B scenarios group into two clusters – one group reproduces the GDP growth scenario of the A1B marker, while the other group suggests a GDP level by 2100 about one-third lower than that of the A1B marker. Mostly this reflects different assumptions used in the models on future labor productivity growth that have not been harmonized with the values adopted for the A1B marker scenario. For ALM, again one group of scenarios tracks closely the A1B marker, whereas other groups indicate either higher (A1B-ASF, A1B-MiniCAM) or lower (A1v2-MiniCAM, A1T-MARIA) GDP growth. The reasons are similar to those discussed above. For the SRES region REF, the different regional aggregations across the models required complicated “inverse” calculations on regional growth rates for harmonization with the respective marker scenario at the level of the aggregated SRES region. For ALM, such calculations were neither possible for all models nor considered desirable by various modeling teams, which preferred to emphasize the inherent uncertainties in regional economic growth perspectives even for an otherwise shared vision of rapid global economic growth and development catch-up. 4.4.4.3. A2 Scenarios As compared to the other SRES scenario families, the A2 world is characterized by relatively slower productivity growth rates and resultant lower per capita incomes (see Table 4-6). Yet, the global average (1990-2100) growth rate in per capita income of 1.3% is still somewhat higher than that observed from 1970 to 1995 (1.2%; World Bank, 1998). The comparatively conservative assumptions on per-capita-income growth reflect both the more fragmented economic outlook of the A2 storyline (see Section 4.3) and the slow pace of the demographic transition that underlies A2’s high population growth trajectory. The fastest growth in per capita incomes (on average over 2.3% per year) occurs in the ASIA region, while the slowest growth is observed in the OECD90 region (on average 1.0% per year). In a reversal of current short-term trends, the REF and ALM regions experience a stable increase of their per capita income levels over the 21st century at a rate that is almost twice as high as in the OECD90 region (see Table 4-7). The A2 world is also characterized by a slow convergence of incomes among regions. Nonetheless, present income disparities become narrower, from a factor of 40 difference in 1990 per capita income levels between the richest and the poorest of the four SRES regions, to a factor of seven or eight by 2100. The increase of global population from 6 to 15 billion by 2100 translates into an increase of global GDP by a factor of 12 over a century. The average (1990 to 2100) annual growth rate of total GDP is 2.2%, which is lower than the 2.9% average annual growth rate observed between 1970 and 1995 (World Bank, 1998) and the 4% rate observed from 1950 to 1990 (see Table 4-5). 4.4.4.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios Four non-marker A2 scenarios (A2-AIM, A2-IMAGE with the exception of 2050, A2-MiniCAM, and A2-MESSAGE) have global GDPs within 5% of the A2 marker. The A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario has much lower global GDP than the A2 marker, reflecting a different viewpoint on future labor productivity growth (see Box 4-5) and a different interpretation of the A2 scenario storyline altogether (see Box 4-6). While this particular scenario illustrates important uncertainties with respect to economic growth and development catch-up for developing countries, it remains controversial within the writing team, especially as to whether it reflects the overall Box 4-5: Labor Productivity Growth Rates in the SRES Scenarios The high income growths assumed in the scenarios, especially in the A1 and B1 scenario families, imply large labor productivity increases. According to one member of the writing team such increases might not be plausible, but the other members find the assumptions plausible, especially in view of historical precedents. In line with IPCC practice, the dissenting view is elaborated here. Its corresponding implications on scenario quantifications are discussed with one example in Box 4-6. Long-term economic growth rates can be expressed as the sum of the labor force growth rate and the growth rate of labor productivity. This framework can be used to understand more clearly the kind of technological and demographic assumptions present in the SRES scenarios. A simplified measure of labor productivity, the average economic output per member of the labor force, is used to examine the SRES scenarios. Productivity assumptions are not comparable across the different models used to quantify the SRES emissions scenarios, so these issues were examined by running quantifications of the SRES scenarios with the MiniCAM model. Population projections were taken as exogenous inputs and regional GDP growth paths were taken to be similar to those in the SRES marker scenarios. From these, the implied labor force productivity growth rates are determined using assumptions about labor force participation rates. In these calculations, total labor force participation rates were assumed to be asymptotic to a participation rate of 80% for a working age population of all persons aged 15 to 65. The result of this exercise is that increases in labor force productivity range between 0.79% and 5.85% per year (calculated for the periods 1990 to 2020, 2020 to 2050, and 2050 to 2100) for the four scenario families and four SRES macro-regions considered separately. This compares with historical experience between 1970 and 1995 of growth in regional labor force productivity of 0.69 to 4.13% per year and the longer-term productivity growth rates of between 1.1 and 7.7% per year. The implied future growth in global labor productivity for the MiniCAM scenario calculations ranges between 1.12% and 3.49% per year for the four scenarios (again from 1990 to 2020, 2020 to 2050, and 2050 to 2100). The historical growth in global labor force productivity between 1970 and 1995 was 1.04% per year. Historical rates of GDP per capita growth (a macro-economic proxy for labor productivity; see Table 3-2 and Table 4-7) were 1.1% per year between 1980 and 1992 and 2.5% per year between 1950 and 1980. At the upper end of these ranges, the SRES scenarios exhibit a growth in global labor force productivity that is higher than recent historical global experience, particularly for the SRES regions REF and ALM. This indicates that none of the four SRES scenario families envisions a recurrence of the current economic crisis in Eastern Europe and Russia or a recurrence of the “lost decade” of negative GDP per capita growth in Africa or Latin America. In addition, the period over which some developing regions exhibit high growth rates in these scenarios is longer than any historical record of high growth rates. However, there is limited analogous historical experience, as Japan is the only country that can be said to have completed such an economic “catch-up.” The assumptions on labor force participation used in the calculations reported in this box result in a decline in the growth of the labor force through the 21st century. The total labor force actually declines in all regions for the last simulation period. This reflects the demographic pattern of an overall decline in the population and the assumed stability in labor force participation rates. However, the scenarios describe generally affluent worlds in which people live longer. Thus, the labor participation patterns are likely to change with respect to current practices. People may work much longer over their lifetime, but this trend is countered by the probable need for an increase in education levels, which act to delay entry into the labor force. Pushing the asymptotic labor participation rates upward from the value assumed here results in only a small increase in total productivity, on the order of 0.2% per year. The high economic growth branches (A1 and B1 families) of the SRES scenarios may represent upper bounds for future increases in labor productivity. Different assumptions about future rates of labor force participation do not appear to change this conclusion substantially. These scenarios essentially assume that, within the next few decades, most developing regions will experience an extended period of successful economic development analogous to the historical experience of Japan and the 0.2% per year. The high economic growth branches (A1 and B1 families) of the SRES scenarios may represent upper bounds for future increases in labor productivity. Different assumptions about future rates of labor force participation do not appear to change this conclusion substantially. These scenarios essentially assume that, within the next few decades, most developing regions will experience an extended period of successful economic development analogous to the historical experience of Japan and the "Asian Tigers." An alternative view on future labor productivity growth is provided in a number of scenarios developed with the MiniCAM model, most notably A1v2-MiniCAM and the "transitional" scenario A2-A1-MiniCAM (see Box 4-6). In these scenarios global economic output is between 20% (A2-A1-MiniCAM) and 36% (A1v2-MiniCAM) lower than in the other scenarios of their respective scenario families. An Overview of Scenarios 199 Box 4-6: Possible Transitions between Scenario Families: The A2-A1-MiniCAM Scenario The four scenario storylines have been stylized as global socio-economic developments that evolve in different directions, but globally and continuously. In reality, different regions may follow the developments pictured in the scenarios in different time periods. For example, the world may in reality develop according to one of the storylines and after some time move toward another. As an illustration of this, one scenario (A2-A1-MiniCAM) was elaborated by a member of the writing team. This scenario is described here even though some members of the writing team considered its inclusion undesirable and possibly confusing as it was submitted too late to have the team thoroughly discuss its consistency and to clarify its relationship to the four storylines. However, the point that in reality transitions between scenarios are possible is a valid one and the contrasting viewpoint is presented here for consideration of the reader, following IPCC practice. The A2-A1-MiniCAM transition scenario explores a world in which the prerequisites for development, such as education, effective institutions, and high saving rates, take some time to develop, so that rapid development does not begin to occur until between 2020 and 2050 depending on the region. In this scenario, total GDP by 2100 is below the median of the historical scenario data base and, with the population 20% higher than the current median UN forecast, average per capita income is at the lower end of the historical data base range. In such a relatively poor world the economic structure is more sensitive to environmental change than in the marker scenario, and the institutional structure is less capable. Thus, the impacts of climate change are larger and the ability to adapt less than those in the A1 world. The primary driving forces for the A2-A1-MiniCAM transition scenario follow the logic of this story line, as detailed below. Population is lower in the A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario variant than in the A2 marker, since its total completed fertility early in the 21st century is lower. This reflects the continued rapid historical declines and leads to slower population growth rates than in the population scenario adopted for the A2 scenario family. Total completed fertility declines slowly in the forecast period with a long-term asymptotic level of 2.25 for all regions, which results in a global population that is still growing by over 100 million per year in 2100. The values for migration and death rates used to generate the population trajectory follow those of the UN median forecast. The population scenario of A2-A1-MiniCAM is quite close to the UN medium population projection (see the discussion of the B2 scenario family below) until about 2060. Thereafter, however, A2-A1-MiniCAM's population scenario continues to grow linearly to about 12 billion, whereas the UN median projection stabilizes at about 10 billion by 2080 and slightly declines thereafter. The regionally heterogeneous ("delayed") pattern of development of the precursors to rapid economic growth (e.g. education) means that some developing regions experience stagnant or very slowly growth in per capita incomes well into the 21st century. As regions begin rapid development they approach and follow the average OECD labor productivity pattern, so GDP growth rates accelerate post-2050 and average nearly 2.5% per year over the second half of the 21st century. GDP thus rises more slowly early in the 21st century in this scenario, reaching just over US$50 trillion by 2050. After 2050, GDP rises more rapidly to reach just under US$200 trillion in 2100. Per capita final energy demands are limited by per capita income, and rise only as economic growth occurs. After growing slowly until 2050, per capita energy demands grow by more than 1.5% annually to reach 120 GJ per capita by 2100. With increases in the efficiency with which services are provided, this results in a global average level of energy services similar to that currently seen in Western Europe. Global per capita income and energy use by 2100 approach that of Western Europe in 1990. Therefore global energy intensities in 2100 approach those of Western Europe in 1990, a value lower than in other scenarios but in line with current observations. Natural gas and oil dominate the primary energy system, and contribute slightly more than half of the primary energy. Non-fossil sources contribute about 30% of total primary energy, with coal providing the remainder. Total fossil energy carbon emissions reach 22 GtC by 2100. Sulfur controls are delayed in this implementation until economic growth takes off after 2050. With high levels of fossil fuel use, and relatively low rates of control, sulfur emissions are about ten million tons higher in 2100 than they are today. The relatively slow growth in output and productivity in the economy in general is mirrored in the agricultural sector, with lower growth in agricultural productivity until post 2050. The large population complicates this problem, leading to large-scale expansion of agricultural lands and a resultant decrease in forested and unmanaged lands, especially in developing regions. Land-use changes do not offset any of these emissions, since the relatively high population, the rapid growth in income, and the growth in modern biomass result in essentially zero carbon emissions from land use and agriculture, rather than the substantial uptake seen in many other scenarios. In particular, the consistency of a continued fast demographic transition to 2050 combined with a scenario of stagnating per capita income growth for as much as five decades is questioned by a number of members from the writing team. 200 An Overview of Scenarios Nonetheless, in view of the spirit of the SRES open process this contrasting scenario is presented in Box 4-6. Regional GDP growth differs more than global values across the different model interpretations of the A2 scenario storyline. A2-MESSAGE and A2-A1M scenarios are harmonized, based on the marker scenario, at the regional level also, while the A2-IMAGE and A2-MiniCAM scenarios have significant regional deviations from the A2 (ASF) marker. In particular, these scenarios assume stronger GDP/capita growth in the ASIA region and slower growth in the ALM and REF regions. 4.4.4.5. B1 Scenarios The B1 scenario storyline assumes high levels of social consciousness and successful governance that result in strong reductions in income inequalities and social inequity. Growth in GDP, while being substantial, is qualitatively different compared to that of other scenarios, as social activities and environmental conservation are emphasized. Concepts of "green" GDP, including socially desirable activities such as childcare, apply in particular in the B1 scenario and qualify its similarity to other scenarios in terms of monetary value of GDP. In contrast to the world of scenario A1, the reduction of income inequalities is not a byproduct, but rather the result of constant domestic and international efforts. Global GDP reaches US$328 trillion, which corresponds to an average annual growth rate of 2.5%, slightly less than the long-term historical average. Per capita income differences between the IND and DEV regions are reduced from 1:16 in 1990 to 1:1.8 by 2100; income disparities within particular regions are assumed to be even further reduced, consistent with the thread of the B1 storyline described in Section 4.3. For the IMAGE model simulation, convergence assumptions were applied in the following domains: • Technology convergence was toward the level of the productivity frontier region (either Japan or the US). • Economic structure convergence was toward long-term sectoral shares of OECD economies (e.g., the US), which over the long-term implies a decline of the share of manufacturing sectors, and hence convergence to a service-oriented economy. • Education convergence was to the OECD ratio of highly skilled workers within the total workforce. 4.4.4.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios The global GDP trajectories are all within the proposed harmonization intervals, except for the B1 High-MiniCAM (see Box 4-5) and the B1-MARIA scenarios in the middle period of the 21st century. On the regional level, differences in GDP trajectories from different models are larger because of the differences in regional aggregations outlined above in the discussion of the A1 scenario family. 4.4.4.7. B2 Scenarios Global GDP in B2 is assumed to increase by more than a factor of 10 during the 21st century, or at an average annual growth rate of 2.2%. This growth rate of GDP is similar to the median GDP growth in the scenario database reviewed in Chapter 2. Stabilization of global population at less than double current levels, as projected in the UN median scenario adopted for B2, combined with a sustained pace of development implies that a B2 world generally achieves high levels of affluence. Average per capita income reaches about US$18,000 by 2100 in the developing countries, which exceeds the current OECD averages. In comparison, average per capita GDP reaches US$54,400 by 2100 in the developed regions, which corresponds to an income ratio of about 3:1 between industrial (IND) and now developing (DEV) regions, a considerable improvement in interregional equity by 2100 (Riahi and Roehrl, 2000). Nonetheless, given the nature of the B2 scenario storyline (Section 4.3), per capita income differences among the world regions are higher than those in the A1 and B1 scenarios, but much smaller than those in A2. reaches US$54,400 by 2100 in the developed regions, which corresponds to an income ratio of about 3:1 between industrial (IND) and now developing (DEV) regions, a considerable improvement in interregional equity by 2100 (Riahi and Roehrl, 2000). Nonetheless, given the nature of the B2 scenario storyline (Section 4.3), per capita income differences among the world regions are higher than those in the A1 and B1 scenarios, but much smaller than those in A2. 4.4.4.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios The economic growth paths described by the B2-MESSAGE marker scenario are closely tracked by the B2 quantifications derived from alternative models at the global level, with the exception of the B2-IMAGE scenario, which is slightly below. Differences at the regional level are larger. For B2-ASF and B2-MiniCAM, GDP is higher in the ALM and lower in the ASIA regions, respectively, compared to the B2 marker scenario and its “fully harmonized” companion B2-AIM. The latter – like all AIM scenarios – was developed by an interdisciplinary group of researchers from different countries in the ASIA region and therefore helps to guide readers as to which scenario better reflects regional perspectives. 4.4.5. Energy Intensities, Energy Demand, and Structure of Energy Use Population and GDP assumptions, along with structural change and technological change that affect energy efficiency and energy costs (and prices), drive the demand for energy services. Given the different model representations of energy service demands, in this section final energy use is discussed as a common measurement point across all SRES models and scenarios. Final energy use per unit economic activity, that is, energy intensity, is a frequently used measure of comparative efficiency of resource use, and reflects a whole range of structural, technological, and lifestyle factors (Schipper and Meyers, 1992). In B2-IMAGE, economic output is higher in OECD90 and lower in the other regions compared to the B2 marker. An Overview of Scenarios 201 Figure 4-6 illustrates the evolution of final energy intensities for the four SRES marker scenarios. Instead of time, per capita income is shown on the horizontal axis, to illustrate a conditional convergence of regional final energy intensities. Invariably, intensities are projected to decline with increasing income levels. As discussed in Chapter 3, the main reason for this trend stems from the common source of economic growth and energy intensity improvements – technological change. All else being equal, the faster intensity improvements are, the faster aggregate productivity (per capita income) grows. An important methodological improvement over previous studies is the explicit inclusion of non-commercial energy forms in some SRES models, drawing on estimates as reported in IPCC WGII SAR (Watson et al., 1996) and in Nakicenovic et al. (1998). In the A1 and B1 scenarios, per capita income differences are substantially narrowed and convergent because of increased economic integration and rapid technological change. Therefore, differences in energy intensities are also narrowed significantly and are convergent, as shown in Figure 4-6. The B1 storyline describes a development path to a less material-intensive economy. Hence, the final energy intensities in the B1 marker are lowest among the four SRES marker scenarios for a given per capita income level. The A2 storyline reflects a world with less rapid technological change, as shown by the smallest rate of energy intensity improvement among the four marker scenarios. Different interpretations of the four scenario storylines, as well as alternative rates of energy intensity improvement to the four marker scenarios, are discussed below. Owing to methodological differences across the six models (see Box 4-7) it is not possible to disaggregate energy intensity improvements into various components, such as structural change, price effects, technological change, etc., in a consistent way. In some models (macro-economic) price effects are differentiated from “everything else” (frequently labeled AEEI, or autonomous energy intensity improvements). As a rule, the importance of non-price factors is an inverse function of the time horizon considered. Over the short-term, the impacts of economic structural change and technology diffusion are necessarily low. Hence, prices assume a paramount importance in driving alternative energy demand patterns in short-term (to 2010-2020) scenario studies (e.g., IEA, 1998; EIA, 1997, 1999). Over the longer term (i.e., the time horizon considered by the SRES scenarios), economic structural and technological changes become more pronounced, as does their influence on energy intensity improvements and energy demand. This does not imply that prices do not matter over the long term, but simply that “everything else” (e.g., AEEI) is likely to outweigh the impacts of prices, as indeed suggested by quantitative scenario analyses performed within the Energy Modeling Forum EMF-14 (Weyant, 1995). Important feedback mechanisms between technological change and costs (and thus also prices) exist over the long term. These are as a rule treated endogenously in the models, for instance when modeling long-run resource extraction costs or structural changes in energy supply options (see Sections 4.4.6 and 4.4.7). Energy prices are also strongly affected by policies (e.g., taxation), but to project these far into the future is both outside the capability of currently available methodologies and outside the general “policy neutral” stance of the SRES scenarios. Therefore, most models treat dynamic changes in (average and marginal) costs as the driving force for energy intensity improvements and for technology choice (see Sections 4.4.6 and 4.4.7). 4.4.5.1. A1 Scenarios Improvements in energy efficiency on the demand side are assumed to be relatively low in the A1B marker scenario, because of low energy prices caused by rapid technological progress in resource availability and energy supply technologies (see Sections 4.4.6 and 4.4.7). These low energy prices provide little incentive to improve end-use-energy efficiencies and high income levels encourage comfortable and convenient (and often energy intensive) lifestyles (especially in the household, service, and transport sectors). Efficient technologies are not fully introduced into the end-use side, dematerialization processes in the industrial sector are not well promoted, lifestyles become energy intensive, and private motor vehicles are used more in developing countries as per capita GDP increases. Conversely, fast rates of economic growth and capital turnover and rising incomes also enable the diffusion of more efficient technologies. During the government review process, comment was made on the fact that energy intensities in A2 are one-third higher than those in B2. This figure is classified as “reasonable” for an inter-family scenario variation by the writing team because it is consistent both with the underlying differences in per capita GDP (i.e. productivity) growth between the two scenario families and with the relationship between energy intensity improvements and macro-economic productivity growth identified in the literature assessment in Chapters 2 and 3. 202 An Overview of Scenarios Box 4-7: The Role of Prices in SRES Scenarios The price of energy comprises many components: • Costs to establish and maintain the production, conversion, transport, and distribution infrastructure of energy supply. • Profit margins. • A whole host of levies such as royalties and taxes raised at the points of energy production or use. • Consumers’ willingness to pay for quality and convenience of energy services. Furthermore, given the importance of energy and the vast volumes traded, prices are influenced by a whole range of additional factors, from inevitable elements of speculation to geopolitical considerations, all of which can decouple energy price trends from any underlying physical balance between supply and demand. Taxes are especially significant. In a number of OECD countries, up to 80% of the consumer price of gasoline is taxes (OECD, 1998), and the differences between countries are enormous. In 1997, 27% of the price of gasoline in the USA was taxes, compared with 78% in France. Taxes vary substantially even between large oil producers (and exporters). In Mexico taxes are 13% of gasoline prices, but in Norway they are 75% (OECD, 1998). Currently, no methodologies exist to project future energy prices taking all of above mentioned factors into account, nor were the SRES scenarios intended to make explicit assumptions on such factors such as future energy taxation. Price information enters long-term emission models either in the form of exogenous scenario assumptions, or it is derived internally in models based on simplified representations of price formation mechanisms usually based on (marginal) cost information. The six models used for SRES range from detailed “bottom-up” models (e.g., AIM, IMAGE), through macro-economic (partial equilibrium) models (e.g., MARIA, MiniCAM), to hybrid approaches (successive iteration between the engineering model MESSAGE with a macro-economic model, or using the Worldscan model with IMAGE). Each has different representations of price formation mechanisms and their relationship to macro-economic or sectoral energy demand. These are summarized in Appendix IV. As a rule, “bottom-up” (optimization) models calculate only (average and marginal) costs endogenously. As a result of their sectoral perspective (energy, agriculture, etc.), these models cannot determine macro-economic feedbacks on other sectors or the entire economy and thus are unable to with a macro-economic model, or using the Worldscan model with IMAGE). Each has different representations of price formation mechanisms and their relationship to macro-economic or sectoral energy demand. These are summarized in Appendix IV. As a rule, "bottom-up" (optimization) models calculate only (average and marginal) costs endogenously. As a result of their sectoral perspective (energy, agriculture, etc.), these models cannot determine macro-economic feedbacks on other sectors or the entire economy and thus are unable to represent a consistent picture of price formation. Conversely, price formation is endogenized in "top-down" models; however, these rely on the stringent assumption that demand and supply must be in equilibrium and in addition provide little sectoral detail. Over recent years this simplified modeling dichotomy has progressively weakened because of further advances in methodology and the development of "hybrid" modeling approaches. To illustrate the methodologies deployed in the six SRES models, two (MARIA and MESSAGE) are discussed here, but (for space limitations) only in terms of one scenario (B2). (Table 4-9 gives additional details of an inter-scenario comparison of energy prices for the MiniCAM and ASF models. Owing to methodological differences, a comparison of prices across scenarios is only possible within a consistent approach (i.e., by comparing scenarios quantified with the same model).) The energy prices represented in MARIA (see also Mori, 2000) consist of energy production and energy utilization costs. Market prices are determined endogenously by model-calculated shadow prices (for further model details see Appendix IV and Mori and Takahashi, 1999). Among various parameters, the extraction costs of fossil fuel resources and the coefficients of utilization costs and their evolution over time are the most important determinants. For the MARIA runs, the resource estimates of Rogner (1997) were used as input. For the sake of simplicity, all fossil resource categories of Rogner (1997) were aggregated into two classes and a quadratic production function was used to interpolate the extraction costs of reserves and all other occurrences. For coal, long-term extraction costs range up to US$6.3 per GJ in 1990 US$ prices, for gas up to US$25 per GJ, and for oil up to US$28 per GJ (see Appendix IV for further details). The energy cost coefficients (representing 16 different energy conversion technologies) are based on Manne and Richels (1992). For the B2 scenario quantification, the Manne and Richels (1992) estimates were largely retained. For instance, electricity generation costs range between 14 mills/kWh for gas to 51 mills/kWh for coal. (For the other scenario quantifications these cost values were modified to conform to the different interpretations of a particular scenario storyline.) Together these assumptions determined long-run costs and shadow prices that were set equal to energy prices in the macro-economic production function of MARIA. The energy prices were combined with assumed (low) AEEI values and potential GDP growth rates (the latter from the B2 marker) to calculate the resultant aggregate energy demand in the model. The resultant primary energy demand was (with exception of the REF region) within 15% of the respective B2 marker quantification at the regional level and within 5% of global energy demand. As a result of different model structures, comparable price data for the MESSAGE model are only available for internationally traded primary energy forms (these are given in Table 4-8). 1 mill is 0.1 US cents (US$0.001). An Overview of Scenarios The bottom-up, systems engineering (optimization) model MESSAGE does not compute energy prices. Instead, the model is entirely based on cost information, but such costs are treated as dynamic. Their overall treatment follows the lines outlined above for the MARIA model, except that greater technology-specific detail is contained in the model. Altogether 19 different fossil resource grades are differentiated, based on the estimates of Rogner (1997). The resultant (levelized) extraction costs for the B2 marker are in the range US$1.1 to US$5.4 per GJ for coal, US$1.2 to US$5.3 per GJ for oil, and US$1.2 to US$5.7 per GJ for gas (range indicates cost variations between lowest and highest costs of the four SRES regions for 2020, 2050, and 2100 respectively, see Appendix IV). Technology-specific cost assumptions cannot be summarized here as MESSAGE contains literally hundreds of energy supply and end-use technologies. Examples of cost assumptions are given in Section 4.4.7 and more detail is reported in Riahi and Roehrl (2000). However, as in MARIA, MESSAGE also calculates shadow prices for internationally traded primary energy forms and therefore these two indicators can be compared (Table 4-8). Table 4-8: International price (MARIA) and calculated shadow price (MESSAGE) of internationally traded energy (1990 US$/GJ) by 2020, 2050, 2100 for the SRES B2 scenario. Coal Oil Gas Biofuels Synfuels MARIA MESSAGE^ MARIA MESSAGE^ MARIA MESSAGE^ MARIA MESSAGE^ 2020 0.5 3.4 3.5 3.9-4.4 2.9 2.8-4.4 4.8 n.a. 2050 0.8 2.5 4.9 7.5-8.2 4.3 5.1-6.4 6.5 10.4-16.2 2100 1.4 8.1 6.3 17.3-18.2 5.4 5.2-11.4 6.3 17.1-20.7 ^ Costs include export and/or import infrastructure and transport. ^ Range between crude oil and light and heavy oil products. ^ Range between liquid natural gas and direct pipeline imports to North America, Europe, Japan, and North Africa. ^ Range between methanol, ethanol, and liquid hydrogen. To achieve consistency between model-calculated energy cost dynamics and energy demand assumptions an iterative modeling procedure between MESSAGE and MACRO (a macro-economic production function model based on Manne and Richels, 1992) was used, on the basis of model-calculated shadow prices as indicators of future price dynamics. The methodology is described in more detail in Wene (1996). This approach requires time-intensive model iterations, but has the advantage that the impact of price increases can be separated from efficiency improvements through fuel substitution (e.g., a gas-fired cook stove energy end-use efficiency is up to 10 times higher than a traditional cook stove fired with fuelwood) as well as from "everything else," i.e., the AEEI in the traditional sense). Aggregated, the impact of (shadow) price increases in MESSAGE's B2 scenario accounts for 8% of global primary energy demand by 2020, 23% by 2050, and 30% by 2100. This impact is calculated as a reduction in energy demand compared to a hypothetical scenario with constant 1990 prices (and correspondingly higher energy demand). The impact of price increases on future energy demand in the B2 scenario is thus relatively small compared to that of other factors, although far from negligible. This also explains why the two B2 scenario quantifications by MARIA and MESSAGE have quite similar energy demand figures, even if international trade prices may differ. First, trade prices are only one component of the cost-price mechanism treated in the models (which also includes domestic energy production, conversion, and end-use costs). Second, models differ in their parametrizations of the "everything else" (AEEI) model parameters, for which a wide range of views on applicable ranges exists. Therefore it is one of the model calibration parameters frequently used to replicate existing scenarios or to standardize inter-model comparison projects such as EMF-14 (Weyant, 1995). (Box 4.7 continues) An Overview of Scenarios Box 4.7 (continued) Table 4-9: Energy prices (1990 US$/GJ) across SRES scenarios as calculated in the ASF (top) and MiniCAM models for their respective A1, A2, B1, and B2 (cf. Table 4-8) scenarios. Note in particular significant base-year differences in fuel prices because of different cost accounting definitions used in models (c.i.f. versus f.o.b.^), in particular with respect to transportation costs (included in the price figures given for ASF, but excluded in the numbers given for MiniCAM). A1 A2 B1 B2 ASF^ Coal 2000 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 2020 1.6 1.5 1.6 1.5 2050 1.9 1.7 1.7 1.6 2100 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.7 Oil 2000 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.4 2020 5.3 4.7 5.1 4.7 2050 7.1 6.2 6.3 6.1 2100 7.7 7.5 6.1 7.1 Gas 2000 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 2020 5.0 5.0 4.9 5.0 2050 5.3 5.0 4.8 4.9 2100 7.9 6.1 4.9 5.8 MiniCAM^ Coal 1990 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 2020 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.6 2050 1.9 2.0 1.7 1.7 2100 2.5 2.5 1.9 2.0 Oil 1990 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9 2020 8.6 10.2 6.4 7.3 2050 10.4 13.3 9.9 10.4 2100 9.6 15.2 8.5 10.2 Gas 1990 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 2020 2.8 3.2 2.0 2.4 2050 3.8 5.7 2.5 3.0 2100 6.8 8.7 1.9 2.3 Biofuels 1990 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 2020 2.1 2.2 2.0 2.0 2050 2.4 2.6 2.0 2.1 2100 2.3 3.2 1.5 2.0 ^ ASF: global average supply price, including transportation. ^ MiniCAM: as determined by solution to a partial equilibrium supply and demand model. and economic structural changes, with consequent improvements in energy intensity. As a result, the rate of energy intensity improvement in Annex I countries is around 1.16% per year, and in non-Annex I countries 1.44% over 1990 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 2020 2.1 2.2 2.0 2.0 2050 2.4 2.6 2.0 2.1 2100 2.3 3.2 1.5 2.0 ^ASF; global average supply price, including transportation. ''MiniCAM: as determined by solution to a partial equilibrium supply and demand model. and economic structural changes, with consequent improvements in energy intensity. As a result, the rate of energy intensity improvement in Annex I countries is around 1.16% per year, and in non-Annex I countries 1.44% over the 100 years to 2100. Thus, final energy use for A1 is much higher than those in the A2, B1, and B2 scenarios, with a substantial long-term convergence in final energy use per capita between Annex I countries and non-Annex I countries. 2^ c.i.f., cost, insurance, freight (included in price); f.o.b., free on board (i.e. insurance and transport costs not included in fuel price delivered "free on board" transport vessel only). These different cost-accounting methods for international energy trade are particularly important for transport and infrastructure intensive fuels such as natural gas. 4.4.5.2. Harmonized and Other A1 Scenarios The various A1 scenarios indicate a wide range in energy intensity improvements and resultant energy demand. A1B-MESSAGE tracks closely the global and regional energy demand patterns of the A1B marker and so satisfies the criteria of a "fully harmonized" scenario, albeit that ASIA deviations from the A1B marker amount to about 20% during the period 2030 to 2060. Other scenarios indicate, for example, higher energy demand in 2050 (e.g., A1-ASF) and/or lower energy demand in 2100 (e.g., A1B-IMAGE, A1B-ASF, and A1B-MARIA). Differences are regionally heterogeneous and result from: • Higher GDP growth rates assumptions compared to those of the A1B marker (e.g., A1-MiniCAM for OECD90). An Overview of Scenarios 205 Figure 4-6: Relationship between final energy intensity and per capita income in the four marker scenarios. The data points represent values in 1990, 2020, 2050, and 2100. The 1990 value is at the top of each curve and the 2100 value at the bottom. • Higher or lower (non-price induced) assumptions in energy intensity improvement rates in the various scenarios. • Differences in technology assumptions that lead to differences in projected energy prices • Combination of all three above factors. The differences in model representation of these factors along with the available time and resources have not allowed a detailed analysis of the numerous underlying differences in energy intensities across the scenarios. For instance, final energy use in the A1v1-MiniCAM and A1v2-MiniCAM scenarios reaches about 60% only of the final energy use described in the A1 marker. However, both scenarios describe very different worlds with respect to economic growth but share the assumption of saturating per capita energy use at levels of 150 GJ/capita. All else being equal, scenarios of lower GDP per capita growth (e.g. A1v2-MiniCAM) generally also assume lower improvement rates in energy intensity, consistent with the literature (as discussed in Chapter 3). Generally, the range between energy intensity across scenarios is larger in the 1990 base year than toward the end of the simulation horizon. This results from alternative estimates and model specifications of non-commercial energy use (excluded in some models), which yield large differences in 1990 energy intensities. Over time - and consistent with the high-income characteristics of an A1 world - the use of non-commercial energy declines and is ultimately phased out altogether. Thus, by 2100 differences in energy intensities across models become much smaller. An interesting set of scenarios was explored in the A1T group. In these the diffusion of a whole host of new energy end-use technologies (e.g., microturbines, fuel cells) results in substantial additional gains in efficiency and hence higher energy intensity improvements and lower final energy demand at equal or lower energy costs compared to the other A1 scenarios. 4.4.5.3. A2 Scenarios Final energy intensities in the A2 (ASF) marker scenario improve steadily, with the exception of the ALM-region between 1990 and 2020 because of material and energy intensive infrastructure build-up. The fastest reduction occurs in the REF region as its energy-intensive economy progressively restructures. The slowest improvements are projected for the OECD90 region, because of slow capital 206 An Overview of Scenarios turnover rates (GDP growth of 1.6% per year between 1990 and 2100). The final energy demand across regions is determined by the product of regional GDP growth and energy intensity improvements. For example, the higher energy intensities in ASIA compared to the ALM region lead to a higher absolute final energy demand in the former in spite of a lower GDP. This is explained by differences in initial conditions and by delayed diffusion of more efficient energy end-use technologies, because of lower GDP per capita growth. 4.4.5.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios The global primary energy use and final energy use in the A2 scenarios created with the AIM, MESSAGE, and MiniCAM models are quite close to those of the marker scenario, while A2-IMAGE scenario projects lower primary and final energy use compared to the A2 marker. As mentioned above, the A2-Al-MiniCAM scenario explores a very different unfolding of driving forces in terms of population and GDP growth, combined with an assumption about saturating energy demand at current Western European levels. Combined, these assumptions translate into the lowest energy intensity improvement rates across the SRES scenario set. Global primary energy use per unit of GDP (intensities) improves from 14.7 MJ/US$90 in 1990 to 8.9 MJ/US$90 in 2100. This reflects mainly the low per capita GDP (productivity) growth of this scenario which (other factors being equal) translates into low rates of energy intensity improvement. Nonetheless, the resultant energy intensities are comparable to current Western European levels, as are income and energy use per capita. In other words, the scenario describes a global picture by 2100 quite similar to that of Western Europe of today, 100 years earlier. 4.4.5.5. B1 Scenarios Energy intensity improvements in the B1 marker result from energy efficiency investments brought about by increases in fuel and electricity prices and technological innovations (including assumptions on taxes and perceived premium values for clean fuels). The rather high rates in energy intensity reduction in B1 stem also from the explicit assumption that less industrialized regions catch-up. Another factor is the assumption that monetary economic growth in less developed regions initially largely replaces activities in the informal economy, which leads to a replacement of traditional non-commercial energy forms by high-efficiency modern applications and fuels - and hence substantial energy intensity improvements. In the developed regions the high economic growth in the B1 scenario may, for instance, be in the form of increasing monetization of human activities previously not included in GDP accounts (e.g., childcare, household work). Such monetary GDP growth does not result in additional demands for energy services, and hence again results in significant energy intensity improvements. The demand for electricity is assumed to rise faster than that for non-electricity energy, and may pose one of the capital availability constraints in this scenario. 4.4.5.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios Various alternative scenario quantifications were developed for B1 by the modeling teams. For the first four to five decades most model runs show a global final energy use within the proposed bounds of the B1 marker, except B1-ASF which is higher. By 2100 most scenarios assume higher final energy use than the marker run, except B1-MESSAGE which reproduces closely the final energy use of the B1 marker (and is correspondingly classified as a "fully harmonized" scenario). In particular, B1-MARIA, BlHigh-MiniCAM, and BlHigh-MESSAGE show a global final energy use in 2100 nearly twice that of the marker. These scenarios explored the implications for energy demand of less rapid "dematerialization" tendencies of the economy, especially for developing countries, with trends in line with historical energy intensity experiences in the OECD countries. Regional trends differ most dramatically for the MiniCAM and MARIA runs for ASIA and ALM, with the MiniCAM simulations assuming a saturating (converging) energy use on a per capita basis at 125 GJ/capita. However, current knowledge about rates and direction of dematerialization of economic activities is limited. Therefore, both historical OECD trends and their applicability to the future economies of currently developing countries may not necessarily reflect future developments. The use of alternative modeling approaches in the quantification of the B1 scenario storyline has helped to shed light on this important area of uncertainty of the future. 4.4.5.7. B2 Scenarios Final energy demand for the B2 marker was derived by applying efficiencies of end-use technologies to the demand of electric and non-electric energy services. These in turn depend on the economic development rates, income levels, and sectoral economic structure of each region. The evolution of the final energy demand levels and structure in the developing regions follows patterns that are similar to the historical development in the now-industrialized regions of B2 marker was derived by applying efficiencies of end-use technologies to the demand of electric and non-electric energy services. These in turn depend on the economic development rates, income levels, and sectoral economic structure of each region. The evolution of the final energy demand levels and structure in the developing regions follows patterns that are similar to the historical development in the now-industrialized regions of the world. This again is consistent with the "dynamics-as-usual" interpretation of the B2 storyline. By successive iterations with a macro-economic model, marginal cost increases are taken into account in the energy demand projections of the MESSAGE model for the B2 marker (see Appendix IV). The result is an aggregate energy-intensity improvement rate at the global level of about 1% per year until 2100, about the same as has prevailed over the past 100 years in countries for which such long-term time series data are available (see Chapter 3). This aggregate global improvement rate masks important differences in the temporal and spatial evolution of energy intensities. Improvements are generally higher in regions far away from the energy-intensity frontier and also faster in those for which the capital turnover rate (i.e., GDP growth) is higher. Consistent with the more imperfect realization of future trends characteristic of the B2 scenario, energy intensity improvements are slower than in the A1 or B1 scenario families, but higher than in the A2 scenario family. An Overview of Scenarios 207 Figure 4-7: World final energy (%) by form of delivery. Direct use of solids, direct use of liquids, and delivery of grids (gas, district heat, electricity, and hydrogen) for the four SRES marker scenarios. Overlapping shaded areas indicate variation across the four marker scenarios. Liquids include oil products, methanol, and ethanol. Solids include coal and biomass. 4.4.5.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios The energy intensity and resultant global growth in final energy demand of the B2 marker is matched reasonably well by other scenario quantifications until about 2050; the B2-AIM scenario shares "fully harmonized" input assumptions at the global and regional levels alike over the entire time horizon. By 2100, however, differences become larger, and in particular the two MiniCAM scenarios show lower final energy intensity improvements compared to the B2 marker and other B2 scenarios. The MiniCAM scenarios were developed to explore high-end sensitivities for GHG emissions in the B2 scenario family by assuming higher energy demand, combined with a high reliance on coal in the B2High-MiniCAM scenario. Different scenarios at the regional level illustrate alternative interpretations, with particularly large variations in the REF and ALM regions. Alternative scenarios indicate up to 50% lower energy use in REF (e.g., B2-IMAGE) and up to 50% higher energy use in ALM (B2-MiniCAM, B2High-MiniCAM) compared to the B2 marker. The alternative scenarios illustrate that uncertainties in future energy intensities and resultant final energy demand are generally larger for developing and transition economies compared to the OECD90 region. Among other reasons, this is a function of the much higher uncertainties with respect to future economic growth rates in these regions. An interesting observation (considering the SRES multi-model approach) is that the changes in structure of final energy are similar in the four markers of the SRES scenario families, even though these are derived from four different modeling approaches and describe very different futures in terms of demographic, socio-economic, and energy development (Figure 4-7).^^ The trend is toward energy reaching the consumer in more flexible, more convenient, and cleaner forms. This reflects that people with higher income are willing to pay more for more convenient energy forms (e.g., even if coal were cheaper than gas, everybody would rather heat with gas than coal). Therefore, the final energy mix is characterized by growing importance and dominance of grid-dependent fuels, such as electricity, district heat, and gas. Consistent with the storylines and the higher income levels of A1 and B1, this change in final energy structure is faster in these scenario families than in the other two scenario families. The structural shift is slowest in scenario A2, with scenario B2 taking an intermediate position. These scenario differences mainly reflect differences in per capita income levels. 4.4.6. Resource Availability Section 3.4 in Chapter 3 reviews energy resources and technologies. Here existing reserves (identified quantities recoverable at today's prices and with today's technologies), resources that have yet to be discovered or that need foreseeable techno-economic progress to become available in the future, and other occurrences of hydrocarbons in the Earth's crust are considered. Oil, gas, and uranium occur in deposits that need to be located, and the exploration for new resources is related to the needs for production over the next few decades rather than to a need to define what might ultimately be available for exploitation. Thus the ultimate resource base is uncertain. Coal, on the other hand, occurs in seams over wide areas and very little exploration is needed to give an estimate of potentially available resources. Whether or not they could be mined with given technologies and economics remains the most important uncertainty. Finally, ^^ Corresponding data were not available for all scenarios developed with other models, and hence a detailed comparison across the entire SRES scenario set was not possible. 208 An Overview of Scenarios new renewable sources of energy are dependent on ongoing technological development and cost reductions. The conventional oil industry is relatively mature and the question is at what point in the 21st century will the current reserves start to run out. However, unconventional resources are also available - shale oil, bitumen, and heavy oil. These are starting to be exploited and they will extend current conventional oil reserves. The gas industry is less mature and much more remains to be discovered, particularly in areas that do not currently have the infrastructure to utilize gas and consequently exploration has been unattractive. Additionally, large amounts of unconventional gas have been identified, some of which are already in commercial production (e.g., in the US). Also, huge quantities of natural gas are believed to exist as methane hydrates on the ocean floor (see Chapter 3) and it is possible that technology to exploit these will be developed at some stage. For uranium and thorium, the amount of exploration to date has been very limited, and hence the possibilities of discovering new deposits are enormous. It is likely that even a major expansion of the nuclear industry will not be limited by the amount of available uranium or thorium. With coal, the question is not one of discovery but one of economics, accessibility, and environmental acceptability. To consider future resource availability as a dynamic process, however, does not resolve the inherent uncertainties in terms of future success rates of hydrocarbon exploration, technology development for either non-conventional fossil resources or non-fossil alternatives, or future energy prices. Therefore, these uncertainties are explored by adopting different scenario assumptions that range from low to (very) high resource availability (see Table 4-4), consistent with the interpretation of the various scenario storylines presented in Section 4.3. This scenario approach is especially important given that hydrocarbon occurrences are the largest storage of carbon. IPCC WGII SAR (Watson et al., 1996) estimates the size of the total carbon "pool" in the form of hydrocarbon occurrences to be up to 25,000 GtC. How much of this eventually could become atmospheric emissions is at present unknown, and depends on the future evolution of technology, prices, and other incentives for future hydrocarbon use and their alternatives. Given that long-term emission scenarios invariably rely on quantification by formal models, an important distinction needs to be made between assumptions concerning the ultimate resource base and projected actual resource use. Typically, assumptions on the ultimate resource base enter models as exogenously specified constraints - cumulative future production simply cannot exceed values specified as the resource base. Actual resource use, or what is frequently termed the "call on resources" conversely depends on numerous other factors represented in models, such as: • Future price levels (either assumed as exogenous inputs or determined endogenously in the model). • Assumptions on future technology improvements that either enable unconventional hydrocarbons to be "mined" economically or, conversely, that draw on non-fossil alternatives and/or non-climate environmental and social constraints (e.g., limits on particulates and sulfur emissions or on land degradation and mining accidents). Their complex interplay results in scenarios of future cumulative resource use being the most appropriate indicator, as opposed to exogenously pre-specified resource-base constraints, especially in view of the multi-model approach adopted to develop the SRES scenarios. Table 4-10 and Figures 4-8 to 4-10 summarize the results for the four SRES marker scenarios and of the ensemble of SRES scenarios for their respective scenario families and scenario groups (in the case of the A1 scenario family). It is evident that, in the absence of climate policies, none of the SRES scenarios depicts a premature end to the fossil-fuel age. Invariably, cumulative fossil-fuel use to 2050 (not to mention 2100) exceeds the quantities of fossil fuels extracted since the onset of the Industrial Revolution, even though the "call on" fossil resources differs significantly across the four marker scenarios. This increase is higher in the scenarios that explore a wider domain of uncertainty on future fossil-resource availability. For non-fossil resources, like uranium and renewable energies, future resource potentials are primarily a function of the assumed rates of technological change, energy prices, and other factors such as safety and risk considerations for nuclear power generation. Generally, absolute resource constraints do not become binding in the marker scenarios or other of uncertainty on future fossil-resource availability. For non-fossil resources, like uranium and renewable energies, future resource potentials are primarily a function of the assumed rates of technological change, energy prices, and other factors such as safety and risk considerations for nuclear power generation. Generally, absolute resource constraints do not become binding in the marker scenarios or other scenarios. The contribution of these resources is substantially below the physical flows identified in Section 3.4, and therefore results mainly from scenario-specific assumptions concerning technology availability, performance, and costs. These are summarized in Section 4.4.7. 4.4.6.1. A1 Scenarios Energy resources are taken to be plentiful by assuming a large future availability of coal, unconventional oil, and gas as well as high levels of improvement in the efficiency of energy exploitation technologies, energy conversion technologies, and transport technologies. The grades of energy resources used in the model differ on the basis of extraction costs. When combined with the level of improvement in efficiency of exploitation technology (expressed as the rate of improvement in marginal production costs), the graded costs of energy-resource exploitation determine the energy production costs (prices) and hence the ultimate resource extraction quantities. For A1, large amounts of unconventional oil and natural gas availability were assumed. Cumulative (1990 to 2100) extraction of oil ranges between 15 and 30 ZJ in the A1 scenarios (A1B marker, 17 ZJ); for gas the range is between 23 and 48 ZJ (A1B marker, 36 ZJ) and for coal the range is between 8 and 50 ZJ (A1B marker, 12 ZJ). Resource availability and reliance uncertainties are also explored through additional scenario groups. Three of these (A1C, A1G, and A1T) explore more extreme patterns of reliance on particular resources and technologies compared to the more "balanced" tendencies described in the A1B scenarios, including the A1B marker. As discussed in Chapter 3 and Section 4.3.1, this characteristic of the A1 scenario family stems from the interpretation of technological change and resource availability as being cumulative and path dependent. 4.4.6.2. A1 Scenario Groups Besides the A1B marker scenario group, alternative pathways unfold within the A1 family, according to diverging technology and resource assumptions (Figures 4-8 to 4-10). Two of these groups (A1C and A1G) were merged into one fossil-intensive group (A1FI) in the SPM. The more detailed information on these two groups is presented here, in Chapter 5 and Appendix VII (see also footnote 1). The coal-intensive scenario group A1C is restricted mainly to conventional oil and gas, which results in the lowest cumulative oil and gas use (15 to 19 ZJ) of all scenarios; it is even slightly lower than in the B2 scenario, which has much lower energy demand. As such, the scenario illustrates the long-term GHG emission implications of quickly "running out of conventional oil and gas" combined with rapid technological progress in developing coal resources and clean coal winning and conversion technologies. As a result, cumulative coal use is very high – between 48 and 62 ZJ (median, 60 ZJ) between 1990 and 2100. Conversely, oil and gas resources are assumed to be plentiful in the world of scenario group A1G because of the assumed development of economic extraction methods for unconventional oil and gas, including methane clathrates. Cumulative oil and gas extraction amounts to 76 to 88 ZJ, about twice as high as in the A1C scenario group. Mainly this reflects current perceptions that radical technological change needs to occur to translate a more significant portion of the resource base of unconventional oil and gas into potentially recoverable reserves, a development evidently also cross-checked by possible developments in non-fossil alternatives. Cumulative coal extraction in A1G is relatively low at 15 to 38 ZJ (median, 19 ZJ) across the scenarios of this scenario group. As a result of fast technological progress in post-fossil alternatives in the technology-dynamic A1T scenario group, the call on oil and gas resources is comparatively modest – cumulative extraction to 2100 ranges between 36 and 46 ZJ, quite similar to the A1C scenario group. The main difference is that because of the improvements in non-fossil alternatives the call on coal resources remains modest – cumulative coal use of 4 to 12 ZJ (median: 10 ZJ) in A1T is the lowest of all the scenarios. 4.4.6.3. resources is comparatively modest - cumulative extraction to 2100 ranges between 36 and 46 ZJ, quite similar to the A1C scenario group. The main difference is that because of the improvements in non-fossil alternatives the call on coal resources remains modest - cumulative coal use of 4 to 12 ZJ (median: 10 ZJ) in A1T is the lowest of all the scenarios. 4.4.6.3. A2 Scenarios Resource availability assumptions for the A2-ASF world are generally rather conservative, essentially that current conventional estimates of petroleum resource availability are not expanded.^* Unconventional hydrocarbons, such as methane clathrates and heavy oils, do not come into large-scale use. As a result, coal resource use is the highest among the SRES marker scenarios. The ASF marker scenario quantification of oil, natural gas, and coal resource availability reflects the Rogner (1997) estimates for conventional oil and coal resource availability and the recent IGU (1997) estimates for conventional gas reserves (optimistic scenario, see Chapter 3). Resource extraction costs in the ASF depend on the resource "grade" and vary from US$2.6 to 5.2 per GJ for oil (in 1990 dollars), from US$1.2 to 4.6 per GJ for gas, and US$0.7 to 6.0 per GJ for coal. 4.4.6.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios The primary energy structure of the A2 family scenarios is also reflected in the cumulative fossil fuel resource use, characterized by an increasing reliance on coal resources (see Figures 4-8 to 4-10). The cumulative oil use varies by a factor of two across the A2-family, between 11 and 24 ZJ (median, 18 ZJ; A2 marker, 17 ZJ). Cumulative gas use ranges between 20 and 36 ZJ (median, 23 ZJ; A2 marker, 25 ZJ). The higher end of the range of gas resource use occurs in the A2G-IMAGE scenarios, which explored the scenario sensitivity to assuming that a significant fraction of methane hydrate occurrences become technically and economically recoverable in an A2 world. Given the regional orientation of the A2 scenario storyline and the resultant quest for energy independence, the possibility of tapping even currently "exotic" fossil resources certainly merits such a scenario sensitivity analysis. The opposite end of the resource availability spectrum is explored in the MiniCAM scenarios of the A2 scenario family. First, methane clathrates are assumed not to become available. As a result, the call on resources focuses on coal (A2-MiniCAM) or, in a scenario sensitivity analysis, more on unconventional oil and gas (A2-A1-MiniCAM). The range of reliance on coal resources is thus an inverse image of the range of oil and gas resource availability. Cumulative coal extraction varies between 22 and 53 ZJ (median, 35 ZJ; A2 marker, 47 ZJ) across the scenarios of the A2 scenario family. This picture mainly represents what used to be termed "conventional wisdom" in much of the scenario literature (including the previous IS92 scenario series). Importantly, while the probabilities of alternative developments of fossil and non-fossil resource availability cannot be assessed at present, the multi-model, multi-scenario approach described here demonstrates that the uncertainties in fossil resource availability might be much larger than assumed a decade ago. This finding also reflects the results of IPCC WGII SAR (Watson et al., 1996). Even with this "conservative" assumption cumulative oil extraction in the A2 marker scenario totals 16 ZJ, or 2.7 times currently identified, recoverable oil reserves (6 ZJ or 143.3 billion tons; BP, 1999). Thus, the A2 scenario also assumes that in future it will be possible to continue the historical trend in which large quantities of (undiscovered or presently uneconomic) oil resources are transferred into recoverable reserves. Some analysts consider such a future trend as definitely optimistic (see the literature review in Chapter 3). 4.4.6.5. B1 Scenarios Assumptions on the fossil fuel resource-base used in the B1 marker scenario quantification are based on the estimates of ultimately recoverable conventional and unconventional fossil resources described in Rogner (1997). The capital output ratio of resource exploitation is assumed to rise with progressive resource depletion, but this is counteracted by learning curve effects in the marker scenario quantification provided by the IMAGE model. Regional estimates of the exploitation costs of conventional and unconventional resources of Rogner (1997) were used to construct long-term supply cost curves as of 1971. These values, rather than absolute upper bounds on resource base availability, define future resource availability in the IMAGE model. The supposed availability of huge non-conventional occurrences of oil and natural gas, with a geographic distribution markedly different from the distribution of conventional oil and gas, has significant implications for fuel supply and trade patterns in the long term. For coal resources, Rogner's (1997) estimates were also adopted; of the total of 262 ZJ, 58 ZJ belong to the categories of proved recoverable, additional recoverable, and additional identified coal resources. The production costs of coal were assumed to rise with increasing depth and rising labor wages, but these costs are largely offset by mechanization (in underground mining) and economies of scale (in surface mining). 4.4.6.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios The call on oil resources in the scenarios that comprise the B1 scenario family ranges between 11 and 20 ZJ, with a median of 17 ZJ (B1 marker, 20 ZJ). For gas the range is 15 to 33 ZJ (median, 20 ZJ; B1 marker, 15 ZJ), and for coal the corresponding range is between 3 and 27 ZJ (median, 11 ZJ; B1 marker, 13 ZJ). An overview is given in Figures 4-8 to 4-10. 4.4.6.7. B2 Scenarios The availability of fossil energy resources in the B2 marker scenario is assumed to be conservative, in line with the gradual, incremental change philosophy of the B2 scenario storyline. Consequently, oil and gas availability expands only gradually while coal continues to be abundant. Assumed oil and gas resource availability does not extend much beyond current conventional and unconventional reserves. Through gradual improvements in technology, a larger share of unconventional reserves and some additional resource categories are assumed to become available at improved costs over the 21st century. The availability of oil and gas, in particular, is limited compared to the estimated magnitude of global fossil resources and occurrences (Watson et al., 1996). This translates into relatively limited energy options in general and extends also to non-fossil energy options. 4.4.6.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios Alternative B2 scenario implementations assumed similar order of magnitudes of resource availability as the B2-marker scenario, except for B2High-MiniCAM. The resultant cumulative resource use (1990-2100) ranged between 9 and 23 ZJ (median, 17 ZJ; B2 marker, 19 ZJ) for oil, between 18 and 27 ZJ (median, 21 ZJ; B2 marker, 27 ZJ) for gas, and between 12 and 55 ZJ (median, 21 ZJ; B2 marker, 13 ZJ) for coal (see Figures 4-8 to 4-10). The largest uncertainties relate to different interpretations of the more gradual changes under a "dynamics-as-usual" philosophy that characterizes the B2 scenario storyline. One group of scenarios (including the B2 marker) assumed a gradual expansion in the availability of conventional and unconventional oil and gas, whereas another group of scenarios adopted more conservative assumptions (akin to the A2 and B1 scenario families).^° All else being equal, lower resource-availability assumptions for oil and natural gas lead to a higher reliance on coal and non-fossil alternatives and explain, together with technology assumptions, the differences in emissions between alternative B2 scenario quantifications discussed in Chapter 5. 4.4.7. Technological Change Chapter 3 highlights the importance of technological change in long-run productivity growth, but also for the historical transformations of energy end-use and supply systems. The importance of technological change in explaining wide-ranging outcomes in future emissions has been highlighted by Alcamo et al., (1995) and Grübler and Nakicenovic (1996), among others. The latter reference also provides a critical assessment of the previous IS92 scenario series and its comparison to the literature. Prominent scenario studies of possible technological change in future energy systems in the absence of climate policies include Ausubel et al. (1988), Edmonds et al. (1994, 1996a), IIASA-WEC (1995), and Nakicenovic et al. (1998). Future technology characteristics must therefore be treated as dynamic, with future improvement rates subject to considerable uncertainty. This is reflected in the SRES scenarios that adopt a wide range of improvement rates for energy extraction, conversion, and end-use technologies (Table 4-11). The actual representation of technological change in the six SRES models ranges from exogenously prescribed availability, through cost and performance profiles (which in some cases also include consumer or end-use costs for technology use), to stylized representation of learning processes.^' Yet, as summarized in Chapter 3, model representations of technological change are poorly developed, although evolving rapidly. ^° Resource availability assumptions also appear to be rather model specific in this scenario family. For instance, in many scenarios patterns of resource availability resemble the hypotheses retained by a particular model used for quantification of a marker scenario in one of the other three scenario families. ^' Roehrl and Riahi (2000) provide a description of the methodology of representing technological change in MESSAGE as used here in the SRES scenarios. Table 4-11: Summary of technology improvements fo (2000) provide a description of the methodology of representing technological change in MESSAGE as used here in the SRES scenarios. An Overview of Scenarios Table 4-11: Summary of technology improvements for extraction, distribution, and conversion technologies assumed for the SRES scenarios. The classification reviews technology dynamics across the four marker scenarios and the four A1 scenario groups relative to each other. Illustrative, scenario-specific technology assumptions are discussed in the text. A1C and A1G have been combined into one fossil-intensive group A1FI in the SPM (see also footnote 1). Technology Improvement Rates Scenario Coal Oil Gas Non-fossil A1B High High High High A2^ Medium Low Low Low B1b Medium Medium Medium Moderate-high B2^ Low Low-medium Moderate-high Medium A1G Low Very high Very high Medium A1C High Low Low Low A1T Low High High Very high ^ Technology improvement rates in the A2 scenario are heterogeneous among the world regions. b1: The assumed time-dependent learning coefficients range from 0.9 (i.e. a 10% reduction in the capital/output ratio on a doubling of cumulated production) for oil, 0.9-0.95 for gas, and 0.9-0.95 for surface coal mining to about 0.94-0.96 for non-fossil electric power generation options and 0.9-0.95 for commercial biofuels. In the specific model implementations, “inconvenience costs” of energy-end use, including social externalities costs, are expected to be particularly important for traditional coal technologies (e.g., underground mining, cooking with coal stoves). 4.4.7.1. A1 Scenarios The A1B marker scenario represents the “balanced” technology development group of A1 scenarios; it assumes significant innovations in energy technologies, which improve energy efficiency and reduce the cost of energy supply. Consistent with the A1 scenario storyline, such improvements occur across the board and neither favor nor penalize particular groups of technologies. A1 assumes, in particular, drastic reductions in power-generation costs, through the use of solar, wind, and other modern renewable energies, and significant progress in gas exploration, production, and transport. For a different view, alternative scenario groups embedded within the overall A1 scenario family explore pathways of cumulative technological change; that is, path-dependent scenarios in which technologies evolve on mutually largely exclusive development paths. In general this has been the historical experience, in which the success of particular energy technologies (the steam engine in the 19th century, or internal combustion in the 20th) have “locked out” other technological alternatives. These scenario groups explore alternative spectra of technology dynamics in the domains of unconventional oil and gas, coal, as well as post-fossil technologies. Salient technology assumptions are described below. Keeping in mind the very different degrees of technological detail and the mechanisms for technology improvements represented in the different models, a consistent inter-scenario comparison of technology assumptions is best achieved within the framework of one particular model. An overview of different technology developments for the scenario groups of the A1 scenario is given in Box 4-8 for the AIM model, which was also used to develop the A1B marker scenario. (A comparison with the MARIA model indicated that technology cost assumptions and their dynamics are quite congruent.) To illustrate differences in technology characteristics that drive the four different SRES scenario families, corresponding scenario-specific data based on MESSAGE data are presented at the end of this Section. 4.4.7.2. A1 Scenario Groups As outlined above, besides the marker, three different groups of A1 scenarios were developed by the different modeling groups (combined into two in the SPM, see also footnote 1). In total, nine alternative runs are clustered in three scenario groups based on the AIM, MARIA, MESSAGE, and MiniCAM models. In the A1G scenario group, technological change enables a larger fraction of the large occurrences of unconventional oil and gas, including oil shales, tar sands, and especially methane hydrates (clathrates) to be tapped. High technological learning and cost reduction effects could lower unconventional oil and gas extraction costs by approximately 1% per year and conversion technology costs by about factor of two (A1G-MESSAGE, see Roehrl and Riahi, 2000). As mentioned in Section 4.4.6, although these assumptions yield higher extractions of unconventional oil and gas resources, they are not sufficient to tap significant fractions of unconventional resources such as gas clathrates. Future scenario studies might reassess the current state of knowledge on possible technology development of these “exotic” fossil-fuel occurrences and the conditions under which they could become a major future source of unconventional hydrocarbon supply (and a massive source of carbon emissions). For the A1G scenario group, substantial improvements and extensions of the present pipeline grids and entirely new natural gas pipelines systems An Overview of Scenarios Box 4-8: Technological Change in the AIM-based Quantifications for the A1 Scenario Family The A1 storyline describes a world with rapid economic development. High economic growth results in pressures on resource availability, counterbalanced by technological progress, which is assumed to be highest among the four scenario families. In the AIM quantifications of the A1 storyline, rates of technological change are high both with respect to “supply push” factors (most notably RD&D) as well as with respect to “demand pull” factors (most notably high capital turnover rates). Since large resource availability and high incomes stimulate demand growth, technological change in energy supply receives a higher emphasis compared to changes in energy end-use technologies. Common technology assumptions in the A1 scenarios can be summarized as follows. The supply of oil, gas, and biomass in the A1 scenario family is assumed to be very high and results from high rates of technological progress for fossil fuel and biomass exploitation technologies. Unconventional oil and gas, such as deep-sea methane hydrates, oil shale, etc., become available at relatively low cost. Also, large amounts of biomass are utilized through well-developed biomass farm plantations and harvest technologies, and biomass utilization technologies, such as biomass power generation and biofuel conversion technologies, become available at low costs through RD&D and other mechanisms of technology improvements (learning by doing and learning by using). High levels in the use of other renewable energy are reached when technologies for solar photovoltaics and thermal utilization, wind farms, geothermal energy utilization, and ocean energy are introduced at low cost. Energy end-use technologies are assumed to progress at medium rates compared with the fast rates of technological change in energy supply technologies. The A1B marker and A1T scenarios assume drastic reductions in cost for solar, wind, and other renewable energies. A1C assumes lower coal costs and emphasizes coal exploitation technology progress and the introduction of advanced coal-fired power generation technology, such as integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC). A1G assumes lower oil and gas costs than other A1 scenarios. The cost of nuclear power is assumed to be the lowest in A1G and A1T, and highest in A1C. The different cost assumptions that drive and result from technological change in the A1 scenario family are summarized in Table 4-12. Table 4-12: Technology costs (1990 US$/GJ and 1990 US cents/kWh) in AIM-based A1 scenarios. Scenarios 2020 2050 2100 Coal (1990US$/GJ) A1B 2.6 3.2 3.1 A1C 1.5 1.5 1.1 A1G 3.5 3.8 3.7 A1T 2.6 2.8 2.8 Natural Gas, Conventional & Unconventional (1990US$/GJ) A1B 2.0 1.9 1.4 A1C 3.5 5.0 4.6 A1G 1.8 1.6 1.6 A1T 1.5 1.5 1.4 Crude Oil, Conventional & Unconventional (1990US$/GJ) A1B 7.3 10.1 14.9 A1C 9.4 13.1 14.0 A1G 7.3 8.2 8.4 A1T 7.9 8.4 15.7 Nuclear (1990UScent/kWh) A1B 5.4 3.9 2.3 A1C 5.7 4.4 2.8 A1G 5.9 4.7 3.1 A1T 5.6 4.1 2.5 Solar, wind, geothermal electricity (1990UScent/kWh) A1B 12.2 5.9 2.0 A1C 13.1 6.9 3.3 A1G 15.2 9.3 5.2 A1T 12.4 6.2 2.7 As mentioned above, improvements in energy efficiency on the demand side are assumed to be comparatively lower in the A1 scenario 4.7 3.1 A1T 5.6 4.1 2.5 Solar, wind, geothermal electricity (1990UScent/kWh) A1B 12.2 5.9 2.0 A1C 13.1 6.9 3.3 A1G 15.2 9.3 5.2 A1T 12.4 6.2 2.7 As mentioned above, improvements in energy efficiency on the demand side are assumed to be comparatively lower in the A1 scenario family, except for the A1T scenario, because the low energy prices give very little incentive to improve end-use energy efficiencies. Efficient technologies are not fully introduced into the end-use side, dematerialization processes in the industrial sector are not promoted, lifestyles become energy intensive, and private motor vehicles are used more in developing countries as per capita incomes increase. As a result, energy efficiency improvement in the industrialized countries (IND) is around 0.8% per year, and in developing countries (DEV) it is 1.0% per year over the next 100 years to 2100. Only A1T assumes greater efficiency improvements (1.1% per year for IND and 1.5% per year for DEV), as a result of the diffusion of new highly efficient energy end-use devices such as fuel cell vehicles. Technology progress is also assumed for land-use changes and sulfur emissions. Higher productivity increases in biomass and crop land (1.5% per year in comparison to 0.5-1.0%) are assumed for the A1 world in the AIM quantification compared to those in the A2 and B2 scenario families. Desulfurization technologies could be introduced because of concerns of economic damage caused by acid rain and there would be strong financial support to install these technologies with the rapid income growth associated with the A1 world. From Siberia and the Caspian to South East Asia, China, Korea, and Japan after 2010/2020 would be needed. Since unconventional oil and gas resources are distributed unevenly geographically, the scenario implies both capital-intensive infrastructure investments and unprecedented large-scale gas and oil trade flows. There is also little pressure to develop non-fossil alternatives in such scenarios, so costs of non-fossil alternatives remain comparatively high, even after significant technological improvements. For instance, solar electricity costs could drop to US$0.05 per kWh (A1G-AIM). The high-growth coal-intensive scenario group A1C assumes relatively large cost improvements in new and clean coal technologies, such as coal high-temperature fuel cells, IGCC power plants, and coal liquefaction. More modest assumptions are made for all the other technologies, except for nuclear technologies in A1C-MESSAGE, as this requires zero-carbon options to ease resource and environmental constraints. The relative costs between coal and oil- or gas-related technologies also shift in A1C-AIM. Progress in renewables is also assumed to be substantial. For instance, solar photovoltaic costs would decline to USCents3/kWh (A1C-AIM). In the dynamic technology scenario group A1T, technological change, driven by market mechanisms and policies to promote innovation, favors non-fossil technologies and synfuels, especially hydrogen from non-fossil sources. Liquid fuels from coal, unconventional oil and gas sources, and renewables become available at less than US$30 per barrel, with costs that fall further, by about 1% per year, through exploitation of learning-curve effects (A1T-MESSAGE). A1T-MARIA also projects declining costs for biofuels, from about US$30 to US$20, after the 2020 period (and in comparison to the A1-MARIA scenario biofuels substitute coal-derived synfuels). Non-fossil electricity (e.g., photovoltaics) begin massive market penetration at costs of about USCents1 to 3 per kWh (A1T-MARIA, A1T-MESSAGE, A1T-AIM), and could continue to improve further (perhaps as low as USCents0.1/kWh in A1T-MESSAGE) as a result of learning-curve effects. An important difference between the marker scenario A1B and the A1T group is that in A1T additional end-use efficiency improvements are assumed to take place with the diffusion of new end-use devices for decentralized production of electricity (fuel cells, microturbines). As a result, final energy demand in the A1T scenario group is between 30% (A1T-AIM, A1T-MESSAGE) and 40% (A1T-MARIA) lower compared to the A1B marker scenario. 4.4.7.3. A2 Scenarios The A2 scenario family includes slow improvements in the energy supply efficiency and a relatively slow convergence of end-use energy efficiency in the industrial, commercial, residential, and transportation sectors between regions. A combination of slow technological progress, more limited environmental concerns, and low land availability because of high population growth means that the energy needs of the A2 world are satisfied primarily by fossil (mostly coal) and nuclear energy. However, in some cases regional energy shortages force investments into renewable alternatives, such as solar and biomass. For instance, intermittent renewable electricity supply options, such as solar and wind, are assumed to decline in costs to about USCents4/kWh and (because of storage requirements) to about twice that value when these intermittent sources are used for medium load applications (50% of electricity supply). 4.4.7.4. B1 Scenarios Consistent with the general environmentally conscious and resource-conservation thrust of the B1 scenario storyline, technological change is largely directed at improving conversion efficiency rather than costs for fossil technologies. Within the SRES Terms of Reference, no additional climate initiatives are assumed that could bar the application of certain technologies or yield forced diffusion of others. The thermal efficiency of centrally generated electricity is assumed to rise to 45% (conventional coal) or to 65% (gas combined cycles) by 2100, while specific investment costs decline slightly from 1990 levels. It is assumed that subsidies on coal for electricity generation are removed entirely. A specific feature of the IMAGE model used to generate the B1 marker scenario is that it treats non-fossil electricity generation technologies as highly generic; for instance, it does not distinguish between nuclear, solar, or wind-power generation technologies. The specific investment costs of generation options for non-fossil electricity and of the production and conversion of commercial biofuels are assumed to fall by 5-10% for every doubling of cumulated production. Cost decreases down to USCents2.5/kWh are anticipated once non-fossil options penetrate on a large scale. The costs of gaseous biofuels in the major producing regions (Latin America, Africa, NIS) are assumed to be in the order of US$3 to 5 per GJ from 2020 to 2030 onward. Liquid biofuels are produced in small amounts in almost all regions at costs in the order of US$3 to 6 per GJ. In all regions a gradual transition occurs from fossil fuels to non-fossil options in electric-power generation, because of rising fuel prices and declining specific investment costs for fossil alternatives. Learning rates were assumed, conservatively, to yield 2 to 6% cost reductions for every doubling of cumulative production. The shift would start in resource-poor industrialized regions such as Japan and Western Europe, but is somewhat tempered by rising conversion efficiencies of fossil-fueled power plants. One of the factors that constrains the use of natural gas in the scenario is the assumption that only a limited part of the transport market is open to competition from non-liquid fuels (between 50% around 2050 to 80% around 2100). Also, the market share of coal in industry is fixed exogenously at 10 to 15% in some regions, to reflect the decreasing environmental and social attractiveness of the more "dirty" coal. 4.4.7.5. B2 Scenarios The approach that underlies the B2 scenario storyline translates into important future improvements of technologies, albeit at more conservative rates than in scenarios A1 or B1, but with higher rates than in scenario A2. Compared to A1 and B1, cost improvements are more modest, because of the regionally fragmented technology policies assumed to characterize a B2 world. Hence, technology-spillover effects and benefits from shared development expenditures are more limited in the scenario. The high emphasis of environmental protection at the local and regional levels is reflected in faster development and diffusion of energy technologies with lower emissions, including advanced coal technologies, nuclear, and renewables. For instance, solar and wind electricity-generating costs are assumed to decline to USCents3/kWh, that is, a similar level as assumed for the long-term costs of advanced, clean coal technologies (such as IGCCs). As conventional oil supplies dwindle, initially high-cost synfuels from coal and also biofuels are introduced as substitutes. With increasing production volume, costs are assumed to decline from initial levels of some US$7/GJ to US$2.6/GJ. Conventional coal technologies undergo the lowest aggregate rates of improvement in the scenario and are also subject to increasing controls of social and environmental externalities (mining safety, particulates, and sulfur emissions). Increasingly, therefore, only advanced coal technologies are deployed. Nonetheless, extraction and conversion costs increase, especially in regions with a large share of deep-mined coal and in high population density agglomerations. In regions with abundant surface minable coal reserves (e.g., North America and Australia), coal extraction costs remain relatively low. 4.4.7.6. Harmonized and Other Scenarios As a consequence of the "multi-model approach" used in SRES, detailed improvement assumptions and scenario implementations for individual technologies vary greatly from one model to another, although the same storyline characteristics were used as guiding principles and many scenarios share similar assumptions on improvement potentials for different technologies. Detailed quantitative comparisons are difficult because of different time profiles of technology improvements assumed in the different models, different representations of regional technology, and the modeling of the international diffusion of technology. For instance, many models assume aggregate regional rates of technological change (e.g., MARIA, MiniCAM, ASF), whereas others attempt to represent spatial and temporal diffusion patterns more explicitly (e.g., MESSAGE, AIM). It is difficult to quantify the influence of varying technology-specific scenario assumptions on scenario outcomes, because in most model simulations the technology assumptions were varied in conjunction with other salient scenario characteristics, such as economic growth. technology. For instance, many models assume aggregate regional rates of technological change (e.g., MARIA, MiniCAM, ASF), whereas others attempt to represent spatial and temporal diffusion patterns more explicitly (e.g., MESSAGE, AIM). It is difficult to quantify the influence of varying technology-specific scenario assumptions on scenario outcomes, because in most model simulations the technology assumptions were varied in conjunction with other salient scenario characteristics, such as economic growth and resource availability (e.g., in the MiniCAM simulations). Therefore, the impact of alternative assumptions with respect to technological change can be best quantified within a particular scenario family and with "fully harmonized" scenario quantifications (i.e., with comparable energy demand), as discussed for the A1 scenario groups above. In some scenarios within other scenario families, technology-specific sensitivity analyses were performed, such as in the B2C-MARIA scenario variant of the B2-MARIA quantification. The main differences between the two scenarios are the respective costs of coal and nuclear power. In B2C-MARIA, the price of coal was assumed to be US$1.4/GJ, while that in B2-MARIA is US$1.8/GJ. In contrast, the capital costs of nuclear power stations are US$1400/kW in B2-MARIA, while those in B2C-MARIA are assumed to remain at US$1800/kW. Thus, even comparatively small variations in relative technology characteristics such as costs and efficiencies can lead to wide differences in scenario outcomes. As discussed in Chapter 5, for instance, changing the relative economics between coal and nuclear in the two MARIA scenarios results in a difference of more than 200 GtC cumulative emissions over the 21st century. Cumulative carbon emissions (all sources) are 1359 GtC for B2-MARIA and 1573 GtC for B2C-MARIA (see Chapter 5). An illustration of inter-scenario variability in technology costs and diffusion is given in Box 4-9 for the MESSAGE model simulations for one representative scenario of each scenario family and scenario group. As stated above, differences in technology diffusion across scenarios are influenced by many more factors than just alternative technology characteristics and cost assumptions. Growth of energy demand, resource availability and costs, and local circumstances (local air-quality regulations that require desulfurization of fuels or stack gases, or land availability and prices that influence biomass costs) are also important determinants of speed and potentials for the diffusion of new energy technologies. 4.4.8. Prospects for Future Energy Systems In the energy systems models used to generate the scenarios reported here, the entire energy systems structure is represented from primary energy extraction, through conversion, transport, and distribution, all the way to the provision of energy services. Primary energy harnessed from nature (e.g., coal from a mine, hydropower, biomass, solar radiation, produced crude oil, or natural gas) is converted in refineries, power plants, and other conversion facilities to give secondary energy in the form of fuels and electricity. This secondary energy is transported and distributed (including trade between regions) to the point of final energy use. Final energy is transformed into useful energy (i.e., work or heat) in appliances, machines, and vehicles. Finally, application of useful energy results in delivered energy services (e.g., the light from a light bulb, mobility). Important differences exist in accounting conventions on how to calculate the primary energy equivalent of particularly renewable and nuclear energy (see Watson et al., 1996). To assure comparability of model results, the SRES writing team agreed to adopt as a common accounting methodology the Box 4-9: Dynamics of Technological Change in the MESSAGE-Based Quantifications for the Four SRES Marker Scenarios. Technological change in energy supply and end-use technologies has historically been a main driver of structural changes in energy systems, efficiency improvements, and improved environmental compatibility. Yet, despite its crucial role, the mechanisms that underlie technological innovation and diffusion of new technologies remain poorly understood, so modeling technological change as an endogenous process to the economy and society is still in its infancy. Historically, the track record of technology forecasts has at best been mixed, with a number of notable failures particularly in the energy sector. In the 1960s, for instance, R&D in the US attempted to develop nuclear-propelled aircraft, and nuclear electricity was anticipated to become "too cheap to meter." Conversely, the dynamic technological changes in microprocessors, information technologies, and aeroderivative turbines (and their combination with the steam cycle in the form of combined cycle gas turbines) were largely underestimated. This is similar to the pessimistic market outlook for gasoline-powered cars at the end of the 19th and start of the 20th centuries. In recognition of the considerable uncertainty in describing future technological trends, a scenario approach was adopted to vary technology-specific assumptions in the MESSAGE model runs of the SRES scenarios. Depending on the specific interpretation of the four SRES scenario storylines, alternative technologies and alternative ranges of their future characteristics were assumed as model inputs. Two guiding principles determined the choice of particular technology assumptions in MESSAGE. First, technologies not yet demonstrated to function on a prototype scale were excluded. Therefore, for instance, nuclear fusion is excluded from the technology portfolio of all SRES scenarios calculated with the MESSAGE model. However, production of hydrogen- or biomass-based synfuels (e.g., ethanol) or advanced nuclear and solar electricity generation technologies are included, as they have demonstrated their physical feasibility at least on a laboratory or prototype scale, or in some specific niche markets (even if they are uneconomic at currently prevailing energy prices). Second, the range of technology-specific assumptions is empirically derived. Statistical distributions of technology characteristics based on a large technology inventory (consisting of 1600 technologies) and developed at IIASA (Messner and Strubegger, 1991; Strubegger and Reitgruber, 1995) were used. Means, maxima, and minima from these distributions (e.g., of estimated future technology costs) guided which particular values to adopt across scenarios on the basis of the scenario taxonomy suggested by the scenario storylines (ranging from conservative to optimistic). Tables 4-13a to 4-13e summarize the technology characteristics and resultant diffusion rates across the four SRES scenario families and their scenario groups. Table 4-13a presents a brief overview of a selection of major energy technologies represented in the MESSAGE model. (Being a detailed "bottom-up" model, MESSAGE literally contains hundreds of individual technologies, too many to summarize here; instead, only the most important technology groups, aggregated across many individual technologies, are presented.) Table 4-13b summarizes salient technology characteristics in terms of levelized costs (investment and operating costs levelized per unit energy output, excluding fuel costs) and Table 4-13c summarizes the resultant marker deployment (diffusion) of these technologies by 2050 and 2100 for the B2-MESSAGE marker scenario. This scenario is characterized by intermediate levels of growth in energy demand and conservative assumptions as to future technological change. The latter were adopted based on a literature survey (Strubegger and Reitgruber, 1995) as well as an expert opinion poll. In particular, the B2-MESSAGE scenario adopted technology characteristics of the equally conservative IIASA-WEC Scenario B (Nakicenovic et al., 1998), which was based on the Strubegger and Reitgruber (1995) analysis, complemented by a review of some 100 energy experts assembled by WEC. Table 4-13d indicates how technology costs in the other MESSAGE scenarios differ from those of the B2 scenario. (The prevalence of negative values in Table 4-13d indicates that most scenarios are more optimistic concerning cost improvements of future technology than the MESSAGE B2 scenario.) Finally, Table 4-13e indicates the difference in market deployment (diffusion) of the other MESSAGE SRES scenarios compared to that of the B2 scenario. Positive values indicate higher market deployment, and negative ones show lower diffusion. However, differences across scenarios in terms of technology diffusion are not governed by technology costs alone. Other technology characteristics (such as efficiency and infrastructure availability) and market (demand) growth are also important in determining market deployment rates and diffusion potentials of energy technologies. Simplifying the complex dynamic patterns of technological change across the scenario groups, one conclusion is that perhaps the single most important dichotomy of energy technologies of relevance for future GHG emissions is between advancements in "clean coal" and other fossil (e.g., methane hydrate) technologies (delivering electricity, gas, or synliquids) and those of decentralized hydrogen-powered fuel cells, combined with nuclear and renewable energy (for hydrogen production). The first, GHG-intensive technology cluster largely follows traditional centralized technological configurations of the energy sector. The latter represents both radical organizational and technological changes. The revolutionary change may well be less the hydrogen-powered fuel cell car itself, but rather that it could generate electricity when parked, dispensing entirely the need for centralized power plants and utilities. Table 4-13a: Overview of selected energy technologies represented in MESSAGE. Technology Aggregates Including: Centralized Electricity Generation: Coal conventional IGCC Coal fuel cell Oil Gas standard NGCC NGFC Bio Nuclear Advanced nuclear/other Hydro Wind Other renewables Decentralized Electricity Generation: Hydrogen fuel cell Photo-voltaics Synfuels: Coal synliquids Biomass synliquids Gas synliquids Syngases: Hydrogen, H2(1) Hydrogen, H2(2),(3) Conventional coal power plants with DESOX (flue-gas desulfurization, FGD) and DENOX (flue-gas denitrification) Integrated coal Gasification Combined Cycle Coal-based high-temperature fuel cell (internal reforming) New standard oil power plant (Rankine cycle, low NOx and with FGD); existing crude oil and light oil engine-plants; light oil combined cycle power plants Standard gas power plant (Rankine cycle, potential for cogeneration) Natural Gas-fueled Combined Cycle power plant with DENOX Natural Gas-powered high-temperature Fuel Cell, cogeneration possibilities New biomass-fired power plant (Rankine cycle, cogeneration possibilities); advanced biomass power plants (gasified biomass is burned in combined cycle gas turbines) Conventional, existing nuclear power plants Nuclear high-temperature reactors for electricity and hydrogen coproduction, future inherently safe nuclear reactor designs, and other future zero-carbon electricity-generating technologies for base load Hydropower plants (low and high cost) Wind power plant Geothermal power plant (cogeneration potential); grid-connected solar photo-voltaic power plant (no storage) Fuel Cell, cogeneration possibilities New biomass-fired power plant (Rankine cycle, cogeneration possibilities); advanced biomass power plants (gasified biomass is burned in combined cycle gas turbines) Conventional, existing nuclear power plants Nuclear high-temperature reactors for electricity and hydrogen coproduction, future inherently safe nuclear reactor designs, and other future zero-carbon electricity-generating technologies for base load Hydropower plants (low and high cost) Wind power plant Geothermal power plant (cogeneration potential); grid-connected solar photovoltaic power plant (no storage); solar thermal power plants with storage, and solar thermal power plant for hydrogen production Decentralized stationary and mobile hydrogen fuel cells (cogeneration systems or off-hours electricity generation) On-site solar photovoltaic power plant in the residential and/or commercial sectors, and in the industrial sector Light oil and methanol production from coal Ethanol production from biomass Methanol production from natural gas Syngases from various sources, including biomass and coal gasification Hydrogen production from fossil fuels (coal or gas) Non-fossil hydrogen production: H2(2): from biomass and electricity, H2(3): from nuclear and solar (Box 4.9 continues) Table 4-13b: Levelized costs (1990 US$/GJ) of selected energy technologies (excluding fuel costs) in B2-MESSAGE (minima and maxima for eleven world regions). 1990 2050 2100 min max min max min max Coal conversion 3.6 7.5 4.4 7.8 4.4 7.8 IGCC 9.4 9.4 8.3 8.6 6.9 8.6 Coal fuel cell 11.9 11.9 11.9 11.9 11.9 11.9 Oil 3.9 28.9 3.3 5.3 3.3 5.3 Gas standard 3.6 8.3 3.9 4.7 3.9 4.7 NGCC 4.9 5.0 3.3 3.3 2.8 2.8 NGFC 8.4 8.4 6.7 6.7 6.7 6.7 Biofuel 5.8 9.2 5.8 8.3 5.8 8.3 Nuclear 6.7 9.7 7.2 9.7 7.2 9.7 Advanced nuclear/other 10.8 10.8 10.6 10.6 10.6 10.6 Hydro 2.5 15.8 2.5 22.2 2.5 22.2 Wind 15.8 15.8 9.4 9.4 9.4 9.4 Other renewables 6.4 29.8 7.2 10.8 7.2 10.8 Hydrogen fuel cell 8.4 8.4 6.7 6.7 6.3 6.3 Photovoltaic 20.4 29.8 8.1 11.7 8.1 11.7 Coal synliquids 6.9 6.9 6.4 7.0 6.4 7.0 Biomass synliquids 7.1 7.1 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.8 Gas synliquids 3.7 3.7 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 Syngases 4.6 4.6 3.4 4.1 3.4 4.1 Hydrogen H2(1) 5.6 5.6 1.7 3.9 1.7 3.9 Hydrogen H2(2) 4.9 4.9 1.5 3.2 1.5 3.2 Hydrogen H2(3) 11.9 11.9 8.4 12.6 8.4 12.6 Table 4-13c: Energy output (EJ) of selected energy technologies in B2-MESSAGE. 1990 2050 2100 Coal conversion 16.2 9.7 0.0 IGCC 0.0 15.9 65.1 Coal fuel cell 0.0 0.0 0.0 Oil 4.8 0.1 0.0 Gas standard 5.7 0.4 0.0 NGCC 0.6 45.0 72.7 NGFC 0.0 5.1 0.0 Biofuel 0.5 2.8 22.3 Nuclear 5.7 18.9 50.6 Advanced nuclear/other 1.3 27.9 88.7 Hydro 7.9 19.7 28.4 Wind 0.011 11.5 17.2 Other renewables 0.11 18.4 50.4 Hydrogen fuel cell 0.000 10.5 11.4 Photovoltaic 0.001 25.2 57.3 Coal synliquids 0.0 4.2 71.8 Biomass synliquids 1.5 31.8 34.9 Gas synliquids 0.0 13.0 39.5 Syngases 0.0 0.1 0.0 Hydrogen H2(1) 0.0 36.4 0.0 Hydrogen H2(2) 0.0 10.4 0.0 Hydrogen H2(3) 0.0 0.0 0.0 A2 B1 B2 OECD90 151-182 267 266 166 236 397 418 126 274 (184-315) (207-300) (134-233) (189-236) (181-607) (267-496) (126-274) (197-274) REF 69-95 103 93 64 97 139 155 39 125 (83-267) (57-116) (50-79) (53-117) (70-290) (61-457) (25-80) (40-328) IND 227-252 370 359 230 334 536 573 164 399 (303-532) (264-406) (203-303) (255-339) (275-896) (385-847) (164-345) (237-593) ASIA 49-79 440 335 272 319 838 581 154 521 (293-789) (249-449) (204-537) (284-411) (308-965) (477-753) (154-434) (309-562) ALM 35-49 538 278 312 217 852 563 196 437 (235-634) (166-354) (176-312) (137-254) (391-1109) (437-662) (196-446) (300-538) DEV 84-123 977 612 583 536 1639 1144 350 959 (606-1278) (415-740) (406-837) (421-660) (700-2074) (914-1375) (350-880) (609-1096) WORLD 326-368 1347 971 813 869 2226 1717 514 1357 (913-1611) (679-1059) (642-1090) (679-966) (1002-2737) (1304-2040) (515-1157) (846-1625) direct equivalent method for all non-thermal uses of renewables and nuclear. The primary energy equivalence of these energy forms is accounted for at the level of secondary energy, that is, the first usable energy form or "currency" available to the energy system. For instance, the primary energy equivalence of electricity generated from solar photovoltaics or nuclear power plants is set equal to their respective gross electricity output, not to the heat equivalent of radiation energy from fissile reaction, the solar radiance that falls onto a photovoltaic panel and is converted into electricity with efficiencies that range from 10% to 15%, or the heat that would have to be generated by burning fossil fuels to produce the same amount of electricity as generated in a photovoltaic cell or a nuclear reactor (as used in the so-called "substitution" accounting method). This common SRES accounting convention must be borne in mind when comparing the primary energy-use figures of this report with those of other studies, which invariably use different accounting methods depending on the organization that produces the scenario. An illustration of the sensitivity of different accounting methods on estimates of primary energy use in long-term energy scenarios is given in Nakicenovic et al. (1998). (See also the discussion in Chapter 2, in which scenario comparisons are based on index numbers rather than absolute figures to account for these definitional differences.) Adopting a common accounting convention avoids misrepresentation of the contribution of renewable and other new energy forms, which can be both under- or over-represented by inconsistent accounting conventions, as continues to be the case in energy statistics and scenario studies. Table 4-14 gives an overview of primary energy use in the four SRES marker scenarios and the range of all SRES scenarios. Figure 4-11 illustrates both the historical change of world primary energy structure over time and future changes as given in the SRES scenarios. Each corner of the triangle corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which all primary energy is supplied by a single source - oil and gas at the top, coal at the left, and non-fossil sources, renewables (including wood), and nuclear at the right. The historical change reflects major technology shifts from the traditional use of renewable energy flows to the coal and steam age of the 19th century, and subsequently to the dominance of oil and internal combustion engines in the 20th century. In around 1850 (lower right of Figure 4-11), only about 20% of world primary energy was provided by coal; the other 80% was provided by traditional renewable energies (biomass, hydropower, and animal energy). With the rise of industrialization, coal substituted for traditional renewable energy forms, and by 1910 (lower left of Figure 4-11) around three-quarters of world primary energy use relied on coal. The second major transition was the replacement of coal by oil and later by gas. By the early 1970s (see 1970 point labeled on Figure 4-11), 56% of global primary energy use was based on oil and gas. From the early 1970s to 1990, the global primary energy structure has changed little, although efforts to substitute for oil imports have led to an increase in the absolute amount of coal used and to the introduction of non-fossil alternatives in the OECD countries (e.g., nuclear energy in France). Rapid growths in energy demand and coal use, particularly in Asia, have outweighed structural changes in the OECD countries. 222 An Overview of Scenarios Figure 4-11 also gives an overview of the evolution of the global energy system between 1990 and 2100 as reflected in the SRES scenarios. The four marker scenarios are shown as thick lines. In addition, for each scenario family the area spanned by all the SRES scenarios in that family is marked in the same color as the trajectory for the respective marker. The SRES scenarios cover a wider range of energy structures than the previous IS92 scenario series, reflecting advances in knowledge on the uncertainty ranges of future fossil resource availability and technological change. Scenarios B1, B2, A1T, and to some extent A1B follow a trend toward increasing shares of zero-carbon options in the long term. A1G more or less follows an oil-gas isoshare line that perpetuates the current dominance of oil and gas in the global energy balance far into the 21st century. Scenarios in group A1C indicate a near doubling of coal's share in primary energy use. Also of interest is the trajectory of the A2 marker scenario, which returns in its energy structure by 2100 (over 50% coal share) to the situation that prevailed almost 200 years before (i.e., around 1900). However, even with similar fuel shares, the technologies, end-use fuels, and applications projected in the A2 scenario are radically different from those of the past. 4.4.8.1. A1 Scenarios The most significant change in the long-term primary energy mix in the A1B-A1M marker scenario is the fast market penetration of (new) renewable energy. Its share increases from Renewables/Nuclear Figure 4-11: Global primary energy structure, shares (%) of oil and gas, coal, and non-fossil (zero-carbon) energy sources - historical development from 1850 to 1990 and in SRES scenarios. Each corner of the triangle corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which all primary energy is supplied by a single source - oil and gas, coal at the left, and non-fossil sources (renewables and nuclear) to the assumption of rapid technology progress, the costs of modern renewable energy technologies (solar, wind, commercial biomass, etc.) decline significantly in the long-term (see Section 4.4.7). Such low costs could make solar energy the largest primary energy source by 2100. Commercial, "high-tech" biomass also increases substantially, and contributes 18% of primary energy supply by 2100 globally. In the meantime, the shares of coal and oil decrease from 25% and 36% in 1990 to 12% and 15%, respectively, by 2050, and decline thereafter either because of depletion of conventional oil resources or because of fast market penetration of post-fossil technologies (in the case of coal). Gas increases its market share initially (from 20% in 1990 to 33% by 2050) and declines thereafter, but still maintains an important market share (24%) by the end of the 21st century. Nuclear is mainly a transient "backstop" technology - its share increases from 2% in 1990 to some 10% by 2050, and declines to 4% by 2100 because its economics increasingly fall behind those of new renewables. Overall, consistent with the high-income characteristics of the A1 scenario family, the share of traditional, non-commercial biomass use declines. By 2100 its use has virtually disappeared. 4.4.8.2. A1 Scenario Groups Embedded in the overall storyline of the A1 scenario family are the possible widely ranging technological bifurcations, each of which spans a "corridor" of the future evolution of primary energy shares (see Figure 4-11). The A1C scenario group spans a range of structural change in future energy supply between the extremes of the A2 marker scenario and of the previous coal-intensive IS92 scenarios (IS92a,b,e,f). Conversely, the A1T scenario group spans a range of structural change in future energy systems delineated by the A1B and B1 marker scenarios, respectively. In all of these the global energy system completes a structural shift initiated with the onset of the Industrial Revolution. This could draw to a close more than 100 years from now, around 2100, with an energy system that predominantly relies on non-fossil energy sources, but evidently with a radically different technology portfolio of "high-tech" non-fossil energy compared to the "low-tech" non-fossil energy of 1800. The second major difference is that even with somewhat similar primary energy structures, absolute levels of demand would have increased by a factor 200 - 2000 EJ by 2100 in the A1T scenario, compared to a mere 10 EJ in 1800. Compared to all other scenarios, the A1G scenario group represents a distinct cluster in which the current dominance of oil and gas is perpetuated throughout much of the 21st century. This scenario cluster is somewhat difficult to discern in Figure 4-11, because of the absence of structural change as a result of which the scenario cluster in terms of primary energy shares moves horizontally along the top part of the energy triangle. The only long-term fuel substitution that takes place is between coal and non-fossil alternatives. 4.4.8.3. A2 Scenarios Major global trends in the A2 (ASF) marker scenario include an increase in the coal share (from 29% in 1990, through 30% by 2050, to 53% in 2100) and a reduction in the share of conventional oil (from 43% in 1990 to 23% by 2050, from where it declines asymptotically toward zero at the end of the 21st century). The progressive depletion of oil resources in the scenario reflects the prevailing view as to the finiteness of conventional oil resources,^* a picture also confirmed by other quantifications of the storyline (see discussion below). Nonetheless, the decline in oil market share should not be interpreted as a physical "running out," but rather as a gradual replacement process via price competition with synfuels and other alternatives as oil prices rise, along with the need to access ever more remote and expensive petroleum deposits. Once oil becomes increasingly expensive (starting from 2030) a substantial proportion of coal is converted into synthetic liquid fuels. Nuclear and renewable energy sources gradually increase in importance from 1990 to 2100, while the share of natural gas remains almost constant. Substantial changes in the primary energy mix also occur at the regional level. Coal shifts from a currently dominant primary energy source only in ASIA and becomes the most important fuel in all the SRES regions. Natural gas remains the second or the third major fuel. Nuclear energy becomes important in OECD90 and ASIA regions, and biomass and other renewables in the ALM region. 4.4.8.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios The shares of different fuel types in all the A2 scenarios, except A2-IMAGE, are close to that of the marker scenario. As in the A2 marker, and with the exception of A2-IMAGE, coal becomes a major fuel by 2100 (45 to 50% of primary energy) in all the scenarios, followed by renewables (19 to 31%) and natural gas (9 to 18%). A higher share of renewables (biomass plus other) and a lower share of nuclear is the major difference between the scenarios (e.g., A2-MESSAGE shows the lowest nuclear share in primary energy of 7% in 2100). The A2G-IMAGE scenario has a quite different energy supply structure in which natural gas is the most important source, followed by renewables and coal, as it was designed to explore the implications of larger gas availability in an A2 world. Table 4-15 presents the primary energy structure of different A2 scenarios. 4.4.8.5. B1 Scenarios The B1 marker scenario in the IMAGE model describes a structural transition in energy systems toward increasing shares of non-fossil energy. This long-term transition features an interim reliance on fossil fuels, in particular with natural gas as the preferred transitional fuel. Structural changes in energy supply are comparatively fast because of both the dynamic outlook on energy-efficiency improvements and structural change and the "dematerialization" of economic activities, characteristic of the B1 world. With lower energy demand than in the other scenarios, technological innovation and diffusion initially translate into slower rates of structural change in primary energy supply (lower demand growth leads to lower investment in capacity expansion and hence fewer opportunities for technological learning). However, once underway, structural change translates into radical systems restructuring in the long term (i.e. post-2050). A persistent long-term trend of B1 is also the continuously declining share of coal in the global primary energy mix, caused by local and regional environmental considerations (airborne emissions, social and environmental impacts from large-scale mining activities, etc.). Until 2050, the global energy system remains fossil-fuel dominated (with an important shift away from coal to gas use within fossil fuels). By 2020, fossils still account for some 79% of global primary energy (23% coal, and 56% oil and gas combined). By 2050, fossils account for 69% (20% coal and 49% oil and gas). By 2100, however, by local and regional environmental considerations (airborne emissions, social and environmental impacts from large-scale mining activities, etc.). Until 2050, the global energy system remains fossil-fuel dominated (with an important shift away from coal to gas use within fossil fuels). By 2020, fossils still account for some 79% of global primary energy (23% coal, and 56% oil and gas combined). By 2050, fossils account for 69% (20% coal and 49% oil and gas). By 2100, however, the transition away from fossil fuels is well underway; they only account for some 47% of primary energy use, mostly natural gas. The non-fossil share mirrors in its growth the declining trajectory of fossil fuels. Generally, even this scenario of significant structural change illustrates the long lead times needed for an "orderly" transition away from the current dominance of fossil fuels. Energy efficiency and "dematerialization" of the economy are integral parts of this transition in the B1 scenario. A distinguishing feature of the IMAGE model used to develop the B1 marker scenario is the generic treatment of non-fossil fuel alternatives, which recognizes that the technology portfolio is particularly diverse and that numerous combinations are possible because of regional resource endowments, economics, technology policies, etc. A second important characteristic of the IMAGE modeling approach is the link between energy sector investments with future improvements in the form of a learning-curve approach. The model structure and methodology is described in more detail in Alcamo et al. (1998) and de Vries et al. (1994, 1999, 2000), (see also Appendix IV). 4.4.8.6. Harmonized and Other B1 Scenarios Other models have (in most instances with harmonized input assumptions) examined the uncertainties associated with the structural shift patterns described by the B1 scenario family. Whereas long-term trends all point in similar directions, considerable scenario variability remains, a function of differences in energy demand, resource availability, and technology assumptions (Table 4-16 and see Sections 4.4.6 and 4.4.7). Relatively robust patterns across all B1 scenarios include the continued importance of oil until about 2050 (15 to 28%) and a subsequent decline thereafter. Three scenarios (B1-ASF, B1-AIM, and B1-MESSAGE) indicate a more rapid decline to less than 10% market share by 2100, and three scenarios (the B1-IMAGE marker, B1-MARIA, and B1-MiniCAM) depict higher oil shares between 16% and 20% by 2100, largely as a function of higher oil resource availability assumptions (see Section 4.4.6). For gas, all scenarios suggest a relatively robust market share range of between 21% and 39% by 2050 and between 17% and 39% by 2100. Coal, biomass, and other non-fossil sources are largely substitutes for each other, depending on the specific cost assumptions used in the models. Whenever nuclear, renewable, and biomass costs are low, the share of coal declines (e.g., B1-AIM, B1-MARIA, B1-MESSAGE) and that of other sources increases, the degree of interfuel substitution being scenario (i.e. model) specific. Drastic shifts, however, are not anticipated before 2050. In most scenarios (except B1-MARIA and B1-MESSAGE) coal's share is around 20% by 2050, and declines to below 10% by 2100 as biomass and other non-fossil sources gain respective market shares. Their diffusion is described more conservatively in the B1-ASF scenario, in which coal maintains a market share of about 22% until 2100. Except B1-MARIA and B1High-MiniCAM. 4.4.8.7. B2 Scenarios The B2 (MESSAGE) marker scenario first follows a trend toward increasing shares of gas, followed by renewables, and finally – as oil and gas start to become scarce – increasingly returns to coal. By 2100, the B2 scenario ends up somewhere in the middle of the triangle in Figure 4-11 (i.e., it relies on a broad, diversified mixture of different primary energy sources). This global diversification results from heterogeneous trends at the regional level and is largely a function of the more modest assumptions concerning technology improvements and oil and gas resource availability (compared to other scenario families, in particular A1 and B1) that are characteristic of the B2 scenario family. By 2100, the main primary energy carriers are biomass (23%), coal (22%), oil and gas (29%), and other renewables and nuclear (26%). Countries with low income and high resource availability continue to rely on fossil fuels up to the end of the 21st century, such as China (mainly coal), Former Soviet Union (mainly gas), and Middle East (first oil and later gas). Regions with low resource availability, such as Africa and South America, rely on renewables and nuclear. The decreasing share of coal and oil in the primary energy structure of OECD countries is substituted by the growing share of renewables, gas, and nuclear. A major characteristic of the B2 scenario is the increasing importance of synthetic liquid fuels in the second half of the 21st century, because of a continuous phase out of conventional oil in all regions. 4.4.8.8. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios Alternative B2 scenarios show a great diversity in changes in energy systems structures compared to the B2 marker. Common to all scenarios is their gradual transition away from conventional oil and gas, which are assumed to be comparatively scarce in the B2 scenario storyline. However alternative scenarios depict very different trends for this structural change, ranging from increased reliance on coal and coal-derived synfuels (B2-ASF, B2High-MiniCAM) to more biomass- and nuclear-intensive scenarios (B2-AIM, B2-MARIA, and B2-IMAGE). Generally, this reflects the considerable uncertainty as to direction and pace of technological change in the technologically more fragmented world described in the B2 scenario storyline. B2-MiniCAM anticipates a strong reliance on oil and natural gas as transitional fuels, with a share in primary energy of about 50% over the next 100 years to 2100 (i.e., gas shares in B2-MiniCAM are as high as in the A1G scenario group). In turn, B2-ASF suggests an increasing reliance on coal and coal-derived synfuels. A third group of scenarios tends to follow similar directions of structural change as those of the B2-marker – a gradual introduction of post-fossil alternatives (with different weights for nuclear and renewables as a function of technological progress), along with gas (or in some scenarios coal-derived synfuels) as transitional technology options. Structural changes in energy systems of the various B2 scenarios largely follow the main directions of the marker scenario developed with a particular model. That is, differences in alternative B2 scenarios appear to relate strongly to differences in model parametrizations derived from the respective marker scenario runs, most notably in the domains of resource availability and technology (see Sections 4.4.6 and 4.4.7). Thus, B2-ASF depicts structural changes in energy technologies and systems akin to the trends of the A2 marker scenario, whereas B2-AIM and B2-IMAGE largely follow the patterns of change of their marker scenarios (A1 and B1, respectively). Alternative patterns of change are illustrated by the B2-MiniCAM and B2-MARIA scenarios, which have also explored scenario sensitivities by developing alternative B2 scenario quantifications (B2C-MARIA, B2High-MiniCAM) that show a higher reliance on coal (and hence higher GHG emissions). 4.4.9. Land-Use Changes The main driving forces for land-use changes are related to increasing demands for food because of a growing population and changing diets. In addition, numerous other social, economic, and institutional factors govern land-use changes, such as deforestation, expansion of cropland areas, or their re-conversion back to forest cover (see Chapter 3). Global food production can be increased, either through intensification (e.g., using multi-cropping, raising cropping intensity, applying fertilizers, new seeds, improved farming technology) or through land expansion (e.g., cultivating land, converting forests). Especially in less developed countries, many examples show the potentials for intensification of food production in a more or less ecological way that may not lead to higher GHG emissions (e.g., multi-cropping; agro-forestry). Different assumptions on these processes translate into alternative scenarios of future land-use changes and GHG emissions, most notably CO2, methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O). A distinguishing characteristic of several models (e.g., AIM, IMAGE, MARIA, and MiniCAM) used in SRES is the explicit modeling of land-use changes from expanding biomass uses, and hence exploration of possible land-use conflicts between the energy and agricultural sectors. The corresponding scenarios of land-use changes are summarized in Table 4-17 and Figure 4-12 for the four SRES marker scenarios and all SRES scenarios. The distinction in scenario groups is related to the energy system and is thus not relevant in this section. As discussed further in Chapter 5, model treatment of land-use change and base-year parameterization differ substantially. Therefore, comparisons between different models can yield substantial differences. Land-use change assumptions for each of the marker scenarios are described below. More detailed inter-model comparisons of land-use change and emissions models, as well as a deeper analysis of potentials and rates of change of main driving force variables, such as agricultural productivity growth and dietary changes, remain an important area for future research. corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which land use is dedicated to a much greater extent than today to one category - 60% to cropland and energy biomass at the top, 80% to forests to the left, and 80% to other categories (including grasslands) to the right. Constant shares in total land area of cropland and energy biomass, forests, and other categories are denoted by their respective isoshare lines. For 1990 to 2100, alternative trajectories are shown for the SRES scenarios. The three marker scenarios A1B, B1, and B2 are shown as thick colored lines, and other SRES scenarios as thin colored lines. The ASF model used to develop the A2 marker scenario projects only land-use change related GHG emissions. Comparable data on land cover changes are therefore not available. The trajectories appear to be largely model specific and illustrate the different views and interpretations of future land-use patterns across the scenarios (e.g. the scenario trajectories on the right that illustrate larger increases in grasslands and decreases in cropland are MiniCAM results). 4.4.9.1. A1 Scenarios In the AIM model, land-use changes at the beginning of the 21st century follow largely historical trends. Over longer time horizons, the assumption is that land-use changes are driven primarily by economic forces, consistent with the A1 scenario storyline. Expected land rents and agricultural prices determine long-run land-use changes, based on an equilibrium approach of international agricultural markets. The AIM land-use model is linked to the AIM energy module via biomass energy demand. In the A1 scenario, the rapid increase in the demand for biomass energy raises the expected rent of biomass farmland. Reduction in forest area occurs until 2020 because of population growth and rapid increases of meat demand in the developing countries. Rising meat demands also result in a substantial expansion of grasslands and pasture. However, high incomes in scenario A1 also increase the demand for environmental amenities. Hence, "demand" for forests also increases with economic growth, and the expected rent of forestland is assumed to increase after 2020. These rising rents reduce the rate of deforestation and increase the area of managed tree-covered land in the latter half of the 21st century. Rising food productivity also counterbalances the pressure on cropland and pastureland in the latter half of the 21st century. For instance, crop productivity is assumed to grow on average by about 1.5% per year in the A1 scenario family.^^ However, despite these counterbalances the demand for pastureland continues to increase throughout the 21st century because of the high income growth and associated changes in diets. The resultant land-use changes for the A1 marker scenario between 1990 and 2100 are: 228 An Overview of Scenarios • Largely stationary trend of global cropland areas (-39 million ha between 1990 and 2100, i.e., 3% of 1990 cropland areas). • Decline in global forest cover by some 92 million ha. • Increase of grasslands and biomass land-use of 188 and 552 million ha, respectively. Land-use change patterns are more dynamic in the intermediate time periods, and also display a wide variation across different regions. 4.4.9.2. Harmonized and Other A1 Scenarios By and large, land-use changes in other A1 scenarios show a very wide range, being mostly model specific. As a rule, the A1 land-use change scenarios take an intermediate position between the more extreme tendencies described by the respective storylines of the A2 and B1 scenario families (see Figure 4-12), which both result in large land-use changes (albeit of an entirely different qualitative nature). Corresponding scenario (model) differences are thus discussed below for these two scenario families where they are largest. 4.4.9.3. A2 Scenarios The ASF model used to produce the A2 marker scenario does not generate estimates of the area covered by different ecosystem types (e.g., forests, grasslands, etc.). However, the ASF deforestation module estimates the area of different tropical-forest types cleared annually for agricultural and other purposes (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990). This information is subsequently used to estimate GHG emissions from deforestation. The A2-ASF scenario also includes estimates of natural carbon sinks and additional sinks attributable to reforestation and afforestation activities. These estimates are based on an extensive survey of available literature (Pepper et. al., 1998). By and large the land-use changes in the A2 marker scenario reflect conventional wisdom - in a high-population and low-income world, natural land cover becomes progressively depleted, which is only partially counterbalanced by re- and afforestation activities. The size of the natural terrestrial carbon For comparison, the corresponding productivity growth rates in the other scenarios range from 1% per year (B2-AIM) to 2% per year (B1-AIM), consistent with their respective storylines. This emphasizes productivity and efficiency (B1) and more fragmented technology and productivity growth (B2). For A2-AIM, crop productivity growth rates range between 1% and 1.5% per year in the DEV and IND regions, respectively; the difference is explained by only slowly closing productivity gaps (approximated by GDP/capita), characteristic of this scenario storyline. Similar differences also characterize other salient scenario assumptions of importance to land-use changes (like biomass yields, animal productivity, or the distribution of grain- versus range-fed cattle). For instance, feed and protein yields from pasture land are assumed to grow at 1.5% per year and biomass yields at 0.5% per year in the A1 scenario. sink (including forests, grasslands, wetlands, and other ecosystem types) in 1990 is estimated in ASF-A2 to amount to 1.8 GtC (1800 MtC). By 2050 this sink reduces to 0.8 GtC and by the end of the 21st century terrestrial ecosystems become a net source of carbon. On the other side of the natural carbon balance is carbon sequestered by re- and afforestation. In A2-ASF the respective (negative) carbon fluxes are estimated to increase from 0.003 GtC in 1990, to 0.171 GtC by 2050, and 0.205 GtC by 2100. 4.4.9.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios Out balance is carbon sequestered by re- and afforestation. In A2-ASF the respective (negative) carbon fluxes are estimated to increase from 0.003 GtC in 1990, to 0.171 GtC by 2050, and 0.205 GtC by 2100. 4.4.9.4. Harmonized and Other A2 Scenarios Out of the five A2 non-marker scenarios, A2-AIM and A2-MiniCAM (and A2-A1-MiniCAM) include explicit land-use patterns. Table 4-18 illustrates that the major difference between these quantifications is a higher energy biomass area assumption in A2-AIM. Among other differences is a higher percentage of cropland and grasslands in A2-MiniCAM and of forestland in A2-AIM. 4.4.9.5. B1 Scenarios The most important indicators and assumptions made in the IMAGE land-use model relate to agricultural yields and diets that influence meat production, cattle population, and, in turn, grasslands land cover. Cereal yields (to 2100) for REF, ASIA, ALM, and the world average are assumed to increase by about a factor of four, while cereal yields for OECD90 start from a higher initial value and increase by only a factor of two. The total cattle population in the IMAGE model includes dairy and non-dairy cattle. Dairy cattle populations change as a result of milk production per animal and the demand for milk. Non-dairy cattle populations change as a result of meat demand, slaughter weight, and off-take rate. The number of slaughtered animals (beef) increases in the period 1995 to 2060, the net result of increasing animal productivity and increasing human consumption of meat. The total number of cattle (dairy and beef) shows a decreasing trend beyond the year 2000, with the near-term increase in beef cattle more than offset by a decrease in the number of dairy cattle. The forest area reflects the result of increasing agricultural production and increasing productivity. The major increase in demand for food in the initial period 1995 to 2030 is nearly compensated by increasing productivity, with a resultant slow decline in forest area, while beyond 2030 forest areas start to expand over abandoned agricultural land. Overall, the net balance of land-use changes in scenario B1 between 1990 and 2100 suggests a considerable “greening” of the planet – a net increase in forest cover by some 1260 million ha, a decrease in cropland of 390 million ha, and an increase of about 200 million ha devoted to biomass production. Grasslands decline by 1540 million ha, partly because of the afforested areas mentioned above, but also because they are converted to other land uses. Thus, while the B1 scenario family is characterized by “high” rates of land-use changes, the quality of these changes (“greening”) is entirely different compared to those of other scenario families (e.g. A2). Table 4-18: Global land use patterns (% global land cover) in A2-AIM and A2-MiniCAM scenarios. The columns may not total to 100% because of independent rounding errors. 1990 2020 2050 2100 Land Use Type AIM MiniCAM AIM MiniCAM AIM MiniCAM AIM MiniCAM Cropland 11 11 12 12 13 13 15 12 Grasslands 26 24 27 29 28 34 29 34 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 0 2 0 2 3 Forest 33 32 33 30 33 26 33 27 Other 29 33 28 29 24 26 22 24 4.4.9.6. B2 Scenarios Since the MESSAGE model does not include a land-use-change module, an external scenario for land-use change consistent with the underlying socio-economic assumptions of the B2 scenario was adopted. This scenario was developed by the AIM model in an iterative process between the two respective modeling teams to ensure consistency and harmonization in assumptions of driving-force variables (see AIM land-use model description above). In B2, population growth adds pressure on cropland expansion. Changing diets (higher meat demand) with rising incomes cause an expansion of pastureland. Land productivity increases were assumed to be more modest (e.g. compared to the A1 scenarios), consistent with the more cautious expectations of the B2 scenario storyline and the intermediate values adopted for productivity increases of energy use. As a result, land-use changes are substantial. Stabilization of population growth combined with continued gradual increases in agricultural productivity relieves some of the land-use-change pressure, particularly for forests. As a result, post-2050 forest cover expands through reforestation and afforestation activities, consistent with the local environmental orientation of the B2 scenario storyline. Emission patterns related to land-use change closely follow these trends in land-cover changes. By 2100, global forest cover in B2 shows a net increase of 230 million ha, croplands by 330 million ha, and grasslands and biomass plantations by 300 million ha each. This “greening” of long-term land-use patterns is at the expense of “other” land uses, and primarily involve reclamation of degraded lands, consistent with the emphasis on improving local and regional environmental quality and food and energy security outlined in the B2 scenario storyline. 4.4.9.7. Harmonized and Other B2 Scenarios Compared to the B2 marker scenario, alternative scenarios project a very wide range of possible future patterns of land-use change. In fact, the range of resultant emissions for the B2 scenarios is as large as the entire range spanned by the four SRES marker scenarios altogether. Similarly, as observed above for structural changes in energy systems, different B2 scenarios are rather model specific and follow the general trends indicated by the respective marker scenario developed with a particular model. Overall, land-use related emissions decline, reflecting changes in driving forces such as increases in agricultural productivity. B2-MARIA and, of course, B2-AIM are structurally similar to the B2 marker – declining deforestation and long-term shifts to maintain (B2-MARIA) or increase forest cover (B2-AIM) – whereas B2-MiniCAM projects a stabilization of deforestation only after 2050. Generally, B2-MiniCAM shows a substantial decrease in cropland area and an increase of grassland area. 4.4.10. Environmental Policies The SRES scenarios quantified emissions of CO2, CH4, N2O, NOx, carbon monoxide, VOCs, SO2, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrofluorochlorocarbons, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, and sulfur hexafluoride. A detailed discussion of the trajectories and the most relevant driving forces is presented in Chapter 5. In all cases herein, future emissions of these gases are affected by environmental policies not related to climate-change concerns, as in the SRES Terms of Reference (see Appendix I). Efforts to protect the ozone layer will result in a significant decline in CFCs and some of their substitutes. Urban air quality concerns will have a significant influence on future emissions of indirect GHGs and of sulfate aerosols. As discussed in Chapter 3, for sulfur emissions the SRES scenarios reflect the evaluation of the IS92 scenario series (Alcamo et al., 1995), the recent sulfur scenario literature (for a review see Grübler, 1998b), and sulfur control policies in the OECD countries and the beginning of similar developments in many developing countries (see Chapter 3). Thus, a range of environmental measures is assumed in all four SRES scenario families, although the magnitude and timing differ as a function of the four different scenario storylines. 4.4.10.1. A1 Scenarios In the A1 scenario family, environmental policies are implemented as incomes rise and societies choose to protect environmental amenities. This first of all would concern water and air quality (health concerns), but also traffic congestion and noise, as well as land-use policies (preservation of recreational spaces). Economic instruments are assumed to be the preferred policy instrument in an A1 world. In some of the more “technology intensive” A1 scenario groups, cleaner energy systems and lower GHG emissions are achieved as a by-product of high economic growth coupled with rapid technological change. 4.4.10.2. A2 Scenarios Environmental concerns in their own right are perhaps the least important in the A2 world and they are mostly local in nature. For instance, no environmentally related barriers to nuclear energy development or environmental costs of fossil energy use are assumed. However, A2 scenarios include indirect control options for several GHGs that adversely affect local air quality. They also require vigorous environmental controls on pollutants that affect the availability of water, quality of soils, and productivity of agricultural crops to ensure food security is not jeopardized in a 15 billion person world. Hence, in terms of a number of traditional pollutants, A2 is far from an environmental “worst case” scenario, even if it generally has the highest GHG emissions. 4.4.10.3. B1 Scenarios The B1 scenario family assumes the most comprehensive environmental measures (see Section 4.3). Sulfur and nitrogen oxide emissions decline with vigorous efficiency improvements and “dematerialization” of the economy. Economic structural change (toward services) and cleaner energy systems (electricity, gas, district heat) to improve urban air quality also result in lower emissions levels compared to other scenarios. Finally, additional “add-on” technologies, such as flue-gas desulfurization and de-nitrification equipment, catalytic Section 4.3). Sulfur and nitrogen oxide emissions decline with vigorous efficiency improvements and "dematerialization" of the economy. Economic structural change (toward services) and cleaner energy systems (electricity, gas, district heat) to improve urban air quality also result in lower emissions levels compared to other scenarios. Finally, additional "add-on" technologies, such as flue-gas desulfurization and de-nitrification equipment, catalytic converters, etc., bridge the transition gap before inherently clean energy systems (e.g. IGCC based on coal or biomass, hydrogen-powered fuel cell vehicles) come into use on a global scale. Environmental consciousness would also lead less-developed regions to take such measures earlier and at lower income levels than occurred in the history of presently industrialized regions (as indeed already actually occurs; see Chapter 5). 4.4.10.4. B2 Scenarios In B2 scenarios, environmental concerns are prominent, but in contrast to the B1 world it is assumed that measures are implemented effectively only at local and regional scales. For instance, it is assumed that sulfur emissions would be progressively controlled and other local and regional problems concerning, for example, air quality, human health, and food supply would also be the focus of policies. 4.5. Regional Scenario Patterns The scenarios imply different regional patterns of socio-economic driving forces and resultant emissions. These are summarized in Table 4-19. Following the definition of the four world regions adopted in this report, the industrial region (IND) corresponds to the SRES regions OECD90 and REF, and the developing region (DEV) corresponds to the SRES regions ASIA and ALM. In 1990, the base year of the SRES scenarios, driving-force variables as well as emissions are distributed unevenly. According to the statistics reported in Nakicenovic et al. (1998), DEV countries account for 76% of global population. However, they only account for 16% to 36% of global economic activity (considering GDP at market exchange rates and purchasing power parities, respectively), 34% of primary energy use, and 42% of global CO2 emissions (including all sources, from energy plus land-use changes). Over time, the regional distribution of socio-economic activities and emission shifts in the scenarios, albeit because of different driving forces. These shifts range from rapid population growth (scenario family A2) and rapid economic development and catch-up (scenario family A1) in developing countries, to rapid "dematerialization" of economic activities in industrial countries (scenario family B1). Generally, scenario family B2 depicts the most gradual changes, and hence also the slowest rates of change in the global distribution of activities and emissions. Of all the SRES scenarios, A2-A1-MiniCAM exhibits the slowest dynamics of development catch-up. Table 4-19 summarizes the main scenario indicators differentiated between industrial and developing countries. Two measures are given (following La Rovere, 1998): • Date when activities and/or emissions in developing countries reach those that prevailed in industrial countries in 1990. • Date when developing country values equalize those of industrial countries. In this comparison, developing countries in 1990 already accounted for 76% of world population and, because of the inevitable demographic momentum, their share is likely to increase further over the next few decades before alternative demographic projections branch out into different regional distributions. However, the basic pattern of dominance of developing countries in global population remains unchanged across all demographic projections. The share of developing countries in global population ranges between 80% (A1, B1) and 86% (A2, B2) by 2100 for demographic projections between 7 and 15 billion people. From the distribution of global population, the scenarios indicate an increasing importance of developing countries in the future, albeit at different rates. In consequence, as shown in Table 4-19, total GDP expressed at purchasing power parities in developing countries could reach 1990 levels in industrial regions between 2000 and 2010 and equalize future industrial country levels between 2010 and 2030. For GDP expressed at market exchange rates, the 1990 "parity date" is reached between 2015 and 2030 and equalization in absolute terms even later, between 2030 and 2060. Total primary energy use in developing countries could reach 1990 industrial levels between 2005 and 2010, and parity in absolute terms between 2005 and 2020. Possible spatial distributions of economic activities based on satellite night imagery data that correlate highly with, for example, GDP and electricity use are discussed in Box 4-10. Conversely, scenario per capita indicators converge only slowly, sometimes well after 2100. Per capita GDP (expressed at market exchange rates) of developing countries reaches the 1990 level of industrial countries at the earliest around 2050 (scenario family A1) and well after 2100 in scenario family A2. None of the four marker scenarios projects a situation in which per capita income in developing countries surpasses future levels of per capita incomes of Annex I countries. Energy use per capita shows a similar pattern. Only scenario family A1 depicts a development in which per capita energy use in developing countries could approach that prevailing in industrial countries in 1990 (by 2070) and in which it could reach parity with industrial countries in the very long-term (after 2100). In all other scenarios energy use per capita remains below 1990 or future per capita energy use levels of industrial countries. By and large, these scenario features reflect the very large differences in present per capita levels of economic activity and energy use, which require many decades, even a century, to narrow. The scenarios thus portray a feature known as "slow conditional convergence only" in the development literature (see, e.g., Shin, 1996). Concerning GHG emissions, discussed in more detail in Chapter 5, trends reflect the evolution of scenario-driving forces discussed above. CO2 emissions of developing countries reach levels in industrial countries around or shortly after the year 2000. This reflects the continued growth in energy use (and emissions), slow recovery of economies in transition (and thus modest growth in aggregate emission from industrial countries), and a continuation of current trends in land-use changes (deforestation); these only diverge in the medium- to long-term across the SRES scenarios. Yet, even with equalizing total emission levels, regional differences in cumulative and per capita emissions remain pronounced. Based on the estimates of cumulative CO2 (all sources) emissions since 1800 given in Grübler and Nakicenovic (1994), developing countries reach 1990 levels of industrial countries only between 2015 and 2030. They reach parity (historical data from 1800 to 1990, and scenario values from 1990 onward) at earliest by 2040 (scenario family A1), and between 2050 (A2 and B1) and post-2100 (scenario family B2) in the other scenarios. None of the SRES scenarios reaches the 1990 per capita CO2 emissions levels of industrial countries in the developing countries. In scenarios with vigorous climate policies (not in the SRES terms of reference) per capita emissions levels in industrial countries may approach levels as projected for developing countries. However, no scenario without climate policies could be found in the literature in which per capita emissions in industrialized and developing countries reached similar levels. Thus the absence of such convergence in the SRES scenarios reflects the current literature, and results from the nature of the SRES scenarios as "no climate policy" scenarios. SRES scenarios do follow the recommendation to explore possible pathways of closing the income gap between the industrial and now developing regions (Alcamo et al., 1995). For reasons of plausibility and foundation in the reviewed no-climate-policy literature, the SRES scenarios do not achieve full income convergence in the scenario period analyzed. However, income levels in developing countries do reach the 1990 levels of the industrial countries in the second half of the next century in three out of four scenario families. 4.6. A Roadmap to the SRES Scenarios In the preceding sections the characteristics of of plausibility and foundation in the reviewed no-climate-policy literature, the SRES scenarios do not achieve full income convergence in the scenario period analyzed. However, income levels in developing countries do reach the 1990 levels of the industrial countries in the second half of the next century in three out of four scenario families. 4.6. A Roadmap to the SRES Scenarios In the preceding sections the characteristics of the SRES scenarios are summarized in terms of scenario driving forces such as population, economic development, resources, technology, land-use changes, and other factors. The scenarios were designed in such a way as to deliberately span a wide range, reflecting uncertainties of the future, but not cover the very extremes from the scenario literature concerning driving forces. A distinguishing feature of the SRES scenarios is that various driving-force variables are not combined numerically (or arbitrarily), but instead try to reflect current understanding of the interrelationships between important scenario driving forces. For instance, according to the literature review of Chapter 3 it would be rather inconsistent to develop scenarios of rapid technological change in a macro-economic and social context of low labor productivity and stagnant income per capita. Scenario storylines were the method developed within SRES to help guide the scenario quantifications and to assure scenario consistency in terms of the main relationships between scenario driving forces. The different quantifications discussed in the previous sections demonstrate that even if scenarios share important main input assumptions in terms of population and GDP growth. Box 4-10: Spatial Distributions of Economic Activities Based on Nighttime Satellite Imagery Data. Spatially explicit data on socio-economic activity is sparse. The reason arises mainly in that Systems of National Accounts and similar socio-economic statistics are available only at high levels of spatial aggregations defined by administrative boundaries (countries, provinces, or regions). As a result, gridded emission inventories largely rely on estimations of current population density distributions (e.g. Olivier et al., 1996) and modeling approaches to date have also relied exclusively on rescaling/where socio-economic activities (economic output, energy use, etc.) based on current or future population density distribution patterns (see e.g., Sørensen and Meibom, 1998; Sørensen et al., 1999). Population density is, however, not necessarily a good indicator for spatial patterns of socio-economic activities (Sutton et al., 1997). At higher levels of spatial aggregation, it is estimated that about two billion people remain outside the formal economy, most of them in rural areas of developing countries (UNDP, 1997). At lower levels of spatial aggregations, locations such as airports, industrial zones, and commercial centers have low resident population densities, but high levels of economic activity. Also, with increasing urbanization future population distribution will be markedly different from present ones (HABITAT, 1996). Night satellite imagery from the US Air Force Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Operational Linescan System (OLS) offers an interesting alternative based on direct observations. Early nighttime lights data were analyzed from analog film strips (Croft, 1978, 1979; Foster, 1983; Sullivan, 1989). Digital DMSP-OLS data have recently become available with global coverage (Elvidge et al., 1997a, 1997b, 1999). Nocturnal lighting can be regarded as one of the defining features of concentrated human activity, such as flaring of natural gas in oil fields (Croft, 1973), fishing fleets, or urban settlements (Tobler, 1969; Lo and Welch, 1977; Foster, 1983; Gallo et al., 1995; Elvidge et al., 1997c). Consequently, extent and brightness of nocturnal lighting correlate highly with indicators of city size and socio-economic activities such as GDP, and energy and electricity use (Welch, 1980; Gallo et al., 1995; Elvidge et al., 1997a). Figure 4-13 (bottom panel) shows a 1995/1996 night-luminosity map of the world developed by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Geophysical Data Center. The map was derived from composites of cloud-free visible band observations made by the DMSP-OLS (see Elvidge et al., 1997b; Imhoff et al., 1997). The DMSP-OLS is an oscillating scan radiometer that generates images with a swath width of 3000 km. The DMSP-OLS is unique in its capability to perform low-light imaging of the entire earth on a nightly basis. With 14 orbits per day, the polar orbiting DMSP-OLS is able to generate global daytime and nighttime coverage of the Earth every 24 hours. The "visible" bandpass straddles the visible and near-infrared (VNIR) portion of the spectrum. The thermal infrared channel has a bandpass that covers 10–13 μm of the spectrum. Satellite altitude is stabilized using four gyroscopes (three-axis stabilization), a starmapper, Earth limb sensor, and a solar detector. Image time series analysis is used to distinguish lights produced by cities, towns, and industrial facilities from sensor noise and ephemeral lights that arise from fires and lightning. The time series approach is required to ensure that each land area is covered with sufficient cloud-free observations to determine the presence or absence of VNIR emission sources. Dietz et al. (2000) performed illustrative simulations of possible future light patterns. Considering the high correlation between observed radiance-calibrated night satellite imagery data and economic activity variables like GDP, these simulations indicate future spatial patterns of economic activity. As a basis of the simulation, Dietz et al. (2000) rescaled present night luminosity patterns using global and regional GDP growth patterns of the preliminary A1B marker scenario reported in the SRES open-process web site combined with a simple stochastic model of spatial evolution and interaction. An illustrative simulation for the year 2070 is given in Figure 4-13 (top panel). The resultant changes in spatial light patterns indicate socio-economic activities and provide useful information for infrastructure planning, such as expansion of gas and electricity networks. When combined with topographical information, like latitude, the data can also be used as input to climate impact and vulnerability assessments (e.g., extent of socio-economic activities that may be affected by sea-level rise). Figure 4-13: Radiance calibrated lights obtained from night satellite imagery. Situation in 1995/1996 (bottom panel) and illustrative simulation for the SRES A1 scenario's implied GDP growth for 2070 (top panel). Color codes refer to radiance units (DN), where radiance = DN^3/2 × 10^-10 W/cm^2 per sr/μm (Watts per square centimeter per steradian per micrometer, the brightness units to which the US Air Force Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Operational Linescan System (OLS) is calibrated; it normalizes for the bandpass (μm) and solid angle of the optics (cm^2/sr)). considerable uncertainty and scenario variability remains. For instance, features of technological and land-use changes can be interpreted quite differently within the framework of different models, even if they conform to the overall conceptual description and "scenario logic" described in a particular scenario family. In some instances the broad outlines of scenario driving forces were not followed entirely in particular scenario quantifications, but alternative scenario interpretations were submitted. These highlight important scenario uncertainties or express scientific disagreements within the writing team, as for future labor productivity growth and economic "catch-up" possibilities of currently developing countries. These alternative scenario interpretations and different model quantifications are presented here to reflect the SRES Terms of Reference for an open process and the use of multiple modeling approaches, even if this necessarily increases complexity and reduces simplicity and transparency in discussion of a large number of scenario quantifications. To guide readers through the different driving-force assumptions that characterize the various scenarios, Tables 4-2 and 4-3 give an overview of the SRES scenario set. They classify scenarios that share important input assumptions (harmonized scenarios share global population and GDP assumptions) from scenarios that offer alternative quantifications. Table 4-4 summarizes the main quantitative scenario descriptors for each of the four SRES scenario families of the "harmonized" scenario category. Here an attempt is made to link this information with the resultant scenario outcomes (emissions) that are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5. In Chapter 5, an additional, complementary scenario classification scheme to that used in this chapter is presented and focuses on driving forces. Scenarios are classified according to their cumulative carbon emissions (1990 to 2100, all sources), the best single quantitative indicator available to compare emission scenarios that portray widely different dynamics and different combinations and magnitude of link this information with the resultant scenario outcomes (emissions) that are discussed in more detail in Chapter 5. In Chapter 5, an additional, complementary scenario classification scheme to that used in this chapter is presented and focuses on driving forces. Scenarios are classified according to their cumulative carbon emissions (1990 to 2100, all sources), the best single quantitative indicator available to compare emission scenarios that portray widely different dynamics and different combinations and magnitude of a variety of emission categories. Four categories of cumulative emissions, Low (<1000 GtC), Medium-Low (1100 to 1450 GtC), Medium-High (1450 to 1800 GtC), and High (>1800 GtC) are presented. Table 4-20 links the scenario overview from Tables 4-2 and 4-3 with this information to guide readers through the differences in scenarios. Table 4-20 indicates that in most cases there is an easily discernable direct connection between main scenario characteristics of a particular scenario family or scenario group and the resultant outcomes in terms of cumulative emissions. For instance, in the high GDP, high energy demand scenario family A1, all scenarios within the two scenario groups that are fossil fuel and technologies intensive (A1C and A1G combined into A1FI in the SPM) result in high cumulative carbon emissions. Conversely, cumulative emissions of the "efficiency and dematerialization" (without additional climate initiatives) scenario family B1 are generally in the "low" emissions category, but two model quantifications indicate medium-low emissions. For the scenario family B2, outcomes in terms of cumulative carbon emissions can also be related clearly to scenario characteristics. One group of scenarios (which includes the B2 marker) adopts an incrementalist perspective of technological change ("dynamics as usual") applied to medium levels of population and GDP (and resultant energy demand) and results in medium-low cumulative carbon emissions. Another group of scenarios explored the sensitivity of a gradual return to coal-based technologies (B2C-MARIA, B2-ASF), in one case combined with higher energy demand than in the other scenarios (B2High-MiniCAM); and results in higher cumulative emissions (Medium-High category in Table 4-20). Equally discernable in Table 4-20 is the wide range in cumulative carbon emissions that characterize the various scenario groups within the A1 scenario family. By design, the different scenario groups within this family explored the implications of different directions of technological change, ranging from carbon-intensive developments (A1C and A1G, combined into A1FI in the SPM) to decarbonization (A1T), with the "balanced" technology development scenario group taking an intermediary position. Different developments concerning fossil or non-fossil resource and technology availability in a less populated but affluent and thus high energy demand world (such as A1) can lead to widely different outcomes in terms of cumulative emissions, with a range as wide as that spanned by all four scenario families together. Technology can thus be as important a driving force as population and GDP growth combined. In other words, very different emissions outcomes are possible for future worlds that otherwise share similar developments of main driving forces such as population and economic growth and high rates of technological change. However, areas of overlap and uncertainties of scenario outcomes (cumulative emissions) occur even for scenario quantifications that share otherwise similar assumptions for the main scenario drivers. Not surprisingly, differences in quantifications are largest within the A1 "balanced" technological progress scenario group, which includes the A1B marker scenario. Most model interpretations result in cumulative carbon emissions within the Medium-High category (1450-1800 GtC). However, there are also scenario quantifications in which technological change tilts more in the direction of the A1C (A1-ASF) or A1T (A1-MARIA) scenario groups that favor fossil (coal) or post-fossil (nuclear, renewables, and biomass) technologies, respectively. This leads to very wide differences in cumulative emissions, from the Medium-Low through to the High categories. A similar range of scenario outcomes between Medium-High to High categories also characterizes the A2 scenario family that otherwise describes an entirely different world (high population and comparatively low per capita income compared to low population with high per capita income for the A1 scenario family; see Table 4-4). Departing from the main scenario characteristics of the A2 scenario family in terms of population and income in direction of lower values (such as in the A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario) could even yield emissions in the Medium-Low category. Thus, the A2 scenario family also indicates that a wide range of emissions outcomes is possible for any given development path of main scenario driving forces, such as population and income per capita. Finally, the categorization of scenarios in terms of their (cumulative carbon) emission outcomes illustrates that similar emission outcomes could arise from very different developments of main scenario drivers. For instance, High category cumulative emissions could arise from scenarios of low population growth, combined with high incomes (and energy use) and globalized technological developments that favor accessibility and economics of fossil fuels (coal, unconventional oil and gas; e.g., A1C and A1G scenario groups). Alternatively, similar High category cumulative emissions could also arise from scenarios of high population growth combined with slower per capita income growth and more regionally oriented technology development trends (scenario family A2). A comparison of the B1 and A1T scenario groups (see Table 4-20) also confirms this conclusion. Both scenarios explore pathways that reduce current income disparities between regions. They indicate that such a tendency does not necessarily lead to high emissions, but could be achieved with Low to Medium-Low category cumulative emissions (as scenario groups A1C and A1G also indicate that High category emission pathways are possible). Perhaps the most important conclusion from the SRES multi-model, open process, and the large number of scenarios it has generated is the recognition that there is no simple, linear relationship between scenario driving forces and outcomes or between emission outcomes and scenario driving forces. High or low population scenarios need not automatically lead to high or low emissions; similar statements also hold for economic growth and for closing regional income gaps. References: Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grubler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios. In Climate Change 1994, Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 233-304. Alcamo, J., E. Kreileman, M. Krol, R. Leemans, J. Bollen, J. van Minnen, M. Schaefer, S. Toet, and B. de Vries, 1998: Global modelling of environmental change: an overview of IMAGE 2.1. In Global change scenarios of the 21st century. Results from the IMAGE 2.1 Model, J. Alcamo, R. Leemans, E. Kreileman (eds.), Elsevier Science, Kidlington, Oxford, pp. 3-94. Ausubel, J.H., A. Grubler, and N. Nakicenovic, 1988: Carbon dioxide emissions in a methane economy. Climatic Change, 12, 245-263. BP (British Petroleum), various years, 1972-1999. BP Statistical Review of World Energy. BP, London. (http://www.bpamoco.com/worldenergy/otl/index.htm). CPB (Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis), 1992: Scanning the Future. A long-term study of the World Economy 1990-2015. Sdu Publishers, The Hague. Croft, T.A., 1973: Burning waste gas in oil fields. Nature, 245 (16 July), 375-376. Croft, T.A., 1978: Nighttime images of the earth from space. Scientific American, 239, 68-79. Croft, T.A., 1979: The brightness of lights on earth at night, digitally recorded by DMSP satellites. Stanford Research Institute final report prepared for the U.S. Geological Survey, SRI, Stanford, CA. Demeny, P., 1990: Population. In The Earth As Transformed by Human Action, B.L. Turner II et al. (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 41-54. De Jong, A., and G. Zalm, 1991: Scanning the Future. A long-term scenario study of the world economy 1990-2015. In Long-term Prospects of the World Economy, OECD, Paris, pp. 27-74. De Vries, H.J.M., J.G.J. Olivier, R.A. van den Wijngaart, G.J.J. Kreileman, and A.M.C. Toet, 1994: Model for calculating regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air, Soil Pollut. global climate scenarios. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 76, 79-131. De Vries, B., M. Janssen, and A. Beusen, 1999: Perspectives on global energy futures – simulations with the TIME model. Energy Policy, 27, 477-494. De Vries, B., J. Bollen, L. Bouwman, M. den Elzen, M. Janssen, and E. Kreileman, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in an equity-, environment- and service-oriented world: An IMAGE-based scenario for the next century. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (in press). Dietz, J., C.D. Elvidge, A. Gritsevskyi, and A. Grubler, 2000: Night satellite imagery data and socio-economic activity variables: Current patterns and long-term simulations. IR-00-XX, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria (http://www.nasa.ac.at/Publications/Catalogue). Durand, J.D., 1967: The modern expansion of world population. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 111(3), 136-159. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, and C. MacCracken, 1994: Advanced energy technologies and climate change: An analysis using the Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM). PNL-9798, UC-402, Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Richland, WA. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, H. Pitcher, R. Richels, T. Wigley, and C. MacCracken, 1996a: An integrated assessment of climate change and the accelerated introduction of advanced energy technologies: An application of MiniCAM 1.0. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1(4), 311-339. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, R. Sands, R. Brown, and H. Kheshgi, 1996b: Agriculture, land-use, and commercial biomass energy: A preliminary integrated analysis of the potential role of biomass energy for reducing future greenhouse-related emissions. PNNL-11155, Pacific Northwest National Laboratories, Washington, D.C. EIA (Energy Information Administration), 1997: International Energy Outlook. EIA, Washington, D.C. EIA (Energy Information Administration), 1999: International Energy Outlook. EIA, Washington, D.C. Elvidge, C.D., K.E. Baugh, E.A. Kihn, H.W. Kroehl, E.R. Davis, and C. Davis, 1997a: Relation between satellite observed visible to near infrared emissions, population, and energy consumption. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 18, 1373-1379. Elvidge, C.D., K.E. Baugh, K.E. Hobson, E.A. Kihn, H.W. Kroehl, H.W. Davis, E.R. Davis, and D. Cocero, 1997b: Satellite inventory of human settlements using nocturnal radiation emissions: A contribution for the global toolchest. Global Change Biology, 3, 387-395. Elvidge, C.D., K.E. Baugh, E.A. Kihn, H.W. Kroehl, and E.R. Davis, 1997c: Mapping of city lights using DMSP Operational Linescan System data. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 63, 727-734. Elvidge, C.D., K.E. Baugh, J.B. Dietz, T. Bland, P.C. Sutton, and H.W. Kroehl, 1999: Radiance calibration of DMSP-OLS low-light imaging data of human settlements. Remote Sensing of Environment, 68, 77-88. Foster, J.L., 1983: Observations of the earth using nighttime visible imagery. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 4, 785-791. Gallo, K.P., J.D. Tarpley, A.L. McNab, and T.R. Karl, 1995: Assessment of urban heat islands: a satellite perspective. Atmospheric Research, 37, 37-43. An Overview of Scenarios 237 Gallopin, G., A. Hammond, P. Raskin, and R. Swart, 1997: Branch Points. PoleStar Series Report 7, Stockholm Environment Institute, Boston, MA. Glenn, J.C., and T.J. Gordon (eds.), 1997: State of the Future: Implications for Actions Today. The Millennium Project, American Council for the United Nations University, Washington, D.C. Glenn, J.C., and T.J. Gordon, 1999: The Millennium Project: Issues and opportunities for the future. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 61(2), 97-208. Godet, M., P. Chapuy, and G. Comyn, 1994: Global scenarios: Geopolitical and economic context to the year 2000. Futures, 26(4), 275-288. Grubler, A., 1990: The Rise and Fall of Infrastructures. Physica Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany. Grubler, A., and N. Nakicenovic, 1994: International burden sharing in greenhouse gas reduction. Environment, Environment Working Paper 55, World Bank, Washington, D.C. Grubler, A., and N. Nakicenovic, 1996: Decarbonizing the global energy system. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 53(1), 97-110. Grubler, A., 1998a: Technology and Global Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 452 pp. Grubler, A., 1998b: A review of global and regional sulfur emission scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 383-418. HABITAT (United Nations Centre for Human Settlements), 1996: An Urbanizing World: Global Report on Human Settlements 1996. Oxford University Press, Oxford. Hammond, A., 1998: Which World? and Schuster, New York, N.Y. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1997. IEA Energy Technology R&D Statistics. IEA/OECD, Paris. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1998. World Energy Outlook. IEA/OECD, Paris. IGU (International Gas Union), 1997. World Gas Prospects: Strategies and Economics. Proceedings of the 20th World Gas Conference, Copenhagen (http://www.wgc.org/proceedings). IIASA–WEC (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis – World Energy Council), 1995. Global Energy Perspectives to 2050 and Beyond. WEC, London. Imhoff, M. L., W. T. Lawrence, D. C. Stutzer, and C. D. Elvidge, 1997. A technique for using composite DMSP/OLS “city lights” satellite data to accurately map urban areas. Remote Sensing of Environment, 61, 361–370. Jiang, K., T. Masui, T. Morita, and Y. Matsuoka, 2000. Long-term GHG emission scenarios of Asia-Pacific and the world. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2–3) (In press). Kaplan, R., 1996. The Ends of the Earth: A Journey at the End of the 21st Century. Random House, New York, N.Y. Kinsman, F., 1990. Millennium: Towards Tomorrow’s Society. W. H. Allen, London. Klein Goldewijk, C. G. M., and J. J. Battjes, 1995. The Image 2 Hundred Year (1890–1990) Data Base of the Global Environment (HYDE). Report No. 481507008, RIVM, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. La Rovere, E. L., 1998. Climate change convention: a tool of sustainable development. Economies et Sociétés, Série F, 36(1), 247–259. Lashof, D., and Tirpak, D. A., 1990. Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate. 21P-2003, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. Lawrence, R. Z., A. Bressand, and T. Ito, 1997. A Vision for the World Economy: Openness, Diversity and Cohesion. The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Leach, M. A., 1998. Culture and sustainability. In UNESCO 1998 World Culture Report: Culture, Creativity and Markets. UNESCO Publishing, Paris. Leggett, J., W. J. Pepper, and R. J. Swart, 1992. Emissions Scenarios for IPCC: An Update. In Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J. T. Houghton, B. A. Callander, S. K. Varney (eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Lo, C. P., and R. Welch, 1977. Chinese urban population estimates. Annals, Association of American Geographers, 67, 246–253. Lutz, W. (ed.), 1996. The Future Population of the World: What Can We Assume Today? 2nd Edition. Earthscan, London. Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov, 1997. Doubling of world population unlikely. Nature, 387(6635), 803–805. Maddison, A., 1989. The World Economy in the 20th Century. OECD Development Centre Studies, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris. Maddison, A., 1995. Monitoring the World Economy 1820–1992. OECD Development Centre Studies, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris. Manne, A. S., and R. Richels, 1992. Buying Greenhouse Insurance: The Economic Costs of CO₂ Emission Limits. The MIT Press, Cambridge. Marchetti, C., and N. Nakicenovic, 1979. The Dynamics of Energy Systems and the Logistic Substitution Model. RR-79-13, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Messner, S., and M. Strubegger, 1991. User’s Guide to CO2DB: The IIASA CO2 Technology Data Base Version 1.0. WP-91-31a, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Messner, S., and M. Strubegger, 1995. User’s Guide for MESSAGE III. WP-95-69, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Mohan Rao, J., 1998. Culture and economic development. In 1998 World Culture Report: Culture, Creativity and Markets, UNESCO Publishing, Paris. Mori, S., and M. Takahashi, 1999. An integrated assessment model for the evaluation of new energy technologies and food productivity. International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 11(1–4), 1–18. Mori, S., 2000. The development of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios using an extension of the MARIA model for the assessment of resource and energy technologies. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2–3) (In press). Morita, Y., Y. Matsuoka, M. Kainuma, and H. Harasawa, 1994. AIM – Asian Pacific integrated model for evaluating policy. for evaluating policy options to reduce GHG emissions and global warming impacts. In Global Warming Issues in Asia. S. Bhattacharya et al. (eds.), AIT, Bangkok, pp. 254-273. Morita, T., and H.-C. Lee, 1998. IPCC SRES Database, Version 0.1. Emission Scenario Database prepared for IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (http://www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). Munasinghe, M. and R. Swart, 2000. Climate change and its linkages with development, equity and sustainability. Proceedings of the IPCC expert meeting, Colombo, Sri Lanka, April 1999. Nakicenovic, N., 1987. Technological substitution and long waves. In The Long Wave Debate. T. Vasko (ed.), Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 76-103. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grubler, A. Inaba, S. Messner, S. Nilsson, et al., 1993. Long-term strategies for mitigating global warming. Energy, 18(5), 401-609. Nakicenovic, N., 1996. Freeing energy from carbon. Daedalus, 125(3), 95-112. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grubler, H. Ishitani, T. Johansson, G. Marland, J. R. Moreira, and H.-H. Rogner, 1996. Energy primer. In Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. R. Watson, M. C. Zinyowera, R. Moss (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 75-92. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grubler, and A. McDonald (eds.), 1998. Global Energy Perspectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development), 1998. Energy Prices and Taxes. OECD, Paris. Olivier, J. G. J., A. F. Bouwman, C. W. M. van der Maas, J. J. M. Berdowski, C. Veldt, J. P. J. Bloos, A. J. H. Visschedijk, P. Y. J. Zandveld, and J. L. Haverlag, 1996. Description of EDGAR Version 2.0. A set of global emission inventories of greenhouse gases and ozone-depleting substances for all anthropogenic and most natural sources on a per country basis and on 1° × 1° grid. Report 771060002, National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. Pepper, W. J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992. Emissions scenarios for the IPCC: An update. Assumptions, methodology, and results. Support document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J. T. Houghton, B. A. Callandar, S. K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pepper, W. J., Barbour, W., Sankovski, A., and Braaz, B., 1998. No-policy greenhouse gas emission scenarios: revisiting IPCC 1992. Environmental Science & Policy, 1, 289-312. Peterson, J. L., 1994. The Road to 2015: Profiles of the Future. Waite Group Press, Publishers Group West, Mill Valley, CA. Pohl, F., 1994. A Visit to Belindia. In The World of 2044: Technological Development and the Future of Society. C. Sheffield, M. Alonso, M. A. Kaplan (eds.), Paragon House, St. Paul, MN, pp. 189-197. Raskin, P., G. Gallopin, P. Gutman, A. Hammond, and R. Swart, 1998. Bending the Curve: Toward Global Sustainability. A report of the Global Scenario Group, PoleStar Series Report 8, Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm, 90 + A-38 pp. Riahi, K., and R. A. Roehrl, 2000. Greenhouse gas emissions in a dynamics-as-usual scenario of economic and energy development. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Roehrl, R. A., and K. Riahi, 2000. Technology dynamics and greenhouse gas emissions mitigation - a cost assessment. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Rogner, H.-H., 1997. An assessment of world hydrocarbon resources. Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 22, 217-262. Rotmans, J., and H. J. M. de Vries (eds), 1997. Perspectives on Global Futures: the TARGETS approach. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Sankovski, A., W. Barbour, and W. Pepper, 2000. Quantification of the IS99 emission scenario storylines using the atmospheric stabilization framework (ASF). Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Schipper, L., and S. Meyers, 1992. Energy Efficiency and Human Activity: Past Trends, Future Prospects. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Schwartz, P., 1991. The Art of the Long View: Three global scenarios to 2005. Doubleday Publications, New York, NY. Schwartz, P., 1996. The New World Disorder. WIRED Special Edition 1.1.0 (See also Global Business Network (http://www.gbn.org/scenarios)). Shell, 1993. Global Scenarios 1992-2020. PL-93-S-04, Group Planning, Shell International, London. Shin, J. S., 1996. The Economics of the Latecomers. Routledge Studies in the Growth Economics of Asia, Routledge, London. Shinn, R. L., 1985. Forced Options: Social Decisions for the 21st century, 2nd edition. The Pilgrim Press, New York, NY. Sørensen, B., and P. Meibom, 1998. GIS Tools for Renewable Energy Modelling. Paper presented at the World Renewable Energy Congress V, Florence, 19-25 September 1998, Italy. Published in Renewable Energy, 16(1-4) (1999), 1262-1267. Sørensen, B., R. Kümmel, and P. Meibom, 1999. Long-term Scenarios f Energy Demand and Supply: Four Global Greenhouse Mitigation Scenarios. IMFUFA 359, Roskilde University, Denmark. Strubegger, M., and I. Reitgruber, 1995. Statistical Analysis of Investment Costs for Power Generation Technologies. WP-95-109, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 21 pp. Sullivan, W.T. III, 1989. A 10 km resolution image of the entire night-time earth based on cloud-free satellite photographs in the 400-1100 μm band. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 10, 1-5. Sutton, P., D. Roberts, C. Elvidge, and H. Meij, 1997. A comparison of nighttime satellite imagery and population density for the continental United States. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 63, 1303-1313. Tobler, W.R., 1969. Satellite confirmation of settlement size coefficients. Area, 1, 30-34. UN (United Nations), 1990. Global Outlook 2000: An Economic, Social and Environmental Perspective. United Nations Publications, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1993a. Human Development Report 1993. United Nations, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1993b. UN MEDS Macroeconomic Data System, MSPA Data Bank of World Development Statistics. MEDS/DTA/1 MSPA-BK 93, Long-Term Socio-Economic Perspectives Branch, Department of Economic and Social Information & Policy Analysis, United Nations, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1994. Report on the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1995. Report on the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6-12 March 1995, New York, N.Y. UN (United Nations), 1998. World Population Projections to 2150. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York, N.Y. UNCED (United Nations Conference of Environment and Development), 1992. Report of the United Nations Conference of Environment and Development, New York, N.Y. UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 1993. Human Development Report 1993. Oxford University Press, New York, N.Y. UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 1997. Human Development Report 1997. Oxford University Press, New York, N.Y. UNESCO, 1998. World Culture Report: Culture, Creativity and Markets. UNESCO Publishing, Paris. UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1992. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Convention text, UNEP/WMO Information Unit of Climate Change (IUCC) on behalf of the Interim Secretariat of the Convention, IUCC, Geneva. UNFPA (United Nations Population Fund), 1999. 6 Billion: A Time for Choices. The State of World Population 1999. UNFPA, New York (http://www.unfpa.org/swp/1999/pdf/swp99.pdf). Watson, R., M.C. Zinyowera, and R. Moss (eds.), 1996. Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 861 pp. WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development), 1998. Exploring Sustainable Development. WBCSD, Geneva. WEC (World Energy Council), 1993. Energy for Tomorrow's World: The Realities, the Real Options and the Agenda for Achievements. Kogan Page, London. Welch, R., 1980. Monitoring urban population and energy utilization patterns from satellite data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 9, 1-9. Wene, C.-O., 1996. Energy-economy analysis: linking the macroeconomic and systems engineering approaches. Energy, 21(9), 809-824. Weyant, J., 1995. Second Round Study Design for EMF 14: Integrated Assessment of Climate Change. Energy Modeling Forum, Terman Engineering Center, Stanford University, Stanford, CA (mimeo, deposited with TSU). Wilkerson, L., 1995. How to build scenarios. WIRED (Special Edition: The Future of the Future, October 13 1995), Conde Nast Publications, San Francisco, CA (http://wired.lycos.com/wired/scenarios/build.htm). World Bank, 1998. Global Economic Prospects and the Developing Countries: Beyond Financial Crisis. World Bank, Washington, D.C. World Bank, 1999. World Development Indicators. World Bank, Washington, D.C. Emission Scenarios CONTENTS 5.1. Introduction 241 5.2. Roadmap to the Scenarios 241 5.3. Carbon Dioxide 243 5.3.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Fossil Fuels and Industry 243 5.3.1.1. A1 Scenario Family 247 5.3.1.2. A2 Scenario Family 249 5.3.1.3. B1 Scenario Family 250 5.3.1.4. B2 Scenario Family 250 5.3.1.5. Inter-family Comparison 251 5.3.2. Land-Use Carbon Dioxide Emissions 252 5.3.3. Overview of Sectoral Carbon Dioxide Emissions 253 5.4. Other Greenhouse Gases 253 5.4.1. Methane 255 5.4.1.1. A1 Scenario Family 257 5.4.1.2. A2 Scenario Family 257 5.4.1.3. B1 Scenario Family 257 5.4.1.4. B2 Scenario Family 258 5.4.1.5. Inter-family Comparison 259 5.4.2. Nitrous Oxide 260 5.4.2.1. A1 Scenario Family 261 5.4.2.2. A2 Scenario Family 261 5.4.2.3. B1 Scenario Family 263 5.4.2.4. B2 Scenario Family 263 5.4.2.5. Inter-family Comparison 263 5.4.3. Halocarbons and Other Halogenated Compounds 264 Methane 255 5.4.1.1. A1 Scenario Family 257 5.4.1.2. A2 Scenario Family 257 5.4.1.3. B1 Scenario Family 257 5.4.1.4. B2 Scenario Family 258 5.4.1.5. Inter-family Comparison 259 5.4.2. Nitrous Oxide 260 5.4.2.1. A1 Scenario Family 261 5.4.2.2. A2 Scenario Family 261 5.4.2.3. B1 Scenario Family 263 5.4.2.4. B2 Scenario Family 263 5.4.2.5. Inter-family Comparison 263 5.4.3. Halocarbons and Other Halogenated Compounds 264 5.4.3.1. Hydrofluorocarbons 266 5.4.3.2. Perfluorocarbons 268 5.4.3.3. Sulfur hexafluoride 269 5.5. Aerosols and Ozone Precursors 269 5.5.1. Ozone Precursors: Nitrogen Oxides, Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds, and Carbon Monoxide 270 5.5.1.1. Nitrogen Oxides 270 5.5.1.2. Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds 270 5.5.1.3. Carbon Monoxide 272 5.5.2. Sulfur 273 5.5.2.1. A1 Scenario Family 276 5.5.2.2. A2 Scenario Family 278 5.5.2.3. B1 Scenario Family 278 5.5.2.4. B2 Scenario Family 278 5.5.2.5. Inter-family Comparison 278 5.6. Regional Distribution and Gridding 280 5.6.1. Regional Distribution 280 5.6.1.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Fossil Fuels and Industry 280 5.6.1.2. Land-Use Carbon Dioxide Emissions 286 5.6.1.3. Total Carbon Dioxide Emissions 286 5.6.1.4. Methane 287 5.6.1.5. Nitrous Oxide 287 5.6.1.6. Halocarbons and Other Halogenated Compounds 288 5.6.1.7. Sulfur 289 5.6.2. Gridded Sulfur Emissions 291 References 291 Emission Scenarios 241 5.1 Introduction In this chapter emission estimates for radiatively important gases generated in 40 Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) scenarios are present. These gases are carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), nitrogen oxides (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), sulfur dioxide (SO2), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) (see Table 5-1). Emission estimates presented here span the interval from 1990 to 2100 at the global level and at the level of four SRES macro-regions (OECD90, REF, ASIA, and ALM; see Appendix IV). In addition, sulfur emission estimates are presented in the regional gridded format to assist in quantifying the effects at the local level. Links between emissions and the underlying driving forces presented in Chapter 4 are illustrated also. As a result of differences in modeling and estimation approaches, base-year (1990) emission values in SRES scenarios developed using different models show substantial variation. To facilitate both use of the scenarios and comparisons across scenarios and families, base-year emissions in all 40 SRES scenarios were standardized using one common set of values (see Box 5-1). With a few clearly indicated exceptions, only standardized emission values are discussed in this chapter. A complete set of standardized emissions, along with other quantitative scenario information, is provided in Appendix VII. The first section in this chapter presents a “roadmap” that serves as an orientation to the 40 SRES scenarios. The roadmap gives a simple taxonomy that compares input parameters, as represented by the four scenario families, and emission outputs, as represented by the 1990 to 2100 cumulative CO2 emissions. The subsequent sections discuss in detail emissions of each gas over the next 100 years to 2100. 5.2. Roadmap to the Scenarios A classification scheme is presented here to assist the reader in understanding the links between driving forces and scenario outputs. This scheme can also be used to help select appropriate scenarios for further analysis (see Chapter 6). The SRES scenarios were developed as quantitative interpretations of the four alternative storylines that represent possible futures with different combinations of driving forces. These broad scenario families are broken down further into seven scenario groups, used here to classify the input driving forces (see also Table 4-20 in Chapter 4). 1 Emission trajectories of these ozone-depleting substances (ODSs) are not developed by the SRES team, but adopted from WMO/UNEP (1998). The scenario outputs of most interest are emissions of GHGs, SO2, and other radiatively important gases. However, the categorization of scenarios based on emissions of multiple gases is quite difficult. All gases that contribute to radiative forcing should be considered, but methods of combining gases such as the use of global warming potentials (GWP) are appropriate only for near-term GHG inventories.2 In addition, emission trajectories may display different dynamics, from monotonic increases to non-linear trajectories in which a subsequent decline from a maximum occurs. This particularly diminishes the significance of a focus on any given year, such as 2100. In light of these difficulties, the classification approach presented here uses cumulative CO2 emissions between 1990 and 2100. CO2 is the dominant GHG and cumulative CO2 emissions are expected to be roughly proportional to CO2 radiative forcing over the time scale considered (Houghton et al. 1996). Total cumulative CO2 emissions from the 40 SRES scenarios fall into the range from 773 to 2538 gigatonnes of carbon (GtC) with a median of 1509 GtC. To represent this range, the scenario classification uses four intervals: • Less than 1100 GtC (low). • Between 1100 and 1450 GtC (medium-low). • Between 1450 and 1800 GtC (medium-high). • Greater than 1800 GtC (high). Each CO2 interval contains multiple scenarios and scenarios from more than one family. Each category also includes one of the four marker scenarios. Figure 5-1 shows how cumulative CO2 emissions from the 40 SRES scenarios fit within the selected emission intervals. Table 5-2 provides an overview of this scenario classification and links the scenario outcomes with factors that drive them, organized by family and scenario group (see also Table 4-20). The rows in Table 5-2 represent the emission categories, while the columns represent the scenario families. The analysis of Table 5-2 reveals two key results: 2 During the approval process of the Summary for Policymakers at the 5th Session of Working Group III (WGIII) of the IPCC from 8 to 11 March 2000 in Katmandu, Nepal, it was decided to combine the A1C and A1G groups into one “fossil intensive” group A1FI in contrast to the non-fossil group A1T, and to select two illustrative scenarios from these two A1 groups to facilitate use by modelers and policy makers. This leads to six scenario groups that constitute the four scenario families, three of which are in the A1 family. All scenarios are equally sound. In particular, the IPCC Working Group 1 (WGI) Second Assessment Report (SAR) GWPs are calculated for constant concentrations. In long-term scenarios, concentrations may change significantly, as do GWP values. It is unclear how to apply GWPs to long-term scenarios in a meaningful manner. In addition, the GWP approach is not applicable to gases such as SO2 and ozone precursors. 242 Emission Scenarios Box 5-1: Scenario Standardization One of the primary reasons for developing emissions scenarios is to enable coordinated studies of climate change, climate impacts, and mitigation options and strategies. With the multi-model approach used in the SRES process, 1990 and 2000 emissions do not agree in scenarios developed using different models. In addition, even with agreed reference values, it is time consuming and often impractical to fine-tune most integrated assessment models to reproduce a particular desired result. Nevertheless, differences in the base year and 2000 emissions may lead to confusion among the scenario users. Therefore, the 1990 and 2000 emission estimates were standardized in all the SRES scenarios, with emissions diverging after the year 2000. The procedure for selecting 1990 and 2000 emission values and the subsequent adjustments to scenario emissions are described in this box. The standardized scenarios share the same values for emissions in both 1990 and 2000. Emissions for the year 2000 are, of course, not yet known and 1990 emissions are also uncertain. The 1990 and 2000 emission estimates for all gases, except SO2, were set to be equal to the averages of initial values in the unadjusted four marker scenarios. This was carried out at the four-region level, and summed to obtain the standardized global totals. The resultant estimates are within relevant uncertainty ranges for each substance, but should not be interpreted as “endorsed” by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to represent values for either global or regional emissions. estimates for all gases, except SO2, were set to be equal to the averages of initial values in the unadjusted four marker scenarios. This was carried out at the four-region level, and summed to obtain the standardized global totals. The resultant estimates are within relevant uncertainty ranges for each substance, but should not be interpreted as “endorsed” by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to represent values for either global or regional emissions. Rather, they are the standardized base-year estimates used for the emissions scenarios. From 2000 to 2100, emissions in all the scenarios (except CO2 emissions from land-use and SO2 emissions) were adjusted by applying a constant offset equal to the difference between the standardized 2000 value and the scenario-specific 2000 value. The purpose was to smooth scenario trajectories between 2000 and 2010. This procedure results in small distortions for those emissions that rise with time, or at least that do not ultimately decrease by a large amount as compared to the base year. However, for emissions that fall significantly over time, such as those from deforestation or of SO2, this procedure can cause more significant distortions and can even change the sign of the emission estimates at later times (i.e., change positive emission estimates into negative ones and vice versa). To avoid these distortions, for the aforementioned emissions, the year 2000 offset was reduced by 10% per decade, cumulatively, to make the offset zero by the year 2100. This allows preservation of the shape of emission trajectories and still ensures the 2000 standardization. The non-standardized scenario values are available from the modeling teams upon request, although the standardized values should be used for most purposes. • Similar future cumulative CO2 emissions may emerge from different sets of driving forces; • Conversely, similar future states of the world with respect to socio-economic development may yield different outcomes in terms of cumulative CO2 emissions. Similar cumulative CO2 emissions can be attained in very different social, economic, and technological circumstances. High emission levels of the A2 marker scenario (A2-ASF) are also attained in all the A1 family scenarios with high fossil-fuel use (A1C and A1G groups), for example in A1G-MiniCAM. Medium-high emissions are attained in most of the A1 group scenarios (including the A1B marker, A1B-AIM), but also in scenarios from the B2 scenario family with high fossil-fuel use (e.g., B2-ASF). Medium-low emissions, which are characteristic of the B2 family, including the B2 marker (B2-MESSAGE), are also attained in the A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario, which illustrates the transition between the A2 and A1 families. Finally, low emission levels result from almost all the B1 family scenarios (including the B1 marker, B1-IMAGE) as well as from scenarios that belong to the A1T high-technology scenario group (e.g., A1T-MARIA). In Table 5-2, italics are used for examples of scenarios within each emission category that illustrate alternative ways to achieve cumulative CO2 emissions similar to those of the marker scenarios. 5.3. Carbon Dioxide CO2 is the largest contributor to anthropogenic radiative forcing of the atmosphere. As described in more detail in Chapter 3, the main sources of anthropogenic CO2 emissions are fossil fuel combustion and the net release of carbon from changes in terrestrial ecosystems, commonly referred to as land-use changes. To a lesser extent, CO2 is emitted by industrial activities, in particular by cement production (Table 5-3). 5.3.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Fossil Fuels and Industry As shown in Table 5-3, fossil fuels were the main source of CO2 emissions in 1990. Therefore, it is expected that future CO2 emission levels will depend primarily on the total energy consumption and the structure of energy supply. The total energy consumption is driven by population size, level of affluence, technological development, environmental concerns, and other factors. The composition of energy supply is determined by estimated reserves of fossil fuel and the availability, relative efficiency, and cost of supply technologies. Emissions from gas flaring and industrial emissions are much lower in comparison with energy-related emissions; for simplification, in this discussion they are added to the latter. In 1990, the global emissions from cement made up about 2.5% of the total global CO2 emissions (Houghton et al., 1995). Figure 5-2 shows standardized carbon emissions from fossil energy and industry for the 40 SRES scenarios. Sample statistics (in terms of percentiles, means, and medians) are indicated against the background of 40 individual scenarios that make up the SRES scenario set. The figure also presents emissions ranges spanned by each of the four scenario families in 2100. SRES scenarios cover a wide range of annual emissions, and the uncertainties in future emission levels increase with time. Up to about the 2040s and the 2050s, emissions tend to rise in all scenarios, albeit at different rates. Across scenarios this reflects changes in the underlying driving forces, such as population, economic output, energy demand, and the share of fossil fuels in energy supply. By 2050, the emissions range covered by the 40 SRES scenarios is from about 9 to 27 GtC, with the mean and median values equal to about 15 GtC. The range between the 25th and 75th percentiles of emissions (the “central tendencies”) extends from 12 to 18 GtC (i.e. from twice to thrice that in 1990). Within this interval lie three of the four marker scenarios. However, a fair number of scenarios (eight out of 40) also indicate the possibility of much higher emissions (in the 18 to 27 GtC range) that reflect an increase by a factor of up to 4.5 over 60 years (1990 to 2050). Another eight SRES scenarios have 2050 emissions below the 25th percentile (Figure 5-2). Beyond 2050, the uncertainties in energy and industrial CO2 emissions continue to increase. By 2100, the range of emissions across the 40 SRES scenarios is between 3 and 37 GtC, which reflects either a decrease to half the 1990 levels or an increase by a factor of six. Emissions between the 25th and 75th percentiles range from 9 to 24 GtC, while the range of the four marker scenarios is even wider, 5 to 29 GtC. The 2100 median and mean of all 40 scenarios are 15.5 and 17 GtC, respectively. As time passes in the scenarios, uncertainties not only increase with respect to absolute levels of CO2 emissions, but also with Table 5-3: Global CO2, CH4, N2O, and CO emissions in the base year (1990) by source. CO2 [GtC] SAR SRES Range Standardized Total anthropogenic 6.0-8.2 7.0-7.5 7.1 Fossil fuel and cement production 5.0-6.0 5.8-6.5 6.0 Land-use change 0.6-2.6 1.0-1.4 1.1 CH4 [Mt CH4] Total anthropogenic Fossil fuel related Total biospheric Enteric fermentation Animal waste Rice paddies Biomass burning Landfills Domestic sewage Total natural / 204-250) 200-350 / 80-97 / 29-61 65-100 / 27-46) 51-62 20-30 / 310 N2O (Mt N) Total anthropogenic Cultivated soils Cattle and feed lots Biomass burning Industrial sources Total natural Total identified 3.7-7.7 / 6.0-6.9 1.8-5.3 / 4.2-4.8 0.2-0.5 / 0.4-1.3 0.2-1.0 / 0.9-1.2 0.7-1.8 / 6.7 CO (Mt CO) Technological Biomass burning Biogenics Oceans Methane oxidation NMVOC oxidation Total 300-500 300-700 60-160 20-200 400-1000 200-600 1800-2700 / 752-1000 / 879 *Of which around 0.16 GtC are from cement production. respect to their trajectories. Scenarios portray different emission patterns that range from continuous increases up to 2100, through emissions that gradually level off by 2100, to trend reversals in which emissions begin to decline in the second half of the 21st century. These dynamic emission patterns diminish the significance of emission levels in any particular year, such as 2100. Over a long time horizon, it also becomes increasingly difficult to perceive the future in terms of "central tendencies." For instance, between 2050 to 2100, up to eight different scenarios from all four SRES scenario families have CO2 emission levels within 10% of the median of all 40 SRES scenarios. Thus, there is no single scenario family or individual scenario that has "median" emissions with respect to the entire uncertainty space described by the 40 SRES scenarios. Similar emission levels can arise from very different combinations of driving-force variables that are embedded in the SRES scenario families and groups. The wide ranges of energy and industry-related CO2 emissions in the SRES scenarios reflect the fact that the "best" or the "most likely" quantifications are nearly impossible to identify. The following discussion suggests that even scenarios with very similar input parameters (e.g., population and GDP) may produce a large variation in resultant CO2 emissions. Emission Scenarios 247 1990 2010 2030 2050 2070 2090 A1B AIM A1B ASF A1B IMAGE A1B MESSAGE A1B MINICAM A1B MARIA A1C AIM A1C MESSAGE A1C MINICAM A1G AIM A1G MESSAGE A1G MINICAM A1V1 MINICAM A1V2 MINICAM A1T AIM A1T MESSAGE A1T MARIA A2 AIM A2G IMAGE A2 MESSAGE A2 MINICAM A2 A1 MINICAM B1 IMAGE B1 AIM B1 ASF B1 MESSAGE B1 MARIA B1 MINICAM B1T MESSAGE B1HIGH MESSAGE B1HIGH MINICAM B2 MESSAGE B2 AIM B2 ASF B2 IMAGE B2 MARIA B2 MINICAM B2HIGH MINICAM B2C MARIA Figure 5-2: Standardized global energy-related and industrial CO2 emissions for 40 SRES scenarios, classified into four scenario families (each denoted by a different color code: A1, red; A2, brown; B1, green; B2, blue). Marker scenarios are shown with thick lines without ticks, globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). Black lines show percentiles, means, and medians for the 40 SRES scenarios. For numbers on the two additional illustrative scenarios A1FI and A1T see Appendix VII. 5.3.1.1. A1 Scenario Family Rapid economic growth in the A1 family scenario leads to high energy demand and hence to a steep increase in CO2 emissions in the first decades of the 21st century. Structural changes in the energy supply become effective only in the longer term because of the inertia caused by long periods of capital turnover. With respect to alternative energy supply technologies, the A1B scenario group assumes a "balanced" approach, in which none of these technologies gain an overwhelming advantage. This scenario group includes the A1B marker scenario developed using the AIM model (Jiang et al., 2000). In addition to the A1 scenario group, variations that assumed fast advancements in specific energy supply sectors were explored (renewables, A1T; oil and gas, A1G; coal, A1C) (see Chapter 4). In the A1B-AIM marker scenario, the global average per capita final energy demand grows from 54 GJ in 1990 to 115 GJ in 2050 and to 247 GJ in 2100. Meanwhile, the final energy carbon intensity declines relatively slowly until 2050 (from the current 21 tC per TJ of final energy to 16 tC per TJ), which results in a steep increase in CO2 emissions in the first decades of the 21st century. After 2050, when structural changes in the energy sector take effect, carbon intensity declines rapidly to reach 7.5 tC per TJ. This more than offsets growing energy demand from a contracting but increasingly prosperous population, so that carbon emissions decline between the years 2050 and 2100. Emissions peak around 2050 at a level 2.7 times (16 GtC) that of 1990 and fall to around 13 GtC by 2100, which is about twice the current level (Figure 5-3a). The total, cumulative 1990 to 2100 carbon emissions** in the A1B-AIM scenario equal 1499 GtC (cumulative emissions from energy and industry only amount to 1437 GtC). Energy-related carbon emissions vary widely across alternative A1 group scenarios. The smallest differences with respect to the A1B marker scenario (A1B-AIM) are in the A1B-MESSAGE (Roehrl and Riahi, 2000) scenario, which used harmonized input assumptions for population, GDP, and final energy use at the level of the four regions (see Chapter 4). Resultant energy-related carbon emissions in A1B-MESSAGE closely match those of the A1B-AIM scenario, reaching 13.8 GtC by 2100, which indicates that energy supply technologies agree well between the AIM and MESSAGE models. Note that unless stated otherwise cumulative emissions reported in this chapter always refer to total carbon, while annual emissions in this section refer to energy and industry emissions only. 248 Emission Scenarios 40 Energy & Industry A1 Family 1990 2010 2030 2050 2070 2090 A1B AIM A1B ASF A1B IMAGE A1B MESSAGE A1B MINICAM A1B MARIA A1C AIM A1C MESSAGE A1C MINICAM A1G AIM A1G MESSAGE A1G MINICAM A1V1 MINICAM A1V2 MINICAM A1T AIM A1T MESSAGE A1T MARIA Figure 5-3a: Global emissions from fossil fuels and industry in the SRES A1 scenario family (standardized). The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). In the SPM, A1C and A1G scenarios are merged into one fossil-intensive A1FI scenario group (see also footnote 2). While still adhering to the "balanced" supply-mix assumption (see Section 4.3.1), other scenarios within the A1 balanced group span a larger range of future emissions around the A1B-AIM scenario. In part this results from different assumptions on global and regional GDP growth and energy-intensity improvements, but also from alternative interpretations of how to translate the concept of a "balanced" pathway of technological change (as described in the A1 scenario storyline) into model-specific technology assumptions. The A1B-ASF and A1B-IMAGE scenarios depict futures with a stronger reliance on fossil fuels (especially coal) than that in A1B-AIM. In 2050 this results in higher emissions (19 to 26 GtC versus 16 GtC for the A1B-AIM; see statistical tables in Appendix VII for more details). The emission pattern in the A1B-MARIA scenario (Mori, 2000) is quite different. This scenario does not reproduce an initial rapid growth in emissions, which reach a maximum around 2050 and subsequently decline. Instead, emissions grow more slowly and then level off. By 2050, the emissions in A1B-MARIA are well below those in A1B-AIM (13 versus 16 GtC). Two out of three A1 scenarios developed using the MiniCAM model (A1V1-MiniCAM and A1V2-MiniCAM) were based on somewhat different assumptions with respect to key scenario driving forces, which included lower energy intensity, less rapid decline in population after 2050, and lower incomes per capita (see Chapter 4 for more details). Emissions in these scenarios increase continuously during the 21st century to reach about 18 GtC by 2100 (see statistical tables in Appendix VII for more details). The emissions range spanned by all the A1 balanced scenario group in 2100 is from 13 to 18 GtC. Total, cumulative carbon emissions range from 1301 to 2073 GtC by 2100. This illustrates the importance during the 21st century to reach about 18 GtC by 2100 (see statistical tables in Appendix VII for more details). The emissions range spanned by all the A1 balanced scenario group in 2100 is from 13 to 18 GtC. Total, cumulative carbon emissions range from 1301 to 2073 GtC by 2100. This illustrates the importance of different assumptions on rates and direction of technological change in the energy sector for long-term emissions scenarios, which is further explored in the three additional scenario groups discussed below. Two alternative A1 scenario groups, A1G (oil and gas) and A1C (coal), explore high-fossil futures and one group, A1T, explores advanced technology futures. A1G and A1C have been combined into one fossil intensive scenario group A1FI in the SPM (see also footnote 2). Energy-related carbon emissions vary widely across these scenario groups in conjunction with the scenario assumptions as to roles of different energy sources (Figure 5-3a). The high fossil scenarios explore worlds that consume vast amounts of coal, or oil and gas, while with the advanced technology assumptions the role of fossil fuel declines strongly as nuclear and/or renewable sources are favored to supply the reduced final energy demand. The A1 fossil scenarios have essentially the same population, GDP, and final energy demand as the A1B marker, but have a primary energy system that relies mainly on fossil fuels. Based on cumulative CO2 emissions, scenarios from the A1 fossil groups (A1G and A1C) fall within the high emissions category, with A1G-MiniCAM falling roughly in the middle of the range spanned by the six A1 fossil scenarios (Table 5-2). The primary energy system in the A1G-MiniCAM scenario emerges as a result of rapid increases in the efficiency with which fossil resources can be recovered, especially in the most expensive grades of these resources; unconventional resources play an increasingly important role toward the end of the 21st century. Emissions Scenarios Figure 5-3b: Global CO2 emissions from fossil fuels and industry in the A2 scenario family (standardized). The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). These rapid technical changes, as well as relatively low rates of growth in the productivity of biomass and other non-fossil sources, imply a world that is heavily reliant on oil and gas. The three coal-based scenarios in this group (A1C-MESSAGE, A1C-MiniCAM, and A1C-AIM) assume rapid increases in the efficiency of synthetic fuel production, as well as relatively limited oil and gas resources. Three advanced technology or A1T scenarios fall in either the “low” or the “medium-low” cumulative emissions categories (Table 5-2). The A1T-MARIA scenario (Mori, 2000) achieves very low carbon emissions through the combination of a low final energy use (54% of that in A1B-AIM) and a rapid increase in the importance of non-fossil energy technologies in the primary energy system (81% by 2100). The resultant CO2 emissions range of all the A1 family scenarios is so wide that most of the remaining SRES scenarios fall within its bandwidth, from 4.3 to 37 GtC in 2100. The total cumulative carbon emissions of the A1 family scenarios also span a very wide range, from around 1000 GtC to more than 2500 GtC (Figure 5-1, Table 5-2). 5.3.1.2. A2 Scenario Family In the A2 scenario family, alternative energy technologies develop relatively slowly and fossil fuels maintain their dominant position in the energy supply mix. As oil and gas resources become scarcer and non-fossil alternatives remain underdeveloped, coal gains the leading role. Its share in the energy mix ranges from 45% to 52% in the harmonized scenarios (A2-ASF, A2-MESSAGE) and in other scenarios with similar input assumptions (A2-MiniCAM and A2-AIM). Global CO2 emissions in the A2 marker scenario implemented using the ASF model (Sankovski et al., 2000) increase by more than fourfold over their 1990 level, to reach 29 GtC by 2100 (Figure 5-3b). Total cumulative carbon emissions from the A2-ASF scenario amount to 1860 GtC by 2100. In other A2 scenarios, CO2 emissions range from 17 GtC (A2G-IMAGE5) to 33 GtC (A2-AIM) by 2100. The harmonized A2-MESSAGE scenario and the A2-MiniCAM scenario have very similar global CO2 emissions as compared to the marker. Slightly higher emissions, primarily caused by higher primary energy use, are generated in the A2-AIM scenario. Unlike the rest of the A2 family scenarios, the A2G-IMAGE scenario yields constant emissions after 2050. This emission trajectory is explained by the combination of a lower energy demand and a larger share of natural gas in the energy supply mix (see Chapter 4 for more details). Total cumulative carbon emissions in the A2 scenario group range between 1710 and 1860 GtC by 2100. A variant of the A2 storyline, developed with the MiniCAM model (A2-A1-MiniCAM), explores a world in which economic growth and population follow a “hybrid” trajectory, which have traits of both the A2 and A1 storylines. As described in Box 4-6, A2-A1-MiniCAM has a lower population than other scenarios of the A2 family, and a slower rate of economic growth in the first half of the 21st century. These in turn limit the growth in final energy demand until after the onset of rapid economic growth around 2050. Emissions also rise rapidly during the post-2050 period, as the large growth in energy consumption results mostly from coal, oil, and gas. Two out of the six A2-family scenarios, A2-ASF and A2-AIM, fall into the “high” cumulative CO2 emissions category. Three scenarios, A2-MESSAGE, A2-IMAGE, and A2-MiniCAM, belong to the “medium-high” category, and only the A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario with its drastically different assumptions about key driving forces falls in the “medium-low” category. 5.3.1.3. B1 Scenario Family The strong trend toward ecologically more compatible consumption and production patterns in the B1 family is reflected by structural changes toward less energy- and material-intensive activities, which lead to a partial decoupling of welfare and energy demands. In the B1 marker scenario (B1-IMAGE; de Vries et al., 2000) the rapid technological change toward resource saving and ecologically sound solutions is assumed to spread very quickly, facilitated by high capital stock turnover rates in currently less developed regions. As a result, energy requirements in B1-IMAGE increase slowly and a shift away from fossil fuels eventually breaks the already slow upward trend in carbon emissions (Figure 5-3c). Emissions peak around 2040 at 12 GtC, twice the 1990 level, and by 2100 the emissions fall below the base-year level to 5 GtC. Total cumulative carbon emissions in the B1-IMAGE scenario amount to 983 GtC by 2100. As for A1, the population projection adopted for this scenario family declines after 2050. Rates of energy-intensity improvement in the first half of the 21st century range quite widely in B1 family scenarios, and lead to emission levels from 8.5 (B1T-MESSAGE) to 17.5 (B1-ASF) GtC in 2050. By 2100 the gap in annual emissions narrows again, with final emissions between 3 and 8 GtC in all the B1 scenarios (except B1-High-MiniCAM). The B1 family also includes one scenario in which energy-related emissions continue to increase throughout the modeling period, B1-High-MiniCAM. In this scenario the final energy demand is assumed to rise more rapidly with increasing income than in the rest of the B1 scenarios. (The total carbon emissions in B1-High-MiniCAM decline slightly later in the modeling period because of reduced land under management and associated carbon sequestration.) Total cumulative carbon emissions in the B1 scenario group ranges between 770 and 1390 GtC by 2100. All but two B1 scenarios fall in the low cumulative emissions category (Table 5-2). 5.3.1.4. B2 Scenario Family In the B2 world, dynamics of technological change continue along historical trends (“dynamics as usual”). The exploitation of comparative regional advantages in energy resources and technologies leads to regionally different mixes of clean fossil and non-fossil supply. With the continued growth of population and of income per capita, a steady increase of CO2 emissions the continued growth of population and of income per capita, a steady increase of CO2 emissions emerges in the B2 marker (Riahi and Roehrl, 2000), developed using the MESSAGE model (B2-MESSAGE). By 2050 emissions reach 11 GtC and by 2100 they reach 14 GtC (Figure 5-3d). Total cumulative CO2 emissions in the B2 marker scenario amount to 1160 GtC by 2100. Emissions in the B2 scenarios with harmonized global input assumptions (population, GDP, final energy; B2-MESSAGE, B2-AIM, B2-MARIA) are very close in 2100. Differences in emissions are largest around 2050, which reflects the different patterns of structural change in the energy systems in anticipation of depletion of conventional oil and gas. The emissions range for non-harmonized scenarios in the B2 scenario group is larger – between 11.2 (B2-IMAGE*) and 15.4 (B2-ASF) GtC by 2050. Relatively high emissions in the B2-ASF scenario are explained by a large share of coal in the fuel mix, because of high oil and gas prices. In this scenario, coal is also widely used for synthetic liquid and gaseous fuel production. In 2100, B2-IMAGE emissions (9 GtC) drop below the B2 marker level, while in B2-ASF emissions continue to grow and reach 19 GtC by 2100. The B2 high scenario variant developed using MiniCAM assumes far less efficiency gains, smaller available resources of oil and gas, and less favorable development of solar power costs than in the marker. As in B2-ASF, the near exhaustion of oil supplies in B2High-MiniCAM leads to a heavy reliance on synthetic fuels to supply the needs of the transportation sector. Emissions in this scenario increase to 23 GtC by 2100. An additional alternative with more coal use (B2C-MARIA) was explored using the MARIA model. Emissions in this scenario are considerably higher than in the original B2-MARIA case, but are very close to those of B2-ASF (19 GtC). Total cumulative carbon emissions across the B2 scenario group range between 1164 and 1686 GtC by 2100. Three of the eight B2 family scenarios fall into the "medium-high" cumulative emissions category, and the five others fall into the "medium-low" category (Table 5-2). * The IMAGE results for the A2 and B2 scenarios are based on preliminary model experiments carried out in March 1998. As a result of limited resources it has not been possible to re-run these experiments. Hence, unlike for the IMAGE A1 and B1 scenarios, the IMAGE team has not been able to provide background data and details for these scenario calculations and the population and economic growth assumptions are not harmonized fully. 5.3.1.5. Inter-family Comparison Table 5-2 suggests fairly strong contrasts in the level of cumulative emissions across the four scenario families (note that estimates in Table 5-2 also include emissions from land use). A variety of available energy supply and demand options means that cumulative emissions in the A1 family span the entire set of emission categories. The A2 family scenarios, characterized by a large population and a relatively carbon-intensive energy system, fall into either the "high" scenario category or in the upper part of the "medium-high" category. Only the A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario falls in the "medium-low" category, because of low cumulative emissions prior to 2050. As a consequence of the low energy consumption and non-fossil energy systems associated with its sustainable development theme, the B1 family scenarios are concentrated in the "low" emissions category. Finally, representatives of the B2 family are present in the two middle categories. In addition to their cumulative emissions, the scenario families are characterized by very different emissions trajectories. The A1 fossil fuel scenarios have continuously increasing emissions, with rapid growth before 2050 and slower growth thereafter. The A1 scenarios with the "balanced" energy mix (e.g. the marker A1B-AIM) typically have emissions that decline after 2050, while the A1T technology scenarios have slower growth prior to 2050, and a steeper decline after 2050. As for the A1 fossil fuel scenarios, A2 family scenarios are characterized by high rates of growth in emissions prior to 2050 and subsequently continued growth but at lower rates. Unlike the rest of the A2 scenarios, the A2-A1-MiniCAM has more rapid growth in emissions after 2050 than before 2050, because per capita incomes in a number of developing regions do not reach a level at which per capita energy demands rise rapidly until the middle of the 21st century. The B1 family is characterized by lower growth in emissions prior to 2050, mostly because of lower rates of growth in energy demand, followed by declining emissions after 2050. Finally, the B2 family is characterized by relatively stable emissions post-2050, after roughly doubling emissions between 1990 and 2050. 5.3.2. Land-Use Carbon Dioxide Emissions Most changes in land use are induced by the demand for cropland and grassland, which is driven by the demand for food products, the extent of biomass energy use, and policies and practices associated with forest management. The 1990 land-use CO2 emissions remain fairly uncertain, estimated at 1.6 ± 1.0 GtC (Watson et al., 1996a); a similar level of uncertainty is attached to current land-use emissions. This uncertainty is reflected by the quantification of the SRES storylines – the 1990 emission estimates from different models range between 1.0 and 1.6 GtC, while the spread of estimates at the four-region level is even larger. For the sake of comparability, common, standardized (see Box 5-1 on standardization) emissions are established at 1.1 GtC in 1990 and 1.0 GtC in 2000, to reflect the net carbon flux from contemporary changes in forest cover. Generally, the SRES models use different approaches to estimate land-use change emissions – in some cases the only source of emissions is tropical deforestation, while in other cases more sources and sinks (including natural) are included. Moreover, methodological differences and uncertainties in carbon content, carbon cycling, and land classification result in seemingly inconsistent results between models that cover the same land-use sources. These features complicate a straightforward comparison between land-use emissions in scenarios generated by different SRES models. The most comprehensive treatment is embedded in the IMAGE model. For the sake of comparison the IMAGE team has made a tentative estimate of those (net) emissions that are reasonably consistent with what other models reported. These derived values are used in this report. Future trajectories of land-use CO2 emissions are shown in Figure 5-4. Emissions in the 40 SRES scenarios range widely in the same year and change significantly over time. In scenarios with continued deforestation, emissions rise initially, then reach a maximum, and finally decline with depletion of forestland that can be cleared. At the other end of the scenario spectrum, emissions turn negative and land-use changes become an increasing CO2 sink through afforestation. By 2020, the resultant uncertainty ranges between 0 and 3 GtC across all 40 SRES scenarios with a median of 1.1 GtC. By 2050, the scenario range shifts to between -0.7 and 1.2 GtC (median, 0.5 GtC). By 2100 the scenario range lies between -2.8 and 2.2 GtC, with a median of 0.0 GtC. Interestingly, in specific years (e.g., in 2050) scenarios from all four SRES families fall within a relatively narrow emissions corridor (i.e. at least one scenario from each of the four SRES scenario families falls within the 25th and 75th percentiles of the emission range). This indicates that similar levels of carbon fluxes related to land use could arise from widely different socio-economic driving forces, depending on future trends in food demand and dietary patterns, agricultural productivity growth, forest practices, etc. In general, the SRES CO2 land-use emissions follow the same pattern as found in the literature (see Chapter 3) – initially emissions increase because of continuing deforestation in developing regions and subsequently they decrease following a drop in population growth and increases in agricultural productivity. The main difference between the SRES scenarios and the literature reviewed in Chapter 3 lies in the maximum emission values, which are significantly lower in the SRES scenarios. Possibly this arises because the SRES models explicitly simulate land-use change as a function of pressure on the land (itself a function of agricultural productivity), while in the literature land-use CO2 emission scenarios are often based on trend extrapolation or statistical relationships (e.g. with population growth). The rapid economic development and technological advances assumed in the SRES storylines thus tend to mitigate CO2 emissions from deforestation, and in some cases lead to their reversal (e.g., turning deforested lands into carbon sinks). As suggested by Figure 5-4, no simple relation exists between the scenario families and land-use emissions. As in the case of energy-related emissions, the A1 family scenarios cover the widest range of emissions and trajectories. In most cases, emissions in these scenarios decline after 2030 to zero or negative (carbon sinks) values. However, in two scenarios (A1B-IMAGE and A1B-MARIA), emissions increase later in the 21st century, reflecting assumptions on additional land pressures. As a rule, scenarios of the A2 family follow the same convex trajectory energy-related emissions, the A1 family scenarios cover the widest range of emissions and trajectories. In most cases, emissions in these scenarios decline after 2030 to zero or negative (carbon sinks) values. However, in two scenarios (A1B-IMAGE and A1B-MARIA), emissions increase later in the 21st century, reflecting assumptions on additional land pressures. As a rule, scenarios of the A2 family follow the same convex trajectory as A1 scenarios, also with two exceptions (A2-IMAGE and A2-AIM). In accordance with the sustainability emphasis of the B1 family storyline, scenarios from this family have the lowest initial emissions, which by 2080 or earlier drop to zero or negative levels. The B1 family marker scenario (B1-IMAGE) has negative land-use emissions for most of the modeling period, a property directly related to B1's "environmental conservation" emphasis. Figure 5-4: Standardized global CO2 emissions from land-use changes (net balance between anthropogenic changes in sources and sinks) for 40 SRES scenarios, classified into the four scenario families (each denoted by a different color code - A1, red; A2, brown; B1, green; B2, blue). Marker scenarios are shown with thick lines without ticks, globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). Black lines show percentiles, means, and medians for the 40 SRES scenarios. For numbers on the two additional illustrative scenarios A1FI and A1T see Appendix VII. 5.3.3. Overview of Sectoral Carbon Dioxide Emissions As a result of different model specifications and detail, it is not possible to draw up consistent comparisons between sectoral emissions across different models. An overview of sectoral CO2 emissions by sector and source category is summarized in Box 5-2 on the basis of the results of the MESSAGE (for energy and industrial sources) and AIM (for land-use change sources) models. 5.4. Other Greenhouse Gases Non-CO2 GHGs (CH4, N2O, and halocarbons) account for about 40% of the total induced additional radiative forcing compared to pre-industrial times (Houghton et al., 1996). Whereas CO2 emissions are largely attributable to two major sources (energy and land use), other gases arise from many different sectors and applications as shown in Table 5-3. Consequently, their emission levels are more uncertain. Also Box 5-2: CO2 Emissions by Sector and Source for MESSAGE Scenarios Table 5-4 gives an overview of CO2 emissions by sector and source category according to the IPCC reporting format given in Watson et al. (1996b). The differences in sectoral detail across models mean a consistent comparison and sectoral CO2 emission balances are only possible within one particular modeling framework. Table 5-4 presents the scenario results as calculated with the MESSAGE model for 1990, 2050, and 2100 and for the four scenario families and their scenario groups. Emissions related to land-use change were derived from consistent model runs with the AIM model. As in Watson et al. (1996b), emissions are presented by sector, and emission categories adopt both supply and demand perspectives for energy-related CO2 emissions. The supply side CO2 balance accounts emissions at the point of energy combustion, that is at a coal-fired power plant (electric generation) or by burning coal in industrial boilers (direct fuel use by industry). Conversely, the demand side CO2 balance accounts emissions per end-use category, irrespective of whether emissions originate directly at the point of end-use or upstream in the energy conversion sector. For example, for residential and commercial energy uses, CO2 emissions include those from direct fuel combustion as well as those emissions that originate from the generation of electricity consumed by the residential and commercial sectors. Finally, an emissions balance by source category is given, in which emissions are accounted for at the level of primary energy (solids, liquids, and gases), again after Watson et al. (1996b). Non-energy emissions are included in a separate "others" category. Combined, these different emission balances can serve as data input for subsequent mitigation analyses at the sectoral level or at that of the entire economy. Box 5.2 continues the base-year emissions of non-CO2 GHGs are subject to considerable uncertainty, in particular when it comes to regional and sectoral breakdowns. Emissions of non-CO2 radiatively important gases are subject to considerable and unresolved uncertainties and are driven by a more complex set of forces than CO2 emissions. Therefore, the types of models employed for the SRES analyses are not expected to produce unambiguous and widely approved estimates of emissions of these gases for a period of over a century. Despite the limited knowledge, at some point in time causal relationships between driving forces and non-CO2 emissions need to be crafted into the models. of over a century. Despite the limited knowledge, at some point in time causal relationships between driving forces and non-CO2 emissions need to be crafted into the models for the sake of completeness. Even if new insights are generated by specialist researchers in certain fields of environmental science, and these become accepted as the mainstream view, their adoption in the models is often far from straightforward, as appropriate links to drivers may not be readily available in the underlying structure. Limited manpower and resources imply that priorities must be assigned when deciding on further model development, and as a consequence the models lag behind "common wisdom" in certain areas. Of course, this does not necessarily limit their abilities to capture major trends at a more aggregate level, the main purpose of these models. In the following sections emission trajectories generated in the SRES scenarios are presented and discussed. However, model structures and properties, and exogenous assumptions made by the modelers involved, may give rise to systematic deviations within scenario families that may prove very significant compared to average inter-family differences. Further investigation and analysis is required to understand these issues more fully. 5.4.1. Methane In the IPCC WGI SAR, anthropogenic CH4 emissions in the year 1990 were estimated at 375 ± 75 MtCH4 (Houghton et al., 1996) and are shown in Table 5-3. These emissions arise from a variety of activities, dominated by biogenic processes that are often subject to considerable uncertainties (see Chapter 3). CH4 emissions across the six models used to generate the SRES scenarios for 1990 range between 298 and 337 MtCH4. After standardization (see Box 5-1), the base-year emissions in the SRES scenarios were set to 310 MtCH4, within the range mentioned above. About one-quarter of the total emissions are related to fossil fuel extraction (CH4 emissions from coal mines, CH4 venting from oil extraction), transport and distribution (e.g., leakage from pipelines), and consumption (incomplete combustion). The biogenic sources include agriculture (enteric fermentation, rice paddies, and animal waste), biomass burning, and waste management (landfills, sewage). Based on this source list, future CH4 emission trajectories depend upon such variables as volumes of fossil fuels used in the scenarios, regional demographic and affluence developments, and assumptions on preferred diets and agricultural practices. Results from the 40 SRES scenarios indicate that uncertainties surrounding future CH4 emission levels are likely to increase over time (Figure 5-5). By 2050 the range across all scenarios is between 359 and 671 MtCH4, and the range increases further to levels between 236 and 1069 MtCH4 by 2100. This wide range in the SRES emissions reflects new information and additional uncertainties concerning certain source categories such as sewage systems. As for CO2 emissions related to land use (see Section 5.3.2), at least one scenario from all four SRES scenario families falls within the 25th and 75th percentiles of the emission range. Thus, very different future developments in energy and agricultural systems could lead to similar outcomes in terms of global CH4 emissions, even if the source categories and regional patterns of these emissions are very different. At the same time, the uncertainty range for any given scenario family is also substantial, as indicated by the range of 2100 emissions for the A1, A2, and B1 scenario families in Figure 5-5. The subsequent sections discuss CH4 emission trajectories for individual scenario families, with sectoral and regional patterns described on the basis of the output of marker scenarios. 5.4.1.1. A1 Scenario Family The A1 family of scenarios covers close to the full range of CH4 emissions in all the SRES scenarios (Figure 5-5). A1C-AIM shows the highest emissions before 2050 and A1G-MiniCam scenario shows them after 2050. marker scenarios. 5.4.1.1. A1 Scenario Family The A1 family of scenarios covers close to the full range of CH4 emissions in all the SRES scenarios (Figure 5-5). A1C-AIM shows the highest emissions before 2050 and A1G-MiniCAM scenario shows them after 2050 (Figure 5-6a). In three A1 fossil scenarios (A1G-MiniCAM, A1C-MiniCAM, and A1C-MESSAGE) and in both alternative MiniCAM scenarios (A1V1-MiniCAM and A1V2-MiniCAM) emissions increase continuously through the 21st century, while in the rest of the A1 scenarios emissions peak between 2030 and 2050 and decline thereafter. In the A1B marker scenario (A1B-AIM) emissions increase through 2030 and subsequently decline to levels similar to those in 1990 (Figure 5-6a). Almost all of the emissions dynamics in A1B-AIM are explained by a rise in emissions from landfills, sewage, and fossil fuel production. At the same time emissions from agriculture are relatively flat because better management of animal wastes and high productivity are assumed to offset the effect of increased food requirements (Table 5-5). Growing population and per capita income combined with increased use of landfills generates increasing emissions from landfills and sewage in developing countries through 2030. After 2030, declining population levels, the introduction of modern management techniques, and increased recycling reduces waste sent to landfills and thus emissions from these wastes. Emissions from biomass burning in A1B-AIM are assumed to decline steadily through the adoption of bio-recycling and other “no-waste” agricultural practices. Similarly, CH4 emissions from fossil fuel production and use grow through 2030 and subsequently decline as fossil fuel production falls. 5.4.1.2. A2 Scenario Family The A2 family of scenarios contributes the upper half of the full range of CH4 emissions in the SRES scenarios (Figure 5-5). The global CH4 emissions in the A2 family scenarios grow continuously throughout the 21st century and range from 550 to 1070 MtCH4 in 2100 (Figure 5-6b). The rate of growth depends on the scenario-specific dynamics of major CH4 emission drivers. Emissions in the A2-ASF scenario, which are close to the upper end of the range, are driven mainly by increases in coal production, livestock population, and waste management capacity to satisfy the needs of an expanding population (Table 5-5). At the lower end of the emission range are the two MiniCAM scenarios and A2-AIM. Relatively slow emission growth in the MiniCAM scenarios is attributed primarily to an increase in rice productivity (which offsets an increase in the area of rice fields) and a shift in livestock production from cattle to animal groups that have notably lower emission factors per animal (e.g. poultry and swine). In the A2-AIM scenario low CH4 emissions are caused by relatively low CH4 emission factors for coal production and a relatively slow increase in livestock production. 5.4.1.3. B1 Scenario Family The B1 family of scenarios covers the lower half of the full range of CH4 emissions in the SRES scenarios, with the B1-IMAGE marker scenario positioned at the low end of this range (Figure 5-5). Global emissions in B1-IMAGE grow through to 2030, driven primarily by increased emissions from landfills and sewage (Figure 5-6c). This growth is partially offset by declines in emissions from biomass burning (Table 5-5). After 2030, emissions level off and subsequently decline from 2050, a reflection of reductions in fossil fuel production and use. Emissions from other sources, which include enteric fermentation and rice production, also decline, primarily from the combination of stabilizing and declining populations with continued improvements in slaughter weight and off-take rate. The B1-AIM scenario lies in the middle of the range for the B1 family. CH4 emissions in this scenario increase through to 2050, with most of the increase associated with landfills and sewage systems. After 2050, emissions from landfills decline because of a combination of factors that include recycling and a declining population. Emissions from sewage decrease after 2050 through the decline in population. Emissions from rice production stay relatively flat because of increases in rice productivity. Emissions from fossil fuel production increase through to 2030 and subsequently decline, which mirrors the increase in production of fossil fuels through to 2030 and the increased use of renewable energy after 2030. Unlike other B1 scenarios, both MiniCAM cases have emissions that continuously increase (Figure 5-6c). The reason is a slow rise in non-energy system emissions for the B1-MiniCAM scenario, which offsets the decrease in energy system emissions and the nearly constant emissions in the agriculture sector. In the B1High-MiniCAM scenario, the additional energy demand designed into this scenario is met largely by an increased use of natural gas, which thus explains the faster rise in CH4 emissions in this scenario as compared to the base B1-MiniCAM scenario. Figure 5-6a: Standardized global CH4 emissions in the A1 family scenarios. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). In the SPM, A1C and A1G scenarios are merged into one fossil-intensive A1FI scenario group (see also footnote 2). Figure 5-6b: Standardized global CH4 emissions in the A2 family scenarios. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). 5.4.1.4. B2 Scenario Family CH4 emission trajectories of the B2 family of scenarios are located in the middle of the SRES range and (except for the B2-AIM scenario) follow very similar paths (Figure 5-6d). Similar emission profiles in B2 scenarios may have different explanations. The increase in emissions from 1990 to 2100 in the B2-MESSAGE scenario is predominantly from landfills and sewage, with fossil-fuel energy production as the second major source. However, in the B2-ASF scenario increasing volumes of CH4 are generated mostly in the energy and agricultural sectors. Unlike the rest of the B2 family, the B2-AIM scenario emissions after 2070 decline because of an increase in the CH4 recovery rate from energy and waste management systems. Figure 5-6c: Standardized global CH4 emissions in the B1 family scenarios. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). Figure 5-6d: Standardized global CH4 emissions in the B2 family scenarios. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). 5.4.1.5. Inter-Family Comparison Global CH4 emissions in all the four markers increase at about the same rate up to 2020 (Figure 5-5). After the early and rapid increase in agricultural productivity and a shift away from fossil fuels, emissions in the B1 marker (B1-IMAGE) level off and subsequently decline. Emissions in the other three markers continue to increase. Emissions in the A1B marker (A1B-AIM) grow to 2030 because of an increasing and much more affluent population in developing regions. The emissions subsequently decline until 2100 as the population growth slows and eventually reverses. Increases in efficiency and productivity, through rapid technological change, offset increases in consumption (A1 global GDP is the largest among the SRES storylines), so that by 2100 global emissions per person are lower than in 1990 even though average incomes grow very significantly (Table 5-5). In the A2 (A2-ASF) and B2 (B2-MESSAGE) markers, emissions increase throughout the whole time horizon to the year 2100. This increase is most pronounced in the A2 marker scenario, in which emissions reach about 900 MtCH4 by 2100 (about a three-fold increase of 1990 levels). The emission level by 2100 for the B2 marker, 600 MtCH4, is about twice as high as in 1990. The four SRES marker scenarios illustrate a complexity of relative impacts of technology, GDP, and population on CH4 emissions. In 2050 and 2100 the A2 and B2 markers have very similar per capita emissions, which indicates a certain similarity between the cumulative impact of economic, technological, and structural changes on emissions in both of these scenarios (in spite of as in 1990. The four SRES marker scenarios illustrate a complexity of relative impacts of technology, GDP, and population on CH₄ emissions. In 2050 and 2100 the A2 and B2 markers have very similar per capita emissions, which indicates a certain similarity between the cumulative impact of economic, technological, and structural changes on emissions in both of these scenarios (in spite of significant differences in the global average per capita incomes). Hence, differences in the absolute emission levels in these scenarios can be explained primarily by differences in population trajectories, with the A2 population in 2100 being 1.5 times larger than the B2 population. At the same time, differences in the absolute emissions between the A1B and B1 markers cannot be explained by population size (both markers have the same population trajectory), but instead result from the greater emphasis on “dematerialization” and “sustainability” in the B1 storyline. The two illustrative scenarios A1G-MiniCAM and A1T-MESSAGE display similar patterns of methane emissions as the A2 and B1 marker scenarios respectively and are therefore not discussed separately here. At the sectoral level, CH₄ emissions in the A1B marker originate primarily from landfills and sewage followed by fossil fuel production and agricultural animals (Table 5-5). Agricultural animals are the major source of emissions in the A2 marker, with fossil fuels being second, and landfills and sewage third in importance. In the B1 marker, fossil fuels produce the largest volumes of CH₄, followed by agricultural sources (Table 5-5). Finally, the B2 marker emissions originate primarily from landfills and sewage, followed by fossil fuels. 5.4.2. Nitrous Oxide Uncertainties in the estimates of current N₂O emissions (Table 5-3) are also reflected in base-year 1990 differences, between 4.8 and 6.9 MtN across the six models used to develop the SRES scenarios. The range across the four markers (Table 5-3) is not as wide, between 6.0 and 6.9 MtN, and leans more toward the higher end of the uncertainty range reported in Houghton et al. (1995). After standardization, 1990 N₂O emissions in the SRES scenarios were set to 6.7 MtN, well within the IPCC WGI SAR range (Table 5-3). Even more so than for CH₄, food supply is assumed to be a key determinant of future N₂O emissions. Size, age structure, and regional spread of the global population are likely to affect future emission trajectories, together with diets and rates of improvement in agricultural productivity. The representation of how these driving forces translate into N₂O emissions varies across the models because of differences in both sectoral coverage and emission factors. As a result, differences in emission trajectories are not only scenario dependent, but also model dependent, which illustrates additional uncertainties in our understanding and representation of driving forces and their influence on N₂O emissions. The range of emissions across all 40 SRES scenarios increases continuously over the 21st century (Figure 5-7). By 2100, N₂O emissions range between 5 and 20 MtN. Emission ranges also tend to be comparable across the four scenario storylines, an indication of the decisive impact of uncertainty in the modeling (mentioned above). Future N₂O emissions in the SRES scenarios tend to cluster into two broad groups – those that project relatively flat, even slightly declining, emissions and those that indicate continuously rising trends toward high emission levels. Some other scenarios (e.g. A1B-ASF, B1-ASF, and B1-IMAGE) indicate the possibility of transitional emission patterns in which N₂O emissions peak around 2050 and decline thereafter, more or less in step with the population size. As a result of differences in modeling approaches, no individual scenario tracks the mean or median across all 40 scenarios of the SRES set. 5.4.2.1. A1 Scenario Family The A1 family of scenarios covers close to the full range of N₂O emissions from the SRES scenarios (Figure 5-7). The A1G-MiniCAM scenario is at the high end of the A1 range (Figure 5-8a). Most of the emissions increase in this scenario is associated with the agriculture sector, primarily with animal manure management. Emissions are driven by a rapid increase in income that induces steep increases in meat and dairy consumption. The A1B-AIM marker scenario has emissions near the low end of the range. This scenario assumes that fertilizer use in developing countries is nearly saturated and that increased productivity comes from better management. A portion of nitrogen from fertilizers is also assumed to be stored indefinitely in underground water. However, the emissions from energy use in A1B-AIM increase until the third quarter of the 21st century, and reach a level about three times the 1990 volume. In the middle of the A1 family range lie emissions from the A1B-ASF and A1B-IMAGE scenarios (Figure 5-8a). In these scenarios, emissions growth to the 2050s is driven by growth in the agricultural and transportation sectors. Thereafter, emissions decline, primarily because of declining population levels and increases in agricultural productivity (lower production factor input per unit of output). As suggested by Figure 5-8a, differences in the energy supply system reflected by the four A1 scenario groups (A1G, A1C, A1T, and A1 or “balance”) are only partially translated into differences in N₂O emissions. For example, scenarios that rely on coal as the primary energy source span the range from 6 MtN (A1C-MESSAGE) to 16 MtN (A1C-MiniCAM). At the same time, trajectories of A1T “technology” scenarios are located in the lower end of the emissions range. 5.4.2.2. A2 Scenario Family N₂O emission trajectories of the A2 scenario family fall into two major groups. The first group includes the A2-AIM and A2-MESSAGE scenarios, and the rest of scenarios form the second group. The A2-AIM N₂O emissions increase at a relatively low rate and do not exceed 10 MtN in 2100 (Figure 5-8b), because of a relatively slow increase in nitrogen fertilizer input and omission of N₂O sources associated with animal wastes. N₂O emissions in the second group of scenarios (which includes the family marker A2-ASF) grow steadily throughout the 21st century, driven by an increased demand for food and associated increases in the animal waste and nitrogen fertilizer use (Table 5-6). In 2100 the emissions from this group of scenarios range from 15 to 20 MtN. Figure 5-8a: Standardized global emissions in the A1 family scenarios. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). In the SPM, A1C and A1G scenarios are merged into one fossil-intensive A1FI scenario group (see also footnote 2). Figure 5-8b: Standardized global N₂O emissions in the A2 family scenarios. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). Table 5-6: N₂O emissions (MtN) by source for the marker scenarios (A1B-AIM, A2-ASF, B1-IMAGE, and B2-MESSAGE). Categories are fertilized soils and manure, fossil fuel use and industrial processes (adipic and nitric acid production), and other emissions. The “other” cat 2080 2090 2100 Fertilized Soils + Manure A1B 4.41 4.32 4.30 4.29 4.28 4.26 4.23 4.20 4.17 4.15 4.15 4.14 A2 4.83 6.20 7.19 8.44 9.33 10.20 10.48 11.37 12.26 13.04 13.61 14.39 B1 4.70 5.10 5.60 6.10 6.30 6.30 6.10 5.90 5.60 5.20 4.90 4.50 B2 4.15 5.03 4.45 4.54 4.63 4.70 4.78 4.86 4.95 5.03 5.12 5.21 Industry + Fossil Fuels A1B 1.22 1.29 1.46 1.80 2.05 2.13 2.21 2.11 2.02 1.95 1.92 1.89 A2 0.99 0.73 0.70 0.85 0.95 1.02 1.04 1.07 1.10 1.13 1.19 1.22 B1 0.90 0.90 1.00 1.20 1.30 1.30 1.40 1.30 1.20 1.10 1.00 0.90 B2 0.95 0.94 0.90 0.85 0.90 0.90 0.89 0.94 0.98 1.03 1.06 1.08 Other A1B 1.32 0.64 0.52 0.33 0.26 0.24 0.23 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.25 0.25 A2 0.75 0.86 0.95 1.42 1.16 1.22 1.24 1.28 1.33 1.42 1.60 1.69 B1 0.40 0.60 0.70 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.30 0.30 0.30 B2 1.21 0.68 0.48 0.30 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.26 0.26 0.27 0.27 0.28 Total A1B 6.95 6.25 6.28 6.42 6.59 6.63 6.67 6.54 6.43 6.35 6.32 6.28 A2 6.57 7.79 8.84 10.71 11.44 12.44 12.76 13.72 14.69 15.59 16.40 17.30 B1 6.00 6.60 7.30 7.80 8.10 8.10 7.90 7.60 7.10 6.60 6.20 5.70 B2 6.31 6.65 5.83 5.69 5.77 5.85 5.93 6.06 6.19 6.33 6.45 6.57 Figure 5-8c: Standardized global N2O emissions in the B1 family scenarios. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). 5.4.2.3. B1 Scenario Family The spread of emissions in the B1 family is quite large. The high-end reflects the agricultural assumptions used in the MiniCAM model, in which continued growth in meat production is driven by increases in per capita consumption that more than offset the reduction in population size (Figure 5-8c). The B1-AIM scenario has emissions near the low end of the range, because fertilizer use in developing countries is assumed to level off and better management increases productivity. Emissions from animal waste, mobile sources, and other sources in B1-AIM are nearly constant. The B1-IMAGE scenario (B1 family marker) has slowly increasing emissions through to 2050, which predominately originate from increases in livestock and the use of synthetic fertilizer (Table 5-6). After 2050, these emissions decline as the population size and associated demand for animal products declines (Figure 5-8c). The B1-ASF scenario has an intermediate emission trajectory with a maximum of 11.5 MtN in 2050 and a subsequent decline to 9.3 MtN by 2100 (Figure 5-8c). The two illustrative scenarios A1G-MiniCAM and A1T-MESSAGE display similar patterns of methane emissions as the A2 and B1 marker scenarios, respectively, and are therefore not discussed separately here. 5.4.2.4. B2 Scenario Family The B2 family of scenarios covers a large range of N2O emissions, similar to that found for the A1 family (see Figure 5-7). In the B2-MESSAGE scenario (B2 family marker), which has the lowest emissions in the family, improvements in agricultural productivity exceed increases in the demand for agricultural products and significantly slow emission growth in the sector (Table 5-6). Slow growth in agriculture and energy-related emissions and declines of emissions from other sectors result in a relatively flat emissions profile (Figure 5-8d). Emissions in the B2-ASF scenario are between the middle of the family range and its high end. The continuous increase in emissions in the B2-ASF scenario (which lie between the middle and high end of the family range) occurs through growth in nitrogen fertilizer use, in animal wastes, and in mobile sources. It is driven by increases in population and, to a smaller extent, by per capita increases in consumption of meat and dairy products. 5.4.2.5. Inter-Family Comparison The allocation of N2O emissions into source categories for the SRES marker scenarios is shown in Table 5-6. Separate emissions estimates for fertilized soils and manure were not available for all scenarios. As the emissions in Table 5-6 have not been standardized (see Box 5-1), base-year 1990 (and 2000) emissions are not the same for the different scenarios. In general, base-year emissions are likely to have greater differences at finer levels of detail. These differences result from different model calibrations, different model methodologies, and different classification schemes. Emissions from fertilized soils and manure from agricultural animals dominate N2O emissions in all the SRES markers. The fraction of total emissions from these two sources increases to about 80% in the A2, B1, and B2 marker scenarios, while the agricultural fraction remains roughly the same over the 21st century in the A1B marker. As discussed in Section 5.4.2, the range of future emissions is similar across each scenario family when all storyline interpretations are considered. Therefore, while it is useful to discuss emissions from the marker scenarios individually, clearly differences in modeling approaches and model assumptions have a particularly strong effect on future emissions. Agricultural emissions in the A1B-AIM marker scenario decrease over the 21st century, with increased productivity offsetting additional food demand. Agricultural emissions in the A2-ASF marker scenario increase substantially because of the food demands of a large population, coupled with less technological change. Emissions in the B1-IMAGE marker scenario increase and subsequently fall. In the B2-MESSAGE marker, agricultural emissions of N2O increase steadily throughout most of the 21st century, with a decrease between 2000 and 2010. These patterns differ because of the different driving forces (population and demand), model assumptions, and modeling approaches. Emissions from the categories "Industry/Fossil Fuels" and "Other" show a monotonic rise in the A2-ASF marker, while emissions in the B1-IMAGE marker rise and subsequently fall. Industry and fossil fuel emissions fall and then increase slightly in the B2-MESSAGE marker scenario, while "Other" emissions, which largely arise from land-use changes, fall. Industry and fossil fuel emissions in the A1B-AIM marker scenario increase through the 21st century, but are countered by a decrease in emissions from the "Other" category. The combined dynamics of N2O emissions in the A1, B1, and B2 markers leads to nearly stable or declining emissions during most of the 21st century (Figure 5-7). The B2 marker shows the lowest emission level (from the year 2010 to 2080), despite a larger population than in A1 and B1. One possible reason is inter-model differences in treatment of land-use changes. Unlike the other markers, the A2-ASF scenario yields a continuous growth in emissions, which corresponds to its assumptions of high population and slow technological change. 5.4.3. Halocarbons and Other Halogenated Compounds Emissions of halocarbons (CFCs, HCFCs, halons, PFCs, and HFCs) and other halogenated compounds (SF6) on a substance-by-substance basis are described in detail in Fenhann (2000). A list of the substances covered, together with their GWPs and lifetimes (as in IPCC SAR; Houghton, et al. 1996), is given in Table 5-7. Importantly, future emissions of halocarbons and other halogenated compounds strongly depend on the technologies involved in their production and use. New uses for these substances may arise or new products or technologies may replace current uses. It is assumed here that the current mix of products continues to exist for the next 100 years to 2100, with some generic technological improvements as described below. This assumption, however, means that emissions projections for industrial gases discussed in this section carry a substantial uncertainty. Halocarbons are carbon compounds that contain fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine. Halocarbons that contain chlorine (CFCs and HCFCs) and products or technologies may replace current uses. It is assumed here that the current mix of products continues to exist for the next 100 years to 2100, with some generic technological improvements as described below. This assumption, however, means that emissions projections for industrial gases discussed in this section carry a substantial uncertainty. Halocarbons are carbon compounds that contain fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine. Halocarbons that contain chlorine (CFCs and HCFCs) and bromine (halons) cause ozone depletion, and their emissions are controlled under the Montreal Protocol and its Adjustment and Amendments. According to the 1987 Montreal Protocol and its subsequent amendments, consumption (the balance of production plus imports minus exports) of CFCs is largely banned in developed countries after January 1996 (and developing countries after 2010), although some countries have failed to meet the deadline. Furthermore, HCFC consumption will be subjected to a gradual phase-out, with cuts from the 1986 base-year values of 35%, 65%, and 90% in 2004, 2010, and 2015, respectively. Final HCFC consumption phase-out will occur in 2020 (2040 for developing countries). The six modeling teams participating in the SRES process did not develop their own projections for emissions of ODS and their substitutes. Hence, a different approach for the development of long-range estimates for halocarbons and other halogenated compounds was adopted. First, for ODSs the external Montreal Protocol A3 maximum production scenario was used as a direct input to all SRES scenarios (WMO/UNEP, 1998), since most measures in this A3 scenario have been implemented already or are well established and under way (and so no large scenario variation is expected). For other gas species, a simple methodology to develop different emission trajectories consistent with aggregate SRES scenario driving-force assumptions (population, GDP, etc.) was developed. Also, the assumed future control rates have been adopted to conform to the SRES storylines presented in Chapter 4. The underlying literature, scenario methodology, and data are documented in more detail in Fenhann (2000) and are summarized in this section. The resultant emissions of Montreal gases, HFCs, PFCs, and SF6 are summarized in Table 5-8. The effect on climate of each of the substances listed in Table 5-9 varies greatly because of differences in both the atmospheric lifetime and the radiative effect per molecule of each gas. A good measure of the net climate effect of halocarbons and other halogenated compounds is provided by their radiative forcing. Radiative forcing will be addressed in IPCC's Third Assessment Report, but is not discussed in this report. Emissions of individual groups of halocarbons and other halogenated compounds in the four families of SRES scenarios are presented below. Table 5-7: GWPs and atmospheric lifetimes of halocarbons and other halogenated compounds. Species Chemical Formula 100 Years GWP Atm. Lifetime Years CFC-11 CCl3F 4000 50 CFC-12 CCl2F2 8500 102 CFC-113 CCl2FCClF2 5000 85 CFC-114 CClF2CClF2 9300 300 CFC-115 CF3CClF2 9300 1700 Carbon tetrachloride CCl4 1400 42 Methyl chloroform CH3CCl3 110 4.9 Halon-1211 CBrClF2 No data 20 Halon-1301 CBrF3 5600 65 Halon-2402 CBrF2CBrF2 No data 20 HCFC-22 CHClF2 1700 12.1 HCFC-141b CH3CCl2F 630 9.4 HCFC-142b CH3CClF2 2000 18.4 HCFC-123 CF3CHCl2 93 1.4 HFC-23 CHF3 11700 264 HFC-32 CH2F2 650 5.6 HFC-43-10 C5H2F10 1300 17.1 HFC-125 C2HF5 2800 32.6 HFC-134a CH2FCF3 1300 14.6 HFC-143a C2H3F3 3800 48.3 HFC-152a C2H4F2 140 1.5 HFC-227ea C3HF7 2900 36.5 HFC-236fa C3H2F6 6300 209 HFC-245ca C3H3F5 560 6.6 Perfluoromethane CF4 6500 50000 Perfluoroethane C2F6 9200 10000 Perfluorobutane C4F10 7000 2600 Sulfur hexafluoride SF6 23900 3200 Table 5-8: Global anthropogenic emissions (kt) projections for ODS, HFC, PFC, and SF6 emissions in the four marker scenarios. 1990 2020 2050 2100 Marker Scenario A1 A2 B1 B2 A1 A2 B1 B2 A1 A2 B1 B2 ODS 1864 253 21 1 HFC-23 6.4 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 HFC-32 0.0 8.3 6.4 6.0 6.2 24.3 14.0 13.9 14.1 30.3 32.8 12.9 25.9 HFC-43-10 0.0 8.8 7.6 6.9 7.2 18.1 10.7 10.7 11.1 30.3 21.8 10.4 17.9 HFC-125 0.0 27.1 20.7 20.6 21.5 80.4 45.6 47.9 48.7 100.8 106.5 44.3 89.1 HFC-134a 0.0 325.5 252.2 248.8 261.9 931.0 506.4 547.4 561.2 980.3 1259.8 486.0 1079.3 HFC-143a 0.0 20.6 16.0 15.0 15.6 60.9 35.1 34.8 35.4 75.7 82.1 32.2 64.7 HFC-227ea 0.0 22.2 16.6 18.5 19.7 62.1 31.5 39.4 40.7 60.6 80.4 34.4 80.0 HFC-245ca 0.0 100.5 78.7 80.3 85.4 292.3 149.2 172.6 178.5 288.5 388.0 150.2 352.7 HFCs-total 6.4 517.9 403.0 401.0 422.4 1470.2 793.5 867.8 890.8 1567.3 1972.4 771.4 1710.5 C2F4 (Perfluoroethene) 15.8 21.1 25.2 15.7 27.1 43.8 45.6 20.9 52.7 57.0 88.2 22.2 59.9 C2F6 1.6 2.1 2.5 1.6 2.7 4.4 4.6 2.1 5.5 5.7 8.8 2.2 6.0 PFCs, total 17.4 23.2 27.7 17.3 29.8 48.2 50.2 23.0 58.2 62.7 97.0 24.4 65.9 SF6 5.8 7.3 9.7 5.7 8.4 18.3 16.0 10.4 12.1 14.5 25.2 6.5 10.6 Notes: ODS emissions are from scenario A3 in the UNEP/WMO Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion (UNEP/WMO, 1998). 5.4.3.1. Hydrofluorocarbons HFCs are beginning to be produced as replacements for CFCs and HCFCs. Unlike the CFCs and the HCFCs, HFCs do not convey chlorine to the stratosphere and thus do not contribute to ozone depletion. For the development of future HFC emissions, Fenhann (2000) used a procedure based on the work by Kroeze (1995) that includes two steps: • “Virtual” future CFC emissions are first calculated assuming a situation without the Montreal Protocol. • CFCs are substituted with HFCs according to substitution percentages adopted from the literature (Table 5-9) and also the various degrees of emission reduction potentials from better housekeeping measures and technological change. Concerning the first step of the methodology used in Fenhann (2000), 1990 CFC emissions were taken from the Scientific Assessment of the Ozone Depletion (WMO/UNEP, 1998). Pre-Montreal 1986 emissions were obtained from McCulloch et al. (1994). Future “virtual” (assuming no Montreal protocol) emissions of CFCs were assumed to be proportional to their consumption, for which GDP numbers in the four marker scenarios were used as a driver (see Chapter 4). The saturation level of per capita demands was assumed to be the same in all four SRES scenario families. The projection of CFC emissions in the absence of the Montreal Protocol shows how emissions would change under conditions of unrestricted production. However, with the Montreal Protocol in place, other chemical compounds will be used to replace the Montreal gases. To compute the amount of CFCs replaced with these other compounds, future CFC emissions with the Montreal Protocol in place (according to the WMO/UNEP A3 ODS scenario) were first subtracted from the “virtual” CFC emissions. Different assumptions about CFC applications as well as substitute candidates were developed (Fenhann, 2000). These were initially based on Kroeze and Reijnders (1992) and Midgley and McCulloch (1999), and subsequently updated using the latest information from the Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs (WMO/UNEP, 1999). An important assumption (based on the latest information from the industry) used in the current analysis is that relatively few Montreal gases will be replaced completely by HFCs. Currently, HFC-134a is favored, and it is the only HFC with sufficiently large sales to be included in the current production and sales statistics (AFEAS, 1998). The global emissions of this gas are estimated to be 0.1 kt HFC-134a in 1990 and 42.7 kt HFC-134a in 1997. Current data indicate that substitution rates of CFCs by HFCs will be less than 50%. It was shown recently that in the European Union the substitution rate of CFCs by HCFCs was 26%, and the HFC share was 6% or a total of 32% (McCulloch and Midgley, 1998). Time series data for the global sales from AFEAS (1998) confirm a 763 kt per year reduction in CFC production and use from the peak production year of 1987 through 1996. An increase in the total HFC and HCFC production and use was 340 kt per year, or a 44% substitution up to 1996. In Fenhann (2000) future technological developments are assumed to result in about 25% of the CFCs Table 5-9: Substitution of CFCs by HFCs and PFCs. Application From HFC-23 HFC-32 HFC-43-10 HFC-125 HFC-134a HFC-143a HFC-152a HFC-227ea HFC-236fa HFC-245fa C2F6 Total Aerosols CFC 4.0% 4.0% 8.0% Cleaning/drying CFC 0.5% 0.5% 1.0% Open cell foams CFC 0.0% Closed cell foams CFC 25.0% 25.0% 50.0% Stationary cooling CFC 2.0% 5.0% 25.0% 5.0% 37.0% Stationary cooling HCFC-22 2.0% 5.0% 25.0% 5.0% 37.0% Mobile cooling CFC 25.0% 25.0% Fire extinguisher Halon-1211 1.0% 1.0% (portable) Fire extinguisher Halon-1301 25.0% 25.0% (fixed) Other uses CFC 5.0% 5.0% 10.0% cooling CFC 25.0% 25.0% Fire extinguisher Halon-1211 1.0% 1.0% (portable) Fire extinguisher Halon-1301 25.0% 25.0% (fixed) Other uses CFC 5.0% 5.0% 10.0% 44% substitution up to 1996. In Fenhann (2000) future technological developments are assumed to result in about 25% of the CFCs ultimately being substituted by HFCs (Table 5-9). This low percentage not only reflects the introduction of non-HFC substitutes, but also the notion that smaller amounts of halocarbons are used in many applications when changing to HFCs and that emissions are reduced by increased containment and recycling. A general assumption is that the present trend to not substitute CFCs with high GWP substances, including PFCs and SF6, will continue. The substitution rates shown in Table 5-9 were used in all four scenarios; the technological options adopted are those known at present. Further substitution away from HFCs is assumed to require a climate policy. Hydrocarbons are expected to be the substitutes used in the aerosols/propellant sector, except for situations in which the flammability of hydrocarbons would be a problem and also in metered dose inhalers (to avoid possible adverse clinical effects). HFC-227ea and HFC-134a, and possibly HFC-152a are expected to replace hydrocarbons (Table 5-9; WMO/UNEP, 1999). CFC-113 was used extensively as a cleaning solvent for metal, electronics, and textiles. The general trend in this area now is toward water-based systems. However, as suggested by Table 5-9 a small fraction (0.5%) of the CFC in this sector is substituted by HFC-43-10 (Kroeze, 1995). The WMO/UNEP (1998) report states that no fluorocarbons are now used for open cell foams, an assumption also adopted in the scenarios. It is expected that closed cell foams and refrigeration will be the largest demand sectors for HFCs in the future. For closed cell foams, the substitution is expected to be 50%, one-half as HFC-134a and the other half as the liquid HFC-245fa (expected to be commercially available by 2002; Table 5-9) (Ashford, 1999). In some cases, HFC-365mfc will be used instead of HFC-245fa. However, all the calculations in Table 5-9 were carried out for HFC-245fa, since these two substances have almost the same climate effect. Prior to 1986, the main refrigerants in use were CFCs, HCFCs, and ammonia. In response to the Montreal Protocol, HFC and hydrocarbon refrigerants have been promoted as the primary alternatives (WMO/UNEP, 1999). The main HFC assumed to be used for stationary cooling is HFC-134a, with 5% of the demand substituted by HFC-125 and another 5% by HFC-143a (Kroeze, 1995). This would agree with the reported measurements of these two substances in the atmosphere. According to Kroeze (1995) about 2% might be substituted by HFC-32. Before 1993, all air-conditioned cars were equipped with systems using CFC-12 as a refrigerant. Over the lifetime of a car, 0.4 kg of this halocarbon was emitted every year. In 1994, two years after the new refrigerant HFC-134a had become available globally in sufficient quantities, almost all major vehicle manufacturers began to use HFC-134a. This conversion was accompanied by a significant reduction in annual losses of refrigerants per car, down to 0.096 kg of halocarbon (Preisegger, 1999). Therefore the substitution rate in Table 5-9 for mobile cooling is assumed to be 25%. In the fixed fire extinguishers sector, only about 25% of the systems that formerly used halons now use HFCs, mainly HFC-227ea. The rest use CO2, inert gas mixtures, water-based systems, foam, dry powder, etc. (WMO/UNEP, 1999). Increased environmental awareness in the industry is assumed to have resulted in the reduction of HFC emissions by a factor of three, compared to former practice. For portable fire extinguishers the substitution rate is assumed to be only 1%, even less than the 2% assumed by Kroeze (1995). CFCs have also been used for other purposes, such as sterilants, tobacco expansion, and others. Kroeze (1995) 268 Emission Scenarios assumes a 30% substitution by HFCs. However, in the SRES scenarios this value is reduced to 10% to remain consistent with the above assumption that HFCs ultimately will substitute for about 25% of the CFCs. As well as using non-halocarbon substitutes, HFC emissions can be avoided by better housekeeping, for instance by reduced spilling of cooling agents. Leakage control equipment can also serve this purpose. Finally, halocarbons can be recovered for recycling or destruction when equipment is discarded. Some of this emission reduction potential is likely to be implemented as a result of technological changes introduced to control ODSs. In the SRES scenarios, reduction rates were varied over time and between industrialized and developing countries to reflect the definitive features of the underlying storylines (Chapter 4). Generally, the reduction rates are assumed highest in scenarios that emphasize sustainability and environmental policies (B1 family). These reductions, however, were not associated with any explicit GHG reduction policies, as required by the SRES Terms of Reference (see Appendix I). In one scenario family, A2, no reductions were assumed, whereas in the A1 and B2 families reduction rates were set at intermediate levels. In addition to consumption-related emissions of HFCs, HFC-23 is emitted as an undesired by-product from the HCFC-22 production process. As a result of the Montreal Protocol, the direct use of HCFC-22, and hence the related HFC-23 emissions, will come to a halt in 2050. To calculate the HFC-23 emissions, information from Oram et al. (1998) was used (estimated emissions of HFC-23 at 6.4 kt in 1990). By relating this value to 178.1 kt HCFC-22 emitted in 1990 (WMO/UNEP, 1999), an emissions factor of 0.036 tons of HFC-23 per ton of HCFC-22 was calculated and applied to estimate future emissions. Since this estimation procedure does not take into account any pollution control regulations (that are not driven by climate considerations), it may result in an overestimation of HFC-23 during the early decades of the 21st century, until HCFC production is phased out under the Montreal Protocol. After the phase-out of HCFC-22 consumption, some HFC-23 emissions will still occur because of the continued HCFC-22 feedstock production allowed under the Montreal Protocol. The resultant projections are shown by individual HFC in Table 5-8. In general, the SRES scenarios might underestimate HFC emissions if the substitution of CFCs with alternatives that have no radiative forcing effect and with more efficient HFCs-based technologies does not penetrate as quickly as is assumed, especially in developing countries. However, more effective technologies and/or suitable non-HFC alternatives may be developed, which would lead to even lower emissions. 5.4.3.2. Perfluorocarbons PFCs, fully fluorinated hydrocarbons, have extremely long atmospheric lifetimes (2600 to 50,000 years) and particularly high radiative forcing (Table 5-7). The production of aluminum is thought to be the largest source of PFCs (CF4 and C2F6) emissions. These emissions are generated, primarily, by the anode effect, which occurs during the reduction of alumina (aluminum oxide) in the primary smelting process as alumina concentrations become too low in the smelter. Under these conditions, the electrolysis cell voltage increases sharply to a level sufficient for bath electrolysis to replace alumina electrolysis. This causes substantial energy loss and the release of fluorine, which reacts with carbon to form CF4 and C2F6. In 1990, the total annual global primary aluminum production was 19.4 Mt. Secondary aluminum production from recycling accounted for 21.5% of the total consumption in 1990. The production statistics from the World Bureau of Metal Statistics (1997) show that the total aluminum production was 27.5 Mt, and recycling has increased to 25.6%, or by about 3.5 percentage points, in 10 years. The scenarios developed by Fenhann (2000) adopt a methodology of projecting future aluminum demand based on: • Aluminum consumption elasticity with respect to GDP. • Use of alternative assumptions concerning recycling rates. • Varying emission factors to reflect future technological change. These assumptions are altered to be in consistent with the four SRES scenario storylines described in Chapter 4. For instance, in Fenhann (2000) the aluminum consumption elasticity varies between 0.8 and 0.96, and the range of increases in aluminum recycling rates varies between 1.5 and 3.5 percentage points per decade. The PFC emission factor varies according to the aluminum production technology used. The default emission factor from the Revised IPCC Guidelines (IPCC, 1997) is 1.4 kg CF4/aluminum. However, Harnisch (1999) gives evidence that the average specific emissions of CF4 per ton of aluminum has decreased from about 1.0 kg to 0.5 kg between 1985 and 1995. Accordingly, an emissions factor of 0.8 kg CF4/t was used for 1990 and this was assumed to decrease to 0.5 kg CF4/t in the future. This is also in agreement with the value of 0.51 kg CF4/t recommended by the IPCC Expert Meeting on Good Practices in Inventory Preparation for Industrial Processes and the New Gases (January 1999, Washington, DC). The same sources also agree on an emission factor for C2F6 that is 10 times lower than that for CF4. This assumption was also used in the calculations presented here (Table 5-8). Aluminum production is being upgraded from highly inefficient smelters and practices to reduce the frequency and duration of the anode effect. Since aluminum smelters are large consumers of energy, the costs of these modifications are offset by savings in energy costs and are therefore assumed to occur in all scenarios. The ultimate reduction of the anode effect frequency and duration was assumed to reach the same level in all the SRES scenarios. However, scenarios vary with respect production is being upgraded from highly inefficient smelters and practices to reduce the frequency and duration of the anode effect. Since aluminum smelters are large consumers of energy, the costs of these modifications are offset by savings in energy costs and are therefore assumed to occur in all scenarios. The ultimate reduction of the anode effect frequency and duration was assumed to reach the same level in all the SRES scenarios. However, scenarios vary with respect to the rate of introducing the underlying modifications. It is technically possible to reduce the anode emissions by a factor of 10 (EU, 1997). This technically feasible reduction can be achieved by changing from the Soderberg cells currently in use to more modern pre-bake cells. It is assumed that this will happen in the A1 and B1 family scenarios, in which specific emissions of 0.15 kg CF4/t are achieved by 2040 in the OECD90 region and by 2090 in the other regions. In the A2 and B2 family scenarios the same specific emissions are achieved later in the century in the OECD90 region and not until after 2100 in the other regions. PFCs are consumed in small amounts in such sectors as electronics (tracers), cosmetics, and medical applications. However, the only emissions included in Fenhann (2000) beyond aluminum production were PFCs (as CF4) from semiconductor production. In all SRES scenarios the emission estimates used are those given by Harnisch et al. (1999) of 0.3 kt CF4 per year in 1990, 1.1 kt CF4 in 2000, 1.0 kt CF4 in 2010, and constant thereafter. The use of these estimates reflects the voluntary agreement, in April 1999, of the World Semiconductor Council, which represent manufacturers from Europe, Japan, Korea, and the US, among others. According to this agreement, manufacturers have adopted the emission reduction target for PFCs of 10% absolute reduction from 1995 emission levels by 2010. This target encompasses over 90% of the total semiconductor production (WMO/UNEP, 1999). The total PFC emissions in the four SRES scenario families cover a range from 24 to 97 kt PFC in 2100 (Table 5-8; Fenhann, 2000). 5.4.3.3. Sulfur hexafluoride SF6 is an extremely stable atmospheric trace gas. All studies concur that this gas is entirely anthropogenic. Its unique physico-chemical properties make SF6 ideally suited for many specialized industrial applications. Its 100-year GWP of 23,900 is the highest of any atmospheric trace gas. In 1994, atmospheric concentrations of SF6 were reported to rise by 6.9% per year, which is equivalent to annual emissions of 5,800 t SF6 (Maiss et al., 1996). According to several sources (Kroeze, 1995; Maiss et al., 1996; Victor and MacDonald, 1998), about 80% of SF6 emissions originate from its use as an insulator in high-voltage electrical equipment. The remaining 20% of the present global SF6 emissions (1200 tons per year) are emitted from magnesium foundries, in which SF6 is used to prevent oxidation of molten magnesium. The global annual production of magnesium is about 350,000 tons (US Geological Survey, 1998), and developing countries account for about 15% of the total. SF6 is also used to de-gas aluminum, but since SF6 reacts with aluminum, little or no atmospheric emissions result from this process. Major manufacturers of SF6 agreed voluntarily to co-operate on the compilation of worldwide SF6 sales data by end-use markets. Six companies from the US (three), Japan, Italy, and Germany participated in the data survey. The companies do not expect the total sales for magnesium foundries to increase before 2000 (Science & Policy Services Inc., 1997). Based on this information, the 1996 statistical production values were used for the year 2000 in the formulation of the scenarios reported in Fenhann (2000). Future production was projected assuming the same consumption elasticity to GDP as for aluminum (see discussion above). In 1996, about 41% of the world magnesium was produced in the US; of this, only 16% was processed in foundries for casting that resulted in emissions of SF6 (Victor and MacDonald, 1998). Since the distribution of world foundry capacity appears to be roughly similar to that of world magnesium production, Fenhann (2000) assumes that, presently, 16% of the produced magnesium is processed in foundries across all regions. Relating this amount of the processed magnesium to the aforementioned emission of 1200 t SF6 per year yields an emission factor of 21 kg SF6 per ton of magnesium processed in foundries. The demand for magnesium in automotive applications as a strong lightweight replacement for steel is growing quickly. Hence, it is expected that the fraction of total magnesium production processed in foundries by 2050 will grow to between two to three times the present level. As mentioned above, no less than 80% of SF6 emissions (or 4600 tons of SF6 per year at present) originate from the use of SF6 as a gaseous insulator in high-voltage electrical equipment. The unique ability of SF6 to quench electric arcs has enabled the development of safe, reliable gas-insulated high-voltage breakers, substations, transformers, and transmission lines. The demand for such electrical equipment is assumed to grow proportionally to electricity demand (Victor and MacDonald, 1998; Fenhann, 2000) with an emission factor of 132.6 t SF6/EJ electricity. Fenhann (2000) used preliminary electricity generation projections from the four SRES marker scenarios and assumed additional various other potentials for emission reductions that result from more careful handling, recovery, recycling, and substitution of SF6. Reduction rates vary in the different SRES scenario storylines; the detailed assumptions are reported in Fenhann (2000). The SF6 emissions for the four scenarios given in Fenhann (2000) range from 7 to 25 kt SF6 in 2100. The main driver is electricity consumption, since the bulk of emissions originate from electric power transmission (for transformers). SF6 is also emitted from other minor sources, but for the purposes of this report it is assumed that uncertainty ranges factored into the alternative scenario formulations cover the emissions from these sources. 5.5. Aerosols and Ozone Precursors In addition to the GHGs discussed above, aerosol particles and tropospheric ozone also change the radiative balance of the atmosphere, albeit in a spatially heterogeneous manner. Sulfate aerosol particles, which form as a consequence of SO2 emissions, act as a cooling agent. Their net effect is quite uncertain, but is thought to offset the forcing from all non-CO2 GHGs to date (Houghton et al., 1996). As interest in the role of sulfur has increased since the previous IPCC assessment, and to encapsulate recent trends and expectations, sulfur emissions are discussed here in substantial detail. Nitrates, ammonia, organic compounds, and black carbon also contribute to the formation of atmospheric aerosols. Carbonaceous aerosols exert a small positive forcing effect, while the effects of other compounds and aerosols are less clear. Tropospheric ozone is a GHG also, with a small net positive forcing effect. Future tropospheric ozone levels will be determined by emissions of CH4, CO, NOx, and NMVOCs. The last three groups are reported and discussed here in a more aggregated and stylized form only, because these gases are short lived, their potential to form ozone is highly non-linear; NMVOCs are not distinguished by their reactivity, and data problems associated with including key sources in aggregated long-term models are large. 5.5.1. Ozone Precursors: Nitrogen Oxides, Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds, and Carbon Monoxide 5.5.1.1. Nitrogen Oxides Emissions of NOx primarily result from the combustion of fossil fuels. The NOx concentration in exhaust gases depends on combustion conditions (temperature, residence time, air-to-fuel ratio, mixing) and varies widely across different applications. In particular, internal combustion engines used in road vehicles and ships have very high emissions, although new designs and exhaust-gas treatment offer much lower specific emission levels. Recent research (Davidson and Kingerlee, 1997; Delmas et al., 1997; Mosier et al., 1998) indicates that soil may be a significant source of NOx emissions also. This source, however, is not included in the models used in the current report. The 1990 NOx emissions in the six SRES models range between 26.5 and 34.2 MtN, but not all the models provide a comprehensive description of NOx emissions. Some models do not estimate NOx emissions at all (MARIA, MiniCAM*), whereas others only include energy-related sources (MESSAGE) and have adopted other source categories from corresponding model runs derived from other models (i.e. AIM). Standardized (see Box 5-1 on Standardization) 1990 NOx emissions in the SRES scenarios, measured as nitrogen, amount to 31 MtN (Figure 5-9). As mentioned in Chapter 4, the volume of fossil fuels used for various energy purposes varies widely in the SRES scenario families. In addition, the level and timing of emission controls, inspired by local air quality concerns, is assumed to differ. As a result the spread is largest within the A1 scenario family, in which it is almost as large as the range across all 40 SRES scenarios. Up to the 2020s, all scenarios project rising NOx emissions (Figure 5-9). The 25th and 75th percentile emissions corridor spans between 40 and 60 MtN by the 2020s, which can be interpreted as a "central tendency" among the entire spectrum of the 40 SRES scenarios. Beyond 2030, uncertainties in emission levels increase significantly. By 2100, the SRES range is between 16 and 150 MtN (i.e. emissions decrease by a factor of two or increase by a factor of five compared with 1990 levels). The median and mean emissions are tracked by a number of scenarios, most notably by B2-MESSAGE (B2 family marker) and A1B-IMAGE. In these scenarios, NOx emissions tend to in emission levels increase significantly. By 2100, the SRES range is between 16 and 150 MtN (i.e., emissions decrease by a factor of two or increase by a factor of five compared with 1990 levels). The median and mean emissions are tracked by a number of scenarios, most notably by B2-MESSAGE (B2 family marker) and A1B-IMAGE. In these scenarios, NOx emissions tend to increase up to 2050 and stabilize thereafter, the result of a gradual substitution of fossil fuels by alternatives as well as by the increasing diffusion of NOx control technologies. Low emission futures are described by various B1 family scenarios, whereas the upper bound for future NOx emissions is represented by scenarios of the fossil fuel intensive A1 scenario groups (e.g., A1C- and A1G-MESSAGE) and the high population, high fossil energy A2 scenario family (A2-ASF, A2-MESSAGE, or A2G-IMAGE) (Figure 5-9). The fossil fuel dominated A2-ASF (A2 family marker) with limited environmental concern has a rapidly increasing NOx trajectory (Figure 5-9). Emissions in other A2 scenarios also continue to grow, except in A2-AIM for which emissions level off by the last decades of the 21st century. In the A1B marker (A1B-AIM), the emissions growth is initially about as strong as in A2-ASF, but emissions peak in 2030, and decline as the fossil fuel share of total primary energy falls and the remaining fossil fuel technologies become more advanced (Figure 5-9). Scenarios from other A1 family groups that assume a much larger and continued role of fossil fuels yield much higher NOx emissions, which reach 150 MtN by 2100 in the coal-based A1C-MESSAGE scenario. Emission growth in the B2 family scenarios is less steep than in the A1 family, but persists throughout the entire period, albeit at a declining rate. By 2100, emissions in the B2-MESSAGE scenario (B2 family marker) are about twice as large as in 1990 (Figure 5-9). B2-ASF has a similar trajectory, while the B2-AIM scenario has essentially constant NOx emissions over the entire period. Emissions in the B1 marker (B1-IMAGE) are among the lowest of all the 40 scenarios (Figure 5-9). In this scenario, emissions increase stops around 2050 and subsequently declines toward the end of the 21st century to 60% of the current level. Other scenarios within the B1 group coincide well with the B1 marker in 2100, although the maximum emission levels in these scenarios are much higher than in B1-IMAGE (Figure 5-9). 5.5.1.2. Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds NMVOCs arise from fossil fuel combustion (as with NOx, wide ranges of emission factors are typical for internal combustion engines), and also from industrial processes, fuel storage (fugitive emissions), use of solvents (e.g., in paint and cleaners), and a variety of other activities. As the chemical reactivities of the various substances grouped under the NMVOCs category are very different, so are their roles in ozone formation and the (potential) health hazards associated with NMVOCs. In this report NMVOCs are reported as one group. In 1990, the estimated NMVOC emissions range between 83 and 178 Mt, which after standardization (see Box 5-1) translates into 140 Mt (Figure 5-10). As discussed above for NOx emissions, not all models include this emissions category or all of its sources; the most detailed treatment of NMVOC emissions is given in the ASF model. A relatively robust trend across all 40 scenarios (see Figure 5-10) is a gradual increase in NMVOC emissions up to about 2050, as indicated by the 25th and 75th percentile corridor, with the range between 190 and 260 Mt by that year. Beyond 2050, uncertainties increase with respect to both emission levels and trends. As for NOx emissions discussed above, the upper bounds of NMVOC emissions are formed by fossil fuel intensive scenarios within the A1 scenario family (e.g., A1B-ASF), and the lower bounds by the scenarios within the B1 family (with an important alternative higher scenario B1-ASF). Characteristic ranges are between 60 and 90 Mt by 2100 in the low emissions cluster and between 370 and 550 Mt in the high emissions cluster. All other scenario families and individual scenarios fall between these two emissions clusters, with the B2 marker scenario (B2-MESSAGE) closely tracking the median of global NMVOC emissions from all the SRES scenarios. In the B1 family marker (B1-IMAGE) emissions gradually decline to 60% of the 1990 level by 2100 (Figure 5-10). The B1-AIM and B1-MESSAGE trajectories are similar, but differ somewhat from the B1 marker. They increase until the 2020s (AIM) or even the 2050s (MESSAGE) at modest rates, but subsequently decline to around or even below the B1 marker in 2100. The B1-ASF profile, however, is radically different, growing faster and continuously throughout the 21st century. By 2100, the NMVOC emissions in B1-ASF increase to 350 Mt, or 2.5 times the 1990 level. This indicates the adoption in this scenario of fairly different assumptions with respect to technological development and emission controls as compared to the rest of B1 scenarios. In the A2 family marker (A2-ASF) and B2 family marker (B2-MESSAGE), emissions grow steadily until 2050, by which time they are around 50% higher than today. Thereafter, emissions in B2-MESSAGE decline gradually, while in the A2 marker the growth continues to reach 2.5 times the current level by 2100 (similar to B1-ASF). Emissions in A2-MESSAGE are fairly similar to those of the A2 marker, while emissions in A2-AIM decline to 170 Mt by 2100, only half of the A2 marker level. The trajectory in the A1B marker (A1B-AIM) is very distinct - up to 2060 a fast growth is observed to more than twice the 1990 level, after which emissions decline to the B2 family marker level (Figure 5-10). A decrease of NMVOC emissions in A1B-AIM after 2060 is explained mainly by the substitution of fossil fuels with renewables, especially in the transport sector. A very similar trajectory emerges in the A1B-MESSAGE scenario, while the A1B-ASF scenario emissions grow continuously up to 2100, by when they are the highest of the set at 550 Mt, almost four times the 1990 level. 5.5.1.3. Carbon Monoxide CO emissions in 1990 are estimated to range between 752 and 984 MtCO across the models used to derive the SRES scenarios. The same caveats as for NOx and NMVOC emissions (see above) also apply to CO emissions - the number of models that represent all the emission source categories is limited and modeling and data uncertainties, such as emission factors, are considerable. As a result, CO emission estimates across the scenarios are highly model specific, as indicated by the overlapping ranges of the four scenario families (Figure 5-11). From a standardized (see Box 5-1) 1990 level of 880 MtCO the range of future emissions is rather wide for both medium-term and long-term time horizons. By 2020, emissions range from 630 to 1550 MtCO, by 2050 they range are highly model specific, as indicated by the overlapping ranges of the four scenario families (Figure 5-11). From a standardized (see Box 5-1) 1990 level of 880 MtCO the range of future emissions is rather wide for both medium-term and long-term time horizons. By 2020, emissions range from 630 to 1550 MtCO, by 2050 they range between 470 and 2300 MtCO, and by 2100 the range is between 360 and 3760 MtCO (i.e. one order of magnitude difference between the highest and the lowest projections). Focusing on the 25th and 75th percentile intervals reduces uncertainty ranges somewhat, but nonetheless they remain substantial - between 1260 and 2300 MtCO by 2100. The median of all 40 scenarios is tracked quite closely by the B2-ASF scenario at the global level. Emissions of CO follow rather different trajectories in the SRES markers than emissions of NMVOCs, except the A2 marker (A2-ASF). Starting from the standardized (see Box 5-1) level of 880 MtCO in 1990, emissions in the A1B marker (A1B-AIM) grow continuously and almost double between 1990 and 2100 (Figure 5-11). Emissions in A1B-MESSAGE (Roehrl and Riahi, 2000) increase at a higher rate than in the marker and reach thrice the current level by 2100. Emissions in A1B-ASF grow as fast as in A1B-MESSAGE until 2040 (1700 MtCO versus 1650 MtCO for A1B-MESSAGE), when the growth stops and emissions more or less stabilize. Emissions in the B1-IMAGE (B1 family marker) gradually decline to 40% of the current level by 2100 (Figure 5-11). Again, other B1 family scenarios have quite different trajectories and the patterns generated by AIM, ASF, and MESSAGE models for the B1 scenario family are similar to those derived by the same models for other storylines. The shape of the A2 family marker (A2-ASF) trajectory is very similar to that for NMVOCs, which suggests that these two substances are governed mainly by the same drivers and that similar assumptions with regard to improved emissions factors are adopted. The emission trajectory in the B2 marker (B2-MESSAGE) is just below the A2 marker trajectory and is about 2000 MtCO by 2100, more than twice the 1990 level. An increase of biomass energy use after 2050 becomes an important factor that affects emissions in this scenario. Other B2 family scenarios produced using the AIM and ASF models closely track the B2 marker, although emissions in these scenarios are somewhat lower, with those of B2-ASF at 1700 MtCO by 2100 and of B2-AIM falling just below 1500 MtCO. 5.2. Sulfur Aerosols result from complex atmospheric processes in which sulfur emissions play an important role. Besides sulfur, other substances, like NOx, ammonia, and small particles from the burning of fossil fuels and biomass, are involved in these processes. Global anthropogenic sulfur emissions are estimated to range between 65 and 90 MtS in 1990 (Houghton et al., 1995; Benkovitz et al., 1996; Olivier et al., 1996; WMO, 1997). Reviews of most recent inventories, given in Smith et al. (2000) and Grübler (1998), indicate a most likely value of 75 ± 10 MtS. These reviews draw on a large body of literature sources and sulfur inventories (in particular the EMEP and CORINAIR inventories for Europe, NAPAP for North America, and the most recent inventories available for Asia, including Akimoto and Narita (1994), Foell et al. (1995), and Kato (1996)). Anthropogenic emissions add to natural sulfur flows, which are estimated to range between 4 and 45 MtS (Houghton et al., 1995). Pepper et al. (1992) adopted an intermediary, constant natural sulfur flux of 22 MtS for the IS92 scenario series. Even with a comparatively good agreement on global sulfur emission levels, important uncertainties remain at the sector and regional levels (discussed in more detail in Alcamo et al. (1997) and Grübler (1998)). The main sources of uncertainties are a lack of detailed inventory data (especially for developing countries outside Asia, but also for the non-European part of Russia), uncertainties in sulfur contents of fuels (especially coal) in many regions, and the use of different base years for development of sulfur inventories. For instance, inventories and scenario studies for China and Centrally Planned Asia give a range of sulfur emissions that differ by more than a factor of two (8.4 to 18 MtS) for the year 1990 (Grübler, 1998). Base-year differences in the available data sources are especially important because regional sulfur emissions trends have changed drastically in the past decade. Although they decreased strongly in Europe and North America as a result of sulfur control policies, they increased rapidly in Asia with growing energy demand and coal use. For instance, between 1980 and 1995 sulfur emissions declined by 59% in Western Europe and Russia (albeit for entirely different reasons - environmental policy limiting sulfur emissions in Western Europe versus a massive economic depression in Russia), by 37% in Eastern Europe, and by 36% in North America (ECE, 1997). Conversely, emissions in China rose rapidly, from an estimated 6.6 MtS in 1985 to 9.1 MtS in 1994, or by 38% (Sinton, 1996; Dadi et al., 1998). These diverging emission trends and their rapid changes also require a continuous updating of available gridded sulfur emission inventories (e.g., Dignon and Hameed, 1989; Spiro et al., 1992; Benkovitz et al., 1996; Olivier et al., 1996) that in some instances still rely on outdated 1980 emissions data. Global base-year (1990) sulfur emission values from the SRES models range from 63 to 77 MtS, with the addition of 3 MtS from international shipping. This difference reflects the existing uncertainty in sulfur emission estimates, particularly at the regional level. The range is within the range of values given by global inventories. Model differences at the regional level are even larger, which reflects the greater uncertainty of emission inventories at this level, particularly outside the OECD countries. To standardize sulfur emissions, the number of SRES reporting regions was increased to six regions, by splitting Latin America from the ALM region and Centrally Planned Asia and China from ASIA. Important differences in economic development status and resource endowments lead to different patterns of sulfur emissions across all SRES scenarios. Regional emissions were standardized (see Box 5-1) and then aggregated to the global level. Global standardized base-year emissions for 1990 for the SRES scenarios are equal to 70.9 MtS, in line with the literature range of global emission inventories given above. The regional sulfur emission profiles were also used to generate spatially gridded emission patterns (see Section 5.6.2 below). Concerning future emissions of sulfur, the SRES scenarios reflect recent literature and trends of sulfur control scenarios, as well as the conclusions from the 1994 evaluation of the IS92 scenarios (Alcamo et al., 1995). Despite considerable scenario variability, all scenarios portray similar emission dynamics - at various future dates (between 2020-2030 and 2070, depending on the scenario and its underlying storyline), global SO2 emissions reach a maximum level and decline thereafter (Figure 5-12). By 2030 sulfur emissions range between 40 and 160 MtS, by 2070 Table 4-3). In the SPM, A1C and A1G scenarios are merged into one fossil-intensive A1FI scenario group (see also footnote 2). On the scenario and its underlying storyline, global SO2 emissions reach a maximum level and decline thereafter (Figure 5-12). By 2030 sulfur emissions range between 40 and 160 MtS,10 by 2070 between 20 and 165 MtS, and by 2100 between 10 and 95 MtS. Emission trajectories of the SRES scenarios reflect a combined impact of different scenario driving forces (local air quality concerns, structural change in energy supply and end-use, etc.), which lead to a gradual decline in sulfur emissions in the second half of the 21st century. Importantly, all SRES scenarios are sulfur-control scenarios only and do not assume any additional climate policy measures. There is, however, an indirect effect of GHG emission reduction from sulfur-control policies that result in energy conservation and inter-fuel substitution from high sulfur to low sulfur fuels (e.g., from coal to gas). To convert into SO2, a unit frequently used in the sulfur scenario literature, multiply the MtS numbers by 2. 1990 2010 2030 2050 2070 2090 A2 Family A2 ASF – A2 AIM – A2G IMAGE – A2 MESSAGE – A2 MINICAM – A2 AIM MINICAM Figure 5-13b: Standardized global SO2 emissions in the A2 scenario family. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). 180 150 120 90 60 30 1990 2010 2030 2050 2070 2090 B1 Family B1 HIGH MESSAGE – B1 HIGH MINICAM Figure 5-13c: Standardized global SO2 emissions in the B1 scenario family. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). 5.5.2.1. A1 Scenario Family The A1 family of scenarios covers most of the range of the 40 SRES scenarios (Figure 5-13a). The A1B-AIM marker is in the middle of the range and its trajectory is similar to those of many other scenarios – a rapid increase in the near term followed by a decline. Increasing fossil fuel use in developing countries combined with low levels of SO2 controls produces the near-term increase in emissions. After 2025, per capita incomes reach levels at which countries place more emphasis on the environment, resulting in emission controls on SO2 (see Section 4.4.10). These controls, combined with a transition from fossil fuels to non-fossil energy, result in declining emissions. More detailed information as to how SO2 emissions are treated in the A1B-AIM scenario is provided in Box 5-3. Another A1 family scenario, A1G-MiniCAM, shows similar behavior for the same reasons, although the increase and subsequent decline in emissions is less pronounced. The MiniCAM model has a higher level of controls, but also a greater fossil fuel use, resulting in slightly higher SO2 emissions in 2100. The A1T, A1G, and A1C scenario groups assume various roles for the development of energy resources and technologies (the coal-intensive A1C scenario group, the oil- and gas-intensive A1G group, and the A1T scenario group with accelerated non-fossil technology diffusion). Consequently, they span a very wide range of future sulfur emissions, ranging from 20 MtS by 2100 in the A1T-MESSAGE scenario to 83 MtS in the A1C-AIM scenario. 5.5.2.2. A2 Scenario Family Sulfur emission trajectories in all the A2 family scenarios, except A2-A1-MiniCAM with its much lower energy consumption, have the same general convex shape (Figure 5-13b). However, the time when maximum emissions are attained varies quite widely across the scenarios. Emissions peak in the A2-ASF marker scenario in 2030, in A2-MESSAGE in 2040, in A2G-IMAGE in 2050, in A2-MiniCAM in 2060, and in A2-AIM not until 2070. These differences are explained primarily by different assumptions about the mechanisms of SO2 reduction adopted in different models. For example, the SO2 reduction in A2-MESSAGE is explained by fundamental structural changes in the electricity generation technologies, while the A2-ASF scenario assumes a rapid introduction of inexpensive end-of-the-pipe sulfur scrubbers and shifts to low-sulfur fuel qualities. The A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario yields a nearly flat sulfur emission profile, explained by a relatively slow growth in population and GDP in the first half of the 21st century (compared to other scenarios of the A2 family) and by expedited technological progress in the second half. Numeric estimates of SO2 emissions developed by different models vary substantially, especially in the middle of the modeling period (Figure 5-13b). Emissions are largest in the A2-AIM scenario, exceeding 160 MtS in 2070. From 2020 to 2060 the lowest emissions are produced by the A2-A1-MiniCAM scenario, while after 2070 the lowest emissions are achieved in the A2-ASF scenario. 5.5.2.3. B1 Scenario Family Sulfur emissions in the B1 family scenarios fall within the lower third of the full range of emissions from the SRES scenarios (Figure 5-12). The B1-IMAGE trajectory is generally positioned in the middle of the B1 family range in the first decades of the 21st century, which corresponds to a 75% reduction of emissions in industrialized countries between 2000 and 2050. The near-term increase in emissions in B1-IMAGE occurs predominantly in developing countries and is associated with increases in fossil fuel use in those regions, combined with relatively low levels Figure 5-13d: Standardized global SO2 emissions in the B2 scenario family. The marker scenario is shown with a thick line without ticks, the globally harmonized scenarios with thin lines, and the non-harmonized scenarios with thin, dotted lines (see Table 4-3). Box 5-3: Sulfur Emissions in the A1B-AIM Marker Scenario In the A1B-AIM marker scenario, global SO2 emissions increase rapidly from 70.6 MtS in 1990 to reach a peak around 2020 at 101 MtS, and subsequently decline to around 30 MtS after 2050. The global SO2 emission trajectory follows that of the developing countries, for which emissions increase because of the rapid growth of fossil fuel use driven by rapid economic development, combined with a lack of sulfur controls that reflect investment and infrastructure limitations. With an increase in personal incomes in developing countries and associated concerns about local air pollution, SO2 becomes controlled in a similar way to that in developed countries, for which SO2 emissions have declined in the past two decades. The sources of SO2 emissions tracked by the AIM model include energy use, industrial production processes (steel and cement production), and biomass burning. The major factors of SO2 emission reduction are changes in the fuel mix, use of advanced energy technology, and implementation of desulfurization technology. In the A1B-AIM scenario, the volume and share in total primary energy of coal and crude oil changes drastically over time (Table 5-10). Table 5-10: Coal and crude oil in the A1-AIM scenario in terms of primary energy requirements (EJ) and as shares of total primary energy (%). 1990 Coal 85 EJ 24.6% Crude oil 126 EJ 36.5% 2050 Coal 140 EJ 17.7% Crude oil 181 EJ 15.0% 2100 Coal 41 EJ 2.0% Crude oil 107 EJ 5.0% Before 2050, both advanced energy technology and desulfurization play a key role in the SO2 emissions reduction. In the power generation sector, integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC), fluidized bed combustion (FBC), and flue-gas desulfurization (FGD) technologies are adopted. In the industry and commercial sectors, FBC boilers, fuel desulfurization and FGD are adopted. SO2 emission reductions are also achieved in the transport sector. Table 5-11 summarizes the SO2 abatement effect of these technologies. Table 5-11: SO2 emission reductions (%) by technology and sector in the A1-AIM scenario. Technologies – SO2 Emission reduction rate – Note Power generation IGCC – 96% – Introduced after 2015 FBC – 95% FGD – 98% Industry and commercial sector FBC – 92% FGD – 95% Fuel desulfurization – 70% Transport sector SO2 emission control – 75% Income levels determine the time at which these technologies are introduced in the A1B-AIM scenario. According to the experience of SO2 emission controls in developed countries, low-income developing countries will start to introduce SO2 emission control technologies when GDP reaches around US$3500 per capita in 1990 dollars. In A1B-AIM this threshold level is reached in a period of about 30 years. the first decades of the 21st century, which corresponds to a 75% reduction of emissions in industrialized countries between 2000 and 2050. The near-term increase in emissions in B1-IMAGE occurs predominantly in developing countries and is associated with increases in fossil fuel use in those regions, combined with relatively low levels of emission controls. After 2040, increased emission controls and declines in fossil fuel use result in decreasing SO2 emissions. Emissions in other B1 family scenarios decline even faster than in B1-IMAGE. In B1-AIM, a decline in emissions is directly related to per capita incomes. As developing countries reach levels of US$3500 per capita in 1990 dollars, they start to apply more stringent SO2 controls that lead to quickly dropping emission levels (Figure 5-13c). 5.5.2.4. B2 Scenario Family Emissions in the B2 family scenarios cover close to the full range of SO2 emissions (Figure 5-12). The B2-MESSAGE scenario yields steadily declining global emissions from 1990. This overall trajectory includes a tripling of emissions from non-energy sources by 2050, with subsequent stabilization and eventual decline after that (Figure 5-13d). The increase in emissions from non-energy sources is more than offset by very rapid reductions in emissions from energy sources between 2015 and 2050. Developing countries have rising emissions through to 2025, which stabilize by 2050, and decline thereafter. This increase in emissions in developing countries is offset by reductions in developed countries. These results are explained largely by regional measures and technological changes to minimize critical loads of acidic deposition (see Box 5-4). The B2-ASF scenario projects very rapid growth in emissions from energy use through 2025, primarily from increases in fossil fuel use in developing countries. After 2025, the growth in fossil fuel declines and developing countries become wealthier and are more aggressive on SO2 emission controls, which in the ASF model are directly linked to GDP/capita levels. Emissions from other industrial sources increase steadily throughout the period as economic activity increases. 5.5.2.5. Inter-Family Comparison The relatively rapid desulfurization in the A1B-AIM marker compared to the other SRES markers mainly results from high capital turnover rates and, therefore, rapid diffusion of new and clean technologies combined with high income levels in the developing world by the middle of the 21st century (Figure 5-12). The structure and patterns of sulfur emissions for the two illustrative scenarios in the two scenario groups A1FI and A1T are similar to those of the A1B and B1 marker scenarios, respectively, and are therefore not discussed separately here. As technological progress and income growth are the slowest in A2 among all the SRES scenario families, the primary energy mix in the A2-ASF marker by 2100 is still dominated by fossil fuels, with about 50% of the primary energy supplied by coal. Although measures are adopted to limit local and regional environmental damages, sulfur-mitigation measures in the A2 world are less pronounced than in the other SRES scenarios. Therefore, global sulfur emissions in the A2 marker are highest as compared to the other markers (Figure 5-12). Box 5-4: Future Sulfur Dioxide Emissions in the B2 Marker Scenario Future global emissions of SO2 are generally lower across the SRES emissions scenarios compared to most earlier projections, because of three factors: • Switch to cleaner fuels, such as natural gas and renewable sources. • Transition to cleaner, more efficient coal technologies, such as IGCC generation and pressurized FBC. • Utilization of direct emissions-reduction technologies, such as FGD. The scope of reductions from fuel switching is illustrated by the following. At present, 60% of anthropogenic SO2 emissions in developing regions are from the direct use of fossil fuels in buildings and industry (Smith et al., 2000). Reductions in these emissions will be realized by shifting from an energy structure that relies on the direct use of solid fuels to one that increasingly relies on distributed energy grids (electricity, natural gas, etc.). This shift, and a resultant decrease in SO2 emissions, has already occurred in Europe and North America. Further reductions are expected in the future as more efficient, and inherently low emission, fossil fuel technologies (such as IGCC) become commercialized. Explicit policies for sulfur emissions reductions, such as the use of FGD devices, will be needed to meet emissions targets in the near term, but are likely to be less necessary in the longer term. To illustrate these trends and the resultant decrease in SO2 emissions over the 21st century, emissions in the B2-MESSAGE scenario (Riahi and Roehrl, 2000) are analyzed. Global energy-related SO2 emissions in this B2 scenario decline from 59 MtS in 1990 to about 12 MtS in 2100. The primary causes for this reduction are the transition to more advanced coal technologies and desulfurization. Consistent with the characteristics of gradual change in the B2 storyline, the aggregated emissions coefficient for power production from coal declines from about 5.3 kgS/MWh in 1990 to 0.04 kgS/MWh in the year 2100. The latter emissions intensity is similar to that of the most advanced current technologies, for example, the Siemens IGCC98 power plant featuring 0.032 kgS/MWh (Baumann et al., 1998). In the second half of the 21st century, desulfurization of the energy system also takes place because of the production of methanol from coal. Sulfur removal is a process-inherent feature. Methanol is mainly used in the transport sector as a substitute for oil products that become scarce after 2050. The percentage reductions in energy-related SO2 emissions in the B2 scenario are shown in Table 5-12 as a function of time for five technologies. These percentages were obtained by re-calculating the B2-MESSAGE emissions scenario with the energy structure and emissions coefficients held constant in time at those of 1990. In this hypothetical case, SO2 emissions in 2100 would be 227 MtS. Accordingly, energy-related SO2 emissions in 2100 are reduced by about 215 MtS in the B2 scenario, 68% of which results from technological change and 32% from fuel switching. By the year 2100 the contribution to these emissions reductions by flue-gas scrubbing (FGD) is negligible by the year 2100, because more-advanced coal technologies eliminate any need for it. Furthermore, a shift in refining technology to lighter oil products, currently underway worldwide, contributes to a reduction in SO2 emissions, particularly in the early part of the 21st century. Table 5-12: Sources of energy-related SO2 emissions reductions in the B2 marker scenario. Year Scrubbing (%) IGCC (%) Synfuel (%) Light oil shift (%) Fuel switching (%) Total reduction (MtS) 1990 100 0 0 0 0 5.1 2020 26 16 0 24 33 58.6 2050 11 15 2 17 54 128.9 Following the B1 storyline, in the B1-IMAGE marker the emphasis is on global solutions to environmental sustainability and improved welfare and development equity. High technological development rates in the renewable energy sector result in a continued structural shift away from fossil fuels. All emissions coefficients were calculated with the MESSAGE model. Combined with dematerialization of the economy and with the most pronounced sulfur mitigation measures assumed among the SRES scenarios, this results in emissions that peak around 2020 and subsequently decline continuously to 2100 (Figure 5-12). In the B2 scenario family, and thus in the B2-MESSAGE marker, strong emphasis is placed on regional environmental protection. Dynamics of technological change continue along historical trends ("dynamics as usual"), which are slower than in the A1 or B1 families, but faster than in the A2 family. Sulfur emission projections for the B2 marker scenario were generated on the basis of minimization of critical loads of acidic deposition using the methodology described in Amann et al. (1996). No explicit link between income levels and sulfur control regime was made in this scenario. The resultant sulfur emissions are 61 MtS in 2020, 56 MtS in 2050, and 48 MtS in 2100 (see Figure 5-12). All the SRES marker scenarios anticipate increasing levels of sulfur control, with rates and timing ranging from rapid introduction of stringent controls in B1-IMAGE to more gradual, later, and less stringent controls in A2-ASF. To illustrate the impacts of sulfur controls in the scenarios, an "uncontrolled sulfur" variant of the B2 marker scenario was calculated at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA; for details see Box 5-4). In this hypothetical scenario, sulfur emissions amount to 182 MtS in 2050 and 227 MtS in 2100 (compared to 57 and 47 MtS, respectively, in the B2 marker scenario). These emission levels are much higher even than those in the A2 marker scenario (105 MtS in 2050 and 60 MtS in 2100). 5.6. Regional Distribution and Gridding Regional information on emissions serves at least two major purposes - to identify the contribution of world regions to the global total and to track shifts in the relative weight of different regions. This information is especially relevant for the development of mitigation scenarios. For climate modeling, the regional distribution of emissions for well-mixed GHGs (CO2, CH4, N2O, and halocarbons) may not be that important. However, short-lived gases such as SO2 are radiatively important close to the point of origin only; their local and regional concentrations may significantly change the future climate outlook. The same is true for the group of ozone precursors (CO, NOx, and NMVOCs). To be able to estimate tropospheric ozone concentration levels, regionalized information is indispensable. The initial evaluation showed that the 40 SRES scenarios have a very substantial regional variability in emissions of all radiatively important substances. The detailed and rigorous SO2 are radiatively important close to the point of origin only; their local and regional concentrations may significantly change the future climate outlook. The same is true for the group of ozone precursors (CO, NOx, and NMVOCs). To be able to estimate tropospheric ozone concentration levels, regionalized information is indispensable. The initial evaluation showed that the 40 SRES scenarios have a very substantial regional variability in emissions of all radiatively important substances. The detailed and rigorous analysis of this variability falls outside the scope of the current report. Therefore, this section merely illustrates possible regional patterns based on standardized regional emissions in the four SRES marker scenarios (see also Kram et al., 2000). Standardized regional outputs from the 40 SRES scenarios are provided in Appendix VII. Subsection 5.6.1 describes emissions of GHGs and SO2 in the four SRES macro-regions, followed by the description of “gridded” SO2 emissions (distributed over a 1° x 1° grid) in 5.6.2. In this report represented by four macro-regions - OECD90, REF, ASIA, and ALM. 5.6.1. Regional Distribution As Tables 5-13a to 5-13d clearly illustrate, the distribution of emissions over the four regions in the base year (1990) is very uneven. For example, while in industrialized regions (OECD90 and REF) fossil and industrial CO2 emissions are dominant, in the developing regions (ASIA and ALM) the contribution of land-use emissions (deforestation) is also very important. In 1990, developing regions produced much lower volumes of CO2 and high-GWP gases than the industrialized world, while their relative share of N2O, CH4, and NOx emissions was much more substantial (see Figures 5-13a to 5-13d). 5.6.1.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Fossil Fuels and Industry As suggested by Figure 5-14, in all the SRES scenario families the share of industrialized regions (OECD90 and REF) in global total becomes progressively smaller and by 2100 these regions emit from 23% to 32% of the total (Table 5-14, Figure 5-14). In the OECD90 region, standardized fossil fuel and industrial CO2 emissions in the A1B marker scenario (A1B-AIM) increase from 2.8 GtC in 1990 to 3.4 GtC in 2050, and subsequently decline to 2.2 GtC in 2100 (Figure 5-14). Compared to other scenarios, the growth in primary energy use in this region is relatively high, spurred by rapid economic development (see also Chapter 4). However, after 2050 the increases in the use of primary energy are accompanied by declining emissions through the combination of a lower use of fossil fuels and a switch from coal to gas. The share of non-fossil fuels in the OECD90 region of the A1B marker scenario also increases drastically. In 2100, the contribution of non-fossil energy amounts to 68% of the total primary energy use of the OECD90 countries, the largest non-fossil fuel share for this region of all the SRES marker scenarios. The fossil fuel and industrial CO2 emission trajectory of the REF region is even less linear than in the OECD90 region. Initially, emissions decline from the base year level of 1.3 GtC to 1.1 GtC in 2020 because of economic restructuring. After 2020, emissions increase, driven by an increased energy demand to support renewed economic growth (Figure 5-14). However, after 2050 emissions decline again primarily through a decrease in population and improved energy efficiency. By 2100, non-fossil fuels in REF contribute 58% of the total primary energy use and the share of natural gas reaches almost 40%. The energy and industry CO2 emission growth in the ASIA region of the A1B marker scenario is very high, reflecting rapid economic growth and high energy demand. By 2100 the total primary energy use in this region exceeds the 1990 level more than 10 fold. Standardized CO2 emissions increase from 1.15 GtC in 1990 to 5.73 GtC in 2050 and then drop to 5.27 GtC in 2100 (Figure 5-14, Table 5-13c). By 2100 contributions from the two major energy sources, non-fossil fuels and natural gas, are 69% and 25%, respectively. 60-75 Total 11.0-17.4 22-40 60-78 2100 Fossil fuel & industry 5.2-28.9 23-32 68-77 Total 4.2-29.1 23-32 68-77 In the A1B marker scenario, the increase in energy demand in the ALM region is even higher than in the ASIA region. The primary energy use of 47 EJ in the base year increases to a level of 802 EJ in 2100, with 72% of energy from non-fossil sources. The emission path in this region is in line with trends observed in ASIA. Emissions grow from 0.72 GtC in 1990 to 5.72 GtC in 2050. After this peak they decline to 4.81 GtC in 2100 (Figure 5-14, Tables 5-13d). In the A2 marker scenario (A2-ASF), technological development is relatively slow and fossil fuels maintain their dominant position to supply the rapidly expanding population. By 2100, the contributions of coal to the total primary energy mix in the OECD90, REF, ASIA, and ALM regions are 52%, 38%, 61%, and 48%, respectively, the largest shares across all the SRES marker scenarios. Relatively slow rates of technological improvements in the A2 scenario family result in the lowest contribution of non-fossil fuels compared to the other scenarios. In the A2 marker, CO2 emissions grow continuously in all SRES regions (except REF from 1990 to 2020; Figure 5-14, Tables 5-13a-d). The fastest growth occurs in the ASIA and ALM regions as a result of the fast population growth in these regions. The contribution of CO2 emissions by ASIA increases from 19% to 38% of the global total, and that by ALM from 12% to 31%. The strong trend toward more ecologically compatible consumption and production in the B1 storyline is reflected by structural changes that lead to fewer energy- and material-intensive activities and result in a relatively limited growth of energy requirements in the B1 marker scenario (B1-IMAGE). In all the regions the shift is away from fossil fuels. In 2100, non-fossil sources supply more than 50% of by ALM from 12% to 31%. The strong trend toward more ecologically compatible consumption and production in the B1 storyline is reflected by structural changes that lead to fewer energy- and material-intensive activities and result in a relatively limited growth of energy requirements in the B1 marker scenario (B1-IMAGE). In all the regions the shift is away from fossil fuels. In 2100, non-fossil sources supply more than 50% of the global energy requirements, with regional shares ranging from 41% (REF) to 64% (ASIA). Drastic changes in energy systems lead to an eventual decline in OECD90 emissions starting from 2020; this starts from 2050 in other regions (Figure 5-14, Tables 5-13a-d). By 2100 emissions in all regions but ALM are smaller than they were in 1990. A decline in emissions is less pronounced in the developing regions – ASIA and ALM combine to produce around 70% of CO2 emissions in 2100. In the B2 world (illustrated by the B2-MESSAGE marker), the regions exploit comparative resource and technology advantages to structure their energy systems. Combined emissions in the OECD90 and REF regions remain more or less stable, changing from 4.1 GtC in 1990 to 4.3 GtC in 2100. The relative share of these two regions decreases from 69% in the base year to 31% in 2100 (Figure 5-14, Tables 5-13a-d). In the B2 marker scenario, fossil fuel and industrial CO2 emissions in the OECD90 region increase to 3.7 GtC by 2020. Thereafter, emissions decline to 3.3 GtC in 2050 and to 3.1 GtC in 2100. This dynamic is caused by a decline in the use of fossil fuels and by the replacement of oil with natural gas, as pressure on the oil resource base increases considerably after 2050. In the REF region, standardized fossil CO2 emissions decline to 0.8 GtC in 2020, after which they return to the 1990 level by 2100 (1.2 GtC). Toward the end of the 21st century, primary energy use in this region decreases while emissions increase because of a switch to coal (mainly to produce liquid substitutes for oil). In ASIA, both primary energy use and carbon emissions increase during the 21st century. Although the use of non-fossil fuels becomes more important, the contribution of fossil fuels to emissions remains high. The use of coal, oil, and gas increases until 2050, after which the use of oil and gas decreases, while the use of coal grows rapidly. Population, energy use, and emissions in the ALM region constantly increase during the 21st century. Again, the fossil fuels retain a dominant role and supply 47% of the energy requirements in 2100. Gas use increases until 2100, while the use of coal is rather stable until 2050 and shows a rapid increase afterward. Oil use drops sharply after 2050 as resources become depleted. 5.6.1.2. Land-Use Carbon Dioxide Emissions Changes in land use are influenced primarily by the demand for cropland and grassland (to supply plant and animal food to the world population) and by the role of biomass energy. The uncertainty of emission estimates is reflected in the models used to quantify the SRES scenarios – in 1990 they range between 1.0 and 1.6 GtC and the spread at the regional level is even larger. In all the SRES marker scenarios, most emissions related to land use originate from the ASIA and ALM regions (Tables 5-13a-d). In the industrialized regions, the land-use change emissions in 2100 vary from -0.40 to +0.04 GtC. In the developing regions emissions from land-use change span a larger range (from -0.56 to +0.35 GtC). 5.6.1.3. Total Carbon Dioxide Emissions Adding land-use CO2 emissions to the energy- and industry-related emissions does not make significant changes to the distribution of emissions across regions (Figures 5-14 and 5-15). Table 5-14 provides an overview of the relative shares of the industrialized and developing regions within global CO2 emissions. On average, the SRES marker scenarios project a shift in relative contribution in both energy- and industry-related and total CO2 emissions from the industrialized to developing regions. In general, the relative contribution of industrialized regions is the lowest in A1 and the highest in B2. Shifts in the regional emission shares (Table 5-13a-d) result from different developments in regional emission trajectories. To illustrate this, the trajectories were normalized to the base year (1990 = 100 for each region) and are presented in Figure 5-16. Figure 5-16 confirms that CO2 emissions in the ASIA and ALM regions in all the SRES markers grow much faster than in the industrialized regions. It also illustrates that the global pattern is strongly influenced by the developing region trajectories. Furthermore, reflecting different development perspectives in the four SRES families, CO2 emissions grow differently in ASIA and ALM. In the A1B marker, emission trajectories in ALM and ASIA are roughly parallel over the entire time horizon. In the B1 marker, this is only true in the earlier years. As the emission of ALM peaks and then declines later than that of ASIA, emission trajectories diverge strongly in the second half of the 21st century. In the A2 marker, emissions in ALM start to grow at a lower rate than in ASIA, but subsequently catch up and later the two are again fairly close. Finally, in the B2 marker, ALM emissions initially grow at a modest rate, close to those for the OECD90 region and the world average. In later years, the growth in ALM exceeds the global rate, but total carbon emissions remain far below those in the ASIA region (Figures 5-15, 5-16). 5.6.1.4. Methane The resultant CH4 emission trajectories in the four SRES markers are displayed in Figure 5-17. By 2020, regional differences between the four markers are minimal. In 2050, the largest difference is the relative share of the REF region in the A2 marker, attributable primarily to an increased coal and gas production in this region. By 2100, the A2 marker has the largest CH4 emissions in all the regions as compared to the other markers (Tables 5-13a-d, Figure 5-17). This arises from the “heterogeneous” nature of the A2 storyline, in which each region has to rely primarily on its own resources and progress in the renewable energy sector is quite limited. The second highest methane emissions are attained in the B2 marker, which also has a “regional” orientation, but with a more environmentally sustainable emphasis as compared to the A2 marker. Starting from 2100, both A1B and B1 markers have notably lower CH4 emissions in all the regions in comparison with the A2 and B2 markers (Figure 5-17). The regional emission allocation changes considerably from 1990 to 2100; all four markers project much greater percentages of emissions in the developing regions (ASIA and ALM). 5.6.1.5. Nitrous Oxide The relative shares of the OECD90, REF, ASIA, and ALM regions in the base year N2O emissions are 39%, 9%, 34%, and 18%, respectively (Figure 5-18). The OECD90 emissions remain quite stable over the 21st century in all the markers, except A2 in which emissions increase from 2.6 MtN in 1990 to almost 4 MtN in 2100. Emissions in the ASIA and REF regions increase in the A2 marker, decline in the B1 marker (after an initial increase in ASIA), and do not change significantly in the A1 and B2 markers. Finally, the ALM N2O emissions grow quickly in the A2 marker and remain relatively flat in the other markers. The relatively small changes in the N2O emissions across regions and scenarios are explained, in part, by a limited capacity of the SRES models to capture drastic shifts in technologies and practices (e.g., new catalytic converters or new manure management systems) that directly impact emission levels. the regions in 2050, while in 2100 the largest emissions across all the regions are produced in the A2 marker. Emissions in all the regions are smallest in the B1 marker, which reflects its sustainability features (e.g., increased recycling and “dematerialization”). Figure 5-18: Anthropogenic N2O emissions in the SRES marker scenarios by region. The numbers for the additional two illustrative scenarios for the A1FI and A1T scenario groups noted in the Summary for Policymakers can be found in Appendix VII. Figure 5-17: Anthropogenic CH4 emissions in the SRES marker scenarios by region. The numbers for the additional two illustrative scenarios for the A1FI and A1T scenario groups noted in the Summary for Policymakers can be found in Appendix VII. 5.6.1.6. Halocarbons and Other Halogenated Compounds In 1990, emissions of halocarbons and other halogenated compounds occurred almost exclusively in the OECD90 region, which contributed 95% to the world total (Figure 5-19). By 2020, OECD90 still remains a major emitter, but emissions in ASIA and ALM are increasing at much higher rates. The continued growth of the production and use of halocarbons and other halogenated compounds in the developing regions after 2020 makes them primary emitters of these substances in all the markers, except the B1 marker, in 2100 (Figure 5-19). Figure 5-19: Halocarbons and other halogenated compounds emissions in the SRES marker scenarios by region. The numbers for the additional two illustrative scenarios for the A1FI and A1T scenario groups noted in the Summary for Policymakers can be found in Appendix VII. 5.6.1.7. Sulfur As noted in Section 5.5.2.1, even with a comparatively good agreement on global sulfur emission levels, important uncertainties remain at the sectoral and regional levels. The base-year uncertainties are especially important because regional sulfur emissions trends have changed drastically during the past decade. While declining strongly in the industrialized regions as a result of sulfur control policies in Europe and North America, and because of economic reforms in Russia and Eastern Europe, emissions increase rapidly in Asia with an increase in the energy demand and coal use. As a general rule, in the SRES scenarios an increasing affluence causes energy use per capita to rise and leads to the substitution of solid fuels, such as coal and fuelwood, with energy forms of higher quality. This relationship determines the sulfur emission dynamics across the SRES markers and regions (Figure 5-20). Figure 5-20: Anthropogenic SO2 emissions in the SRES marker scenarios by region. The numbers for the additional two illustrative scenarios for the A1FI and A1T scenario groups noted in the Summary for Policymakers can be found in Appendix VII. Figure 5-21: Distribution of emissions in 1990 (top), 2020, 2050, 2080 and in 2100 (bottom) in the A1B marker scenario. Low emission levels are indicated by shades of (bright) green; higher levels are indicated by shades of red and pink. Box 5-5: Gridding of Emission Data The climate effects of SO2 are intrinsically regional and emissions on a latitude-longitude grid are required as input to climate models. Emissions of SO2 were first standardized for four world regions as described above. Then, emissions from the marker scenarios for six regions (OECD90, REF, Centrally Planned Asia, Rest of Asia, Latin America, and Africa/Middle East, scaled to match the standardized emissions) were used for gridding purposes. For the Annex II countries, a value of 23 MtS was taken for 1990 emissions, a figure derived from a compilation of country-level emissions inventories (Smith et al., 2000). These emissions were mapped to a global 1° x 1° emissions grid. For each region, the pattern of total SO2 emissions from the EDGAR database (Olivier et al., 1996) was scaled by the total emissions for that region and a time period. Emissions for OECD90 countries were first scaled individually to their country-specific values. The value of 3 MtS was added to reflect international shipping, with the pattern and magnitude of these emissions held constant. Emissions of other short-lived gases (CO, NOx, NMVOCs, and CH4) also needed to be mapped to a global grid for use in atmospheric chemistry models. The approach taken was essentially the same, with the EDGAR database used to establish the spatial pattern. Standardization and subsequent gridding were carried out at the level of the original four world regions, and no specific adjustments were made for international shipping. In “high income regions” (OECD90, REF) sulfur emissions have already passed their peaks and are actually declining at present. This trend is expected to continue in all the markers, except A2 in which an increased use of coal “counters” a decline in specific emissions in OECD90 (Figure 5-20). Emissions in ASIA grow in all the markers by 2020, and then decline by 2050, and further decline by 2100. The most dramatic decline is registered in the A1B marker; this is related to its aggressive assumptions on the introduction of low-sulfur technologies and fuel switching in the ASIA region (see Box 5-3 for more details). Unlike ASIA, the ALM region sees increases in emissions in all four markers from 2020 to 2050, because of the somewhat “mixed” nature of this region, which combines countries with substantially different affluence levels and development trends. However, by 2100, when low-sulfur technology becomes widely available everywhere, emissions in the ALM decline in all markers (Figure 5-20). 5.6.2. Gridded Sulfur Emissions As discussed above, global sulfur emissions eventually decline in all SRES scenario families and associated groups. In addition, the regional distribution of emissions changes drastically over time. While in previous decades major sulfur emitters were located primarily in industrialized regions of the world, presently emissions for these sources are declining because of the introduction of cleaner fuels and the conversion to low-sulfur technologies to comply with environmental regulations. In the majority of SRES scenarios, this trend is expected to continue. Meanwhile, less-developed regions are anticipated to experience strong economic growth associated with an increased demand for energy. Especially in the short term, fossil fuels are likely to satisfy the major share of this new demand, which may lead to a steep initial growth in sulfur emissions. As mentioned earlier (see Section 5.5.2), at some point in time sulfur emissions will be controlled in all the scenarios and, together with shifts to essentially sulfur-free energy resources, they will decrease in the developing regions as they are decreasing now in the industrialized world. As a consequence of these complex dynamics, different countries and regions are bound to experience very different levels of sulfur emissions over the 21st century. To illustrate this, Figure 5-21 shows gridded sulfur emissions in 1990 and 2050 in the A1B marker (see Box 5-5). References: AFEAS (Alternative Fluorocarbons Environmental Acceptability Study), 1998: Production, Sales and Atmospheric Release of Fluorocarbons Through 1997. AFEAS, Washington, DC. Akimoto, H., and H. Narita, 1994: Distribution of SO2, NOx, and CO2 emissions from fuel combustion and industrial activities in Asia with 1° x 1° resolution. Atmospheric Environment, 28(2), 213-225. Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grübler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios. In Climate Change 1994, Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 233-304. Alcamo, J., J. Onigkeit, and F. Kaspar, 1997: The Pollutant Burden Approach for Computing Global Cofala, F. Gyarfas, C. Heyes, Z. Klimont, M. Makowski, W. Schoepp, and S. Shibayev, 1996: Cost-Effective Control of Acidification and Ground-Level Ozone. Second interim report to the European Commission (DGXI), International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), Laxenburg, Austria. Ashford, P., 1999: Consideration for the responsible use of HFCs in Foams. Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs, Petten, the Netherlands. Baumann, H., N. Ulrich, G. Haupt, G. Zimmermann, R. Pruschek, and G. Oeljeklaus, 1998: Development of a Cost Effective IGCC 98 Power Plant. Power Gen Europe '98, Milan, June 9-11. Benkovitz, C.M., M.T. Scholtz, J. Pacyna, L. Tarrason, J. Dignon, E.G. Voldner, P.A. Spiro, J.A. Logan, and T.E. Graedel, 1996: Global gridded inventories of anthropogenic emissions of sulfur and nitrogen. Journal of Geophysical Research, 101(D22), 29,239-29,253. Dadi, Z., L. Xueyi, and X. Huaqing, 1998: Estimation of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions in China in 1990 and 1995. Energy Research Institute, Beijing, China. Davidson, E.A., and W. Kingerlee, 1997: A global inventory of nitric oxide emissions from soils. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 48(1/2), 37-50. Delmas, R., D. Serca, and C. Jambert, 1997: Global inventory of NOx sources. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 48(1/2), 51-60. De Vries, B., J. Bollen, L. Bouwman, M. den Elzen, M. Janssen, and E. Kreileman, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in an equity-, environment- and service-oriented world. An IMAGE-based scenario for the next century. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Dignon, J., and S. Hameed, 1989: Global emissions of nitrogen and sulfur oxides from 1860 to 1989. Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association, 39(2), 180-186. ECE (UN Economic Commission for Europe), 1997: Anthropogenic Emissions of Sulfur 1980 to 2010 in the ECE Region. EB.AIR/GE.1/1997/3 and Addendum 1, ECE, Geneva. EU (European Commission), 1997: Estimated European Union (EU) fluorocarbon emissions now and in the future & EU reduction potential of fluorocarbon emissions. Draft, January 28, 1997, EC, Brussels. Fenhann, J., 2000: Industrial non-energy, non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Foell, W., M. Amann, G. Carmichael, M. Chadwick, J.-P. Hettelingh, L. Hordijk, and Z. Dianwu, 1995: RAINS Asia. An assessment model for air pollution in Asia. Report on the World Bank sponsored project "Acid Rain and Emission Reductions in Asia," World Bank, Washington, DC. Grubler, A., 1998: A review of global and regional sulfur emission scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 383-418. Harnisch, J., R. Borchers, P. Fabian, and M. Maiss, 1999: CF4 and the age of mesospheric polar vortex air. Geophysical Research Letters, 26(3), 295-298. Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1995: Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emissions Scenarios. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1996: Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate Change, Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1997: Revised Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Organisation for Economic Cooperation (OECD), and the International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris. Jiang, K., T. Masui, T. Morita, and Y. Matsuoka, 2000: Long-term GHG emission scenarios of Asia-Pacific and the world. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Kato, N., 1996: Analysis of the structure of energy consumption and dynamics of emission of atmospheric species related to global environmental change (SO2, NOx, CO2) in Asia. Atmospheric Environment, 30(5), 757-785. Kram, T., K. Riahi, R.A. Roehrl, S. van Rooijen, T. Morita, and B. de Vries, 2000: Global and regional greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Kroeze, C., and L. Reijnders, 1992: Halocarbons and global warming III. The Science of Total Environment, 112, 291-314. Kroeze, C., 1995: Fluorocarbons and SF6 Global Emission Inventory and Options for Control. RIVM report 773001007, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. Maiss, M., L.P. Steele, R.J. Francey, P.J. Fraser, R.L. Langenfelds, N.B.A. Trivett, and I. Levin, 1996: Sulfur hexafluoride - a powerful new atmospheric tracer. Atmospheric Environment, 30, 1621-1629. McCulloch, A., P.M. Midgley, and D.A. Fisher, 1994: Distribution of emissions of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 11, 12, 113, 114 and 115 among reporting and non-reporting countries in 1986. Atmospheric Environment, 28(16), 2567-2582. McCulloch, A., and P.M. Midgley, 1998: Estimated historic emissions 1998. Estimated historic emissions of fluorocarbons from the European Union. Atmospheric Environment, 32(9), 1571-1580. Midgley, P.M., and A. McCulloch, 1999. Properties and applications of industrial halocarbons. In Reactive Halogen Compounds in the Atmosphere, 4, Part E. P. Fabian, and O.N. Singh (eds.), The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, Springer Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg. Mori, S., 2000. The development of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios using an extension of the MARIA model for the assessment of resource and energy technologies. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Mosier, A., C. Kroeze, C. Nevison, O. Oenema, S. Seitzinger, and O. van Cleemput, 1998. Closing the global N2O budget: nitrous oxide emissions through the agricultural nitrogen cycle. OECD/IPCC/IEA phase II development of IPCC guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventory methodology. Nutrient Cycling in Agrosystems, 52, 225-248. Olivier, J.G.J., A.F. Bouwman, C.W.M. van der Maas, J.J.M. Berdowski, C. Veldt, S.P.S. Bloos, A.J.H. Visschedijk, P.Y.J. Zandveld, and J.L. Haverlag, 1996. Description of EDGAR Version 2.0. A set of global emission inventories of GHGs and ozone-depleting substances for all anthropogenic and most natural sources on a per country basis and on 1°×1° grid. Report 771060002, National Institute of Public Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, the Netherlands. Oram, D.E., W.T. Sturges, S.A. Penkett, A. McCulloch, and P.J. Fraser, 1998. Growth of fluoroform (CHF3, HFC-23) in the background atmosphere. Geophysical Research Letters, 25(1), 35-38. Pepper, W.J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992. Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: An update. Assumptions, methodology and results. Support document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Preisegger, E., 1999. Automotive Air Conditioning: Impact of Refrigerant on Global Warming. Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs, Petten, the Netherlands. Riahi, K., and R.A. Roehrl, 2000. Greenhouse gas emissions in a dynamics-as-usual scenario of economic and energy development. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Roehrl, R.A., and K. Riahi, 2000. Technology dynamics and greenhouse gas emissions mitigation: a cost assessment. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Sankovski, A., W. Barbour, and W. Pepper, 2000. Quantification of the IS99 emission scenario storylines using the atmospheric stabilization framework (ASF). Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Science & Policy Services Inc., 1997. Sales of sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) by end-use applications. Annual sales for 1961 through 1996, Sales projections for 1997 through 2000, Washington, D.C. Sinton, J.E., (ed), 1996. China Energy Databook. LBL-32822 Rev.4 UC-900, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA. Smith, S.J., H. Pitcher, and T.M.L. Wigley, 2000. Global and regional anthropogenic sulfur dioxide emissions. Global Biogeochemical Cycles (In press). Spiro, P.A., D.J. Jacob, and J.A. Logan, 1992. Global inventory of sulfur emissions with 1°×1° resolution. Journal of Geophysical Research, 97, 6023-6036. US Geological Survey, 1998. Mineral Commodities Information (http://minerals.er.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/). Victor, D.G., and G.J. MacDonald, 1998. A Model for Estimating Future Emissions of Sulfur Hexafluoride and Perfluorocarbons. IR-98-053, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, July 1998, pp. 33. Watson, R., M.C. Zinyowera, and R. Moss (eds.), 1996a. Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific Analyses. Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 861 pp. Watson, R., M.C. Zinyowera, and R. Moss (eds.), 1996b. Technologies, Policies and Measures for Mitigating Climate Change. IPCC Technical Paper I, IPCC Working Group II, 85 pp. WMO (World Meteorological Organisation), 1997. Global acid deposition assessment. In WMO Global Atmospheric Watch, No. 16. D.M. Whelpdale, and M.S. Kaiser (eds.), WMO, Geneva. WMO/UNEP (World Meteorological Organisation and United Nations Environment Programme), 1998. Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1998. WMO Global Ozone Research & Monitoring Project, December 1998, WMO, Geneva. WMO/UNEP, 1999. Conference Report. Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs, Petten, the Netherlands, 26-28 May 1999. World Bureau of Metal Statistics, 1997. World Metal Statistics Yearbook. Hertfordshire, UK. 6 Summary Discussions and Recommendations CONTENTS 6.1. Introduction and Background 295 6.2. Scenario Driving Forces 299 6.2.1. Population Projections 299 6.2.2. Economic Development 300 6.2.3. Structural and Technological Change 300 6.2.3.1. Energy Systems 301 6.2.3.2. Land-use Patterns 302 6.3. Greenhouse Gases and Sulfur Emissions 304 6.3.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions 304 6.3.1.1. Emissions from Energy, Industry and Land Use 304 6.3.1.2. Four Categories of Cumulative Emissions 307 6.3.2. Other Greenhouse Gases 308 6.3.2.1. Methane Emissions 310 6.3.2.2. Nitrous Oxide Emissions 310 6.3.2.3. Halocarbons and Halogenated Compounds 311 6.3.3. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions 311 6.3.4. Nitrogen Oxides and Volatile Organic Compounds Emissions 304 6.3.1.1. Emissions from Energy, Industry and Land Use 304 6.3.1.2. Four Categories of Cumulative Emissions 307 6.3.2. Other Greenhouse Gases 308 6.3.2.1. Methane Emissions 310 6.3.2.2. Nitrous Oxide Emissions 310 6.3.2.3. Halocarbons and Halogenated Compounds 311 6.3.3. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions 311 6.3.4. Nitrogen Oxides and Volatile Organic Compounds 313 6.3.4.1. Nitrogen Oxides Emissions 313 6.3.4.2. Volatile Organic Compounds, Excluding Methane 313 6.3.4.3. Carbon Monoxide 314 6.4. Summary and Conclusions 314 References 319 Summary Discussions and Recommendations 295 6.1. Introduction and Background The set of 40 emissions scenarios in this Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) is based on an extensive assessment of the literature, six alternative modeling approaches, and an "open process" that solicited wide participation and feedback from many groups and individuals. The set of scenarios includes all relevant species of greenhouse gases (GHGs)^. This chapter provides a summary of the SRES emissions scenarios and compares them with the previous set of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IS92 scenarios and the underlying literature. The first step in the formulation of the scenarios was the review and analysis of the published literature and the development of the database with more than 400 emissions scenarios (accessible on the web site, www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html). One of the recommendations of the writing team is that IPCC or a similar international institution should maintain such a database to ensure continuity of knowledge and scientific progress in any future assessments of GHG scenarios. An equivalent database to document narrative and other qualitative scenarios would also be very useful for future climate-change assessments. One difficulty encountered in the analysis of the emissions scenarios is that the distinction between climate policy scenarios, non-climate policy scenarios, and other scenarios appeared to be to a degree arbitrary and was often impossible to make. Therefore, the writing team recommends that an effort should be made in the future to develop an appropriate emissions scenario classification scheme. Chapters 2 and 3 give a more detailed description of the very wide range of future emissions paths, their driving forces, and their relationships as reflected in the literature; the wide range indicates that their possible developments are highly uncertain. The sources of inherent uncertainties range from data and modeling uncertainties through to inadequate scientific understanding of the underlying problems. Scenarios are appropriate tools for dealing with such uncertainty. Scenarios are images of the future, or alternative futures. As an integration tool in the assessment of climate change they allow a role for intuition, analysis, and synthesis; thus we turn to scenarios in this report to take advantage of these features to aid the assessment of future climate change, impacts, vulnerabilities, adaptation, and mitigation. Scenarios are not predictions. A set of scenarios can assist in the understanding of possible future developments, and hence the development of a set of alternative scenarios (see Chapters 1 and 4 for more detail). ^ Included are anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulfur hexafluoride (SF6), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), sulfur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs). The SRES approach involved the development of a set of four alternative scenario "families" that encompass the 40 scenarios. Each family of SRES scenarios includes a descriptive part called a "storyline," and a number of alternative interpretations and quantifications of each storyline developed by six different modeling approaches. All the interpretations and quantifications of one storyline together are called a scenario family (see Chapter 1 for terminology). Each storyline describes a demographic, social, economic, technological, and policy future for one of these scenario families. Within each family different scenarios explore variations of global and regional developments and their implications for GHG and sulfur emissions. Each of these scenarios is consistent with the broad framework of that scenario family as specified by the storyline. Chapters 4 and 5 give a more detailed description of the storylines, their quantifications, and the resultant 40 emissions scenarios. The SRES writing team reached a broad consensus that there could be no "best guess" scenarios; that the future is inherently unpredictable and that views will differ as to which storylines could be more likely. There is no "business-as-usual" scenario. The storylines represent the playing out of certain social, economic, technological and environmental paradigms that will be viewed positively by some people and negatively by others. The writing team decided on four storylines - an even number helps to avoid the impression that there is a "central" or "most likely" case. The team wanted more than two storylines to help illustrate that the future depends on many different underlying dynamics, but no more than four, as they wanted to avoid complicating the process with too many alternatives. The scenarios cover a wide range, but not all possible futures. In particular, it was decided that possible "surprises" would not be considered and that there would be no "disaster" scenarios. The storylines describe developments in many different social, economic, technological, environmental, and policy dimensions. The titles of the storylines have been kept simple - A1, A2, B1, and B2. There is no particular order among the storylines, which are listed in Box 6-1 in alphabetic order. The team decided to carry out sensitivity tests within some of the storylines by considering alternative scenarios with different fossil-fuel reserves, rates of economic growth, or rates of technological change within a given scenario family. All four storylines and scenario families describe future worlds that are generally more affluent compared to the current situation. They range from very rapid economic growth and technological change to high levels of environmental protection, from low to high global populations, and from high to low GHG emissions. What is perhaps even more important is that all the storylines describe dynamic changes and transitions in generally different directions. Although they do not include additional climate initiatives, none of them are policy free. As time progresses, the storylines diverge from each other in many of their characteristic features. In this way they span the relevant range of GHG emissions and different combinations of their main sources. Box 6-1: The Main Characteristics of the Four SRES Storylines and Scenario Families. By 2100 the world will have changed in ways that are hard to imagine - as hard as it would have been at the end of the 19th century to imagine the changes of the 100 years since. Each storyline assumes a distinctly different direction for future developments, such that the four storylines differ in increasingly irreversible ways. Together they describe divergent futures that encompass a significant portion of the underlying uncertainties in the main driving forces. They cover a wide range of key "future" characteristics such as population growth, economic development, and technological change. For this reason, their plausibility or feasibility should not be considered solely on the basis of an extrapolation of current economic, technological, and social trends. • The A1 storyline and scenario family describes a future world of very rapid economic growth, low population growth, and the rapid introduction of new and more efficient technologies. Major underlying themes are convergence among regions, capacity building and increased cultural and social interactions, with a substantial reduction in regional differences in per capita income. The A1 scenario family develops into four groups that describe alternative directions of technological change in the energy system. Please note that in the Summary for Policymakers, two of these groups were merged into one.^ • The A2 storyline and scenario family describes a very heterogeneous world. The underlying theme is self-reliance and preservation of local identities. Fertility patterns across regions converge very slowly, which results in high population growth. Economic development is primarily regionally oriented and per capita economic growth and technological change are more fragmented and slower than in other storylines. • The B1 storyline and scenario family describes a convergent world with the same low population growth as in the A1 storyline, but with rapid changes in economic structures toward a service and information economy, with reductions in material intensity, and the introduction of clean and resource-efficient technologies. The emphasis is on global solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability, including improved equity, but without additional climate initiatives. • The B2 storyline and scenario family describes a world in which the emphasis is on local solutions to economic, social, and environmental sustainability. It is a world with moderate population growth, intermediate levels of economic development, and less rapid and more diverse technological change than in the B1 and A1 storylines. While the scenario is also oriented toward environmental protection and social equity, it focuses on local and regional levels. After determining the basic features and driving forces for each of the four storylines, the team began modeling and quantifying the storylines. This resulted in 40 scenarios, each of which constitutes an alternative interpretation and quantification of a storyline. All the interpretations and quantifications associated with a single storyline are called a scenario "family" (see Chapter 1 for terminology and Chapter 4 for further details). After determining the basic features and driving forces for each of the four storylines, the team quantified the storylines into individual scenarios with the help of formal (computer) models. The six modeling groups that quantified the storylines are listed in Box 6-2. The six models are representative of different approaches to modeling emissions scenarios and different integrated assessment (IA) frameworks in the literature and include so-called top-down and bottom-up models. The writing team recommends that IPCC or a similar international institution should ensure participation of ^ During the approval process of the Summary for Policymakers at the 5th Session of Working Group III of the IPCC from 8-11 March 2000 in Katmandu, Nepal, it was decided to combine the A1C and A1G groups into one "fossil intensive" group A1FI in contrast to the non-fossil group A1T, and select two illustrative scenarios from these two A1 groups. a similar international institution should ensure participation of modeling groups around the world, and especially those from developing countries, in future scenario development and assessment efforts. Clearly, this would also require resources specifically to assist modeling groups from developing countries. Indeed, a concerted effort was made to engage modeling groups and experts from developing countries in SRES as a direct response to recommendations of the IPCC scenario evaluation (Alcamo et al., 1995). The six models have different regional aggregations. The writing team decided to group the various global regions into four “macro-regions” common to all different regional aggregations across the six models. The four macro-regions (see Appendix III) are broadly consistent with the allocation of countries in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 1997) although the correspondence is not exact because of changes in the countries listed in Annex I of UNFCCC. All the qualitative and quantitative features of scenarios that belong to the same family were set to conform to the corresponding features of the underlying storyline. Together, Summary Discussions and Recommendations 297 Box 6-2: SRES Modeling Teams In all, six models were used to generate the 40 scenarios: • Asian Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) from the National Institute of Environmental Studies in Japan (Morita et al., 1994); • Atmospheric Stabilization Framework Model (ASF) from ICF Consulting in the USA (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990; Pepper et al., 1992, 1998; Sankovski et al., 2000); • Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect (IMAGE) from the National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) (Alcamo et al., 1998; de Vries et al., 1994, 1999, 2000), used in connection with the Dutch Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) WorldScan model (de Jong and Zalm, 1991), the Netherlands; • Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation (MARIA) from the Science University of Tokyo in Japan (Mori and Takahashi, 1999; Mori, 2000); • Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (MESSAGE) from the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria (Messner and Strubegger, 1995; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000); and the • Mini Climate Assessment Model (MiniCAM) from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) in the USA (Edmonds et al., 1994, 1996a, 1996b). For a more detailed description of the modeling approaches see Appendix IV. 26 scenarios were “harmonized” to share agreed common assumptions about population and gross domestic product (GDP) developments (a few that also share common final energy trajectories are called “fully harmonized,” see Section 4.1. in Chapter 4). Thus, the harmonized scenarios are not independent of each other within each family, but they are independent across the four families. However, scenarios within each family vary quite substantially in characteristics such as the assumptions about availability of fossil-fuel resources, the rate of energy-efficiency improvements, the extent of renewable-energy development, and, hence, the resultant GHG emissions. Thus, after the modeling teams had quantified the key driving forces and made an effort to harmonize them with the storylines by adjusting control parameters, there still remained diversity in the assumptions about the driving forces and in the resultant emissions (see Chapter 4). The remaining 14 scenarios adopted alternative interpretations of the four scenario storylines to explore additional scenario uncertainties beyond differences in methodological approaches, such as different rates of economic growth and variations in population projections. These variations reflect the “modeling teams’ choice” of alternative but plausible global and regional developments compared to those of the “harmonized” scenarios; they also stem from the differences in the underlying modeling approaches. This approach generated a large variation and richness in different scenario quantifications, often with overlapping ranges of main driving forces and GHG emissions across the four families. In addition, the A1 scenario family branched out into different distinct scenario groups, based on alternative technological developments in future energy systems, from carbon-intensive development to decarbonization. Similar-storyline variations were considered for other scenario families, but they did not result in genuine scenario groupings within the respective families. However, if future energy systems variations were applied fully to other storylines, they may evolve differently from those in A1. They have been introduced into the A1 storyline because of its “high growth with high technology” nature, for which differences in alternative technology developments translate into large differences in future GHG emission levels. The A1 groups further increased the richness in different GHG and SO2 emissions paths. Indeed, this variation in the structure of future energy systems in itself resulted in a range of emissions almost as large as that generated through the variation of other main driving forces, such as population and economic development. Altogether the 40 SRES scenarios fall into seven groups: the three scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus four groups within the A1 scenario (see footnote 2). As in the case of the storylines, no single scenario – whether it represents a modeler’s choice or harmonized assumptions – was treated as being more or less “probable” than others belonging to the same family. However, one preliminary harmonized scenario from each family, referred to as a “marker,” was used in 1998 to solicit comments during the “open process” and as input for climate modelers in accordance with a decision of the IPCC Bureau. The four marker scenarios were posted on the IPCC web site (sres.ciesin.org) in June 1998, and the open scenario review process through the IPCC web site lasted until January 1999. The choice of markers was based on extensive discussion of: • Range of emissions across all of marker scenarios. • Which of the initial quantifications (by the modelers) reflected the storyline. • Preference of some of the modeling teams and features of specific models. • Use of different models for the four markers. 298 Summary Discussions and Recommendations Markers were not intended to be the median or mean scenarios from their respective families. Indeed, in general it proved impossible to develop scenarios in which all relevant characteristics matched mean or median values. Thus, marker scenarios are no more or less likely than any other scenarios, but are those scenarios considered by the SRES writing team as illustrative of a particular storyline. These scenarios have received much closer scrutiny, not only from the entire writing team, but also via the SRES open process, than other scenario quantifications. The marker scenarios are also the SRES scenarios that have been most intensively tested in terms of reproducibility. As a rule, different modeling teams have attempted to replicate the model quantification of marker scenarios. Available time and resources have not allowed a similar exercise to be conducted for all SRES scenarios, although some effort was devoted to reproduce the scenario groups that constitute different interpretations of the A1 storyline with different models. Additional scenarios using the same harmonized assumptions as the marker scenarios developed by different modeling teams and other scenarios that give alternative quantitative interpretations of the four storylines constitute the final set of 40 SRES scenarios. However, differences in modeling approaches mean that not all the scenarios provide estimates for all the direct and indirect GHG emissions for all the sources and sectors. The four SRES marker scenarios cover all the relevant gas species and emission categories comprehensively and thus constitute the smallest set of independent and fully documented SRES scenarios. The scenario groups and cumulative emissions categories were developed as the smallest subsets of SRES scenarios that capture the range of uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions. Together, the scenario groups constitute the set of SRES scenarios that reflects the uncertainty ranges in the emissions and their driving forces. Furthermore, the writing team recommends that, to the extent possible, these scenarios, but at least the four markers, be used to capture the range of uncertainties of driving forces and in addition, the two additional illustrative scenarios in A1 be used to capture the range of GHG emissions, and these should always be used together, and that no individual scenario should be singled out for any purpose. Multiple baselines and overlapping emissions ranges have important implications for making policy analysis (e.g., similar policies might have different impacts in different scenarios). Combinations of policies might shape the future development in the direction of certain scenarios. Box 6-4 (see later) summarizes the recommendations of the writing team for consideration by the user communities within and outside the IPCC. Thus, there are three different types of scenarios within each family – one marker (and two illustrative scenarios in the A1 family), a set of harmonized scenarios, and a set of other (non-harmonized) scenarios. In addition, the A1 family of scenarios is subdivided into groups that describe alternative technological developments in the energy system. Together with the other three scenario families the SRES scenarios build seven distinct scenario groups (see footnote 2). Figure 6-1 illustrates this scenario terminology schematically. The Scenario Groups A1C Illustrative Scenario OS A1G Illustrative Scenario OS A1FI Illustrative Scenario OS A1T Illustrative Scenario OS HS A1B Marker Scenario OS HS A2 Marker Scenario OS HS B1 Marker Scenario OS HS B2 Marker Scenario OS HS Other Scenarios Harmonized Scenarios Six SRES Modeling Teams (AIM, ASF, IMAGE, MARIA, MESSAGE, MiniCAM) Emissions ^ During the approval process of the Summary for Policymakers at the 5th Session of Working Group III of the IPCC from 8–11 March 2000 in Katmandu, Nepal, it was decided to combine the A1C and A1G groups into one “fossil intensive” group A1FI in contrast to the non-fossil group A1T, and select two illustrative scenarios from these two A1 groups to facilitate use by modelers and policy makers. This leads to six scenario groups that constitute the four scenario families, three of which are in the A1 family. The six groups all have “illustrative scenarios”, four of which are marker scenarios. All scenarios are equally sound. See also Figure SPM-1. build seven distinct scenario groups (see footnote 2). Figure 6-1 illustrates this scenario terminology schematically. The Scenario Groups A1C | A1G | A1T | A1B | A2 | B1 | B2 Illustrative Scenario Other Scenarios Harmonized Scenarios A1T Illustrative Scenario A1B Marker Scenario A2 Marker Scenario B1 Marker Scenario A1 Marker Scenario Other Scenarios Harmonized Scenarios Six SRES Modeling Teams (AIM, ASF, IMAGE, MARIA, MESSAGE, MiniCAM) Emissions Markers and other Standardized Emissions Scenarios Other Emissions Scenarios Figure 6-1: Schematic illustration of SRES scenarios. The set of scenarios consists of the four scenario families A1, A2, B1, and B2. Each family consists of a number of scenarios, some of which have “harmonized” driving forces and share the same prespecified population and gross world product (a few that also share common final energy trajectories are called “fully harmonized”). These are marked as “HS” for harmonized scenarios. One of the harmonized scenarios, originally posted on the open-process web site, is called a “marker scenario.” All other scenarios of the same family based on the quantification of the storyline chosen by the modeling team are marked as “OS.” Six modeling groups developed the set of 40 emissions scenarios. The GHG and SO2 emissions of the scenarios were standardized to share the same data for 1990 and 2000 on request of the user communities. The time-dependent standardized emissions were also translated into geographic distributions. See also footnote 2. Summary Discussions and Recommendations Detailed descriptions of inputs and outputs (other than GHG emissions) of the SRES marker scenarios, other harmonized scenarios, and all other scenarios are presented in Chapter 4 and the Appendices, while the emissions of GHGs and other radiatively important species of gases are described in Chapter 5 and Appendices. The writing team considers that the SRES scenario set (in all the richness of scenario families, groups, markers, and illustrative and harmonized scenarios) is based on a “neutral” choice of scenario drivers; no driver is unduly emphasized as being more important than others. The scenarios do not suggest that future population growth alone is the driver of future emissions, nor do they suggest that technological change alone in any one sector could drive future emissions in one way or the other. While recognizing the importance of any of these driving forces per se, this report illustrates the critical role of relationships and interdependencies between scenario driving forces. To an extent it is the nature of these relationships that drives the future more than the possible evolution of any individual driving forces by itself. In other words, the uncertainty of the future is not simply parametric, but deeply functional; uncertainties and incomplete understanding exist for both. Qualitative scenario storylines add transparency and consistency to the relationships assumed in any particular scenario. The storylines also allow for additional interpretation of scenario results by different user communities. 6.2. Scenario Driving Forces The scenarios cover a wide range of driving forces, from demographic to social and economic developments. This section summarizes the assumptions on important scenario drivers. For simplicity, only three important driving forces are presented separately following the exposition in Chapters 2, 3, and 4. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind that the future evolution of these and other main driving forces is interrelated in the SRES scenarios (see Table 6.2a for a summary of the ranges of the main driving forces across the scenario groups in 2020, 2050, and 2100). The SRES scenarios span a wide range of assumptions for the most salient scenario drivers, and thus reflect the uncertainty of the future. Evidently, views of the future are a time-specific phenomenon, and this report and its scenarios are no exception. However, it is important to emphasize that this is an explicit part of the Terms of Reference for the SRES writing team - to reflect a range of views, based on current knowledge and the most recently available literature (see Appendix I). The scenario quantification results reflect well the literature range, except for extreme scenarios. 6.2.1. Population Projections Three different population trajectories were chosen for SRES scenarios to reflect future demographic uncertainties based on published population projections (Lutz, 1996; UN, 1998; see Chapter 3). The population projections are exogenous input to all the models used to develop the SRES scenarios. The models used do not develop population from other assumptions within the model. Figure 6-2 shows the three population projections in comparison with the three population projections used in the IS92 scenarios. Global population ranges between 7 and 15 billion people by 2100 across the scenarios, depending on the rate and extent of the demographic transition. The insert in Figure 6.2 shows population development in the industrialized (i.e., developed) regions. The range of future populations is smaller than in the IS92 scenarios, particularly in the industrialized regions, for which the lowest scenario indicates a very modest population decline compared to IS92 scenarios. The greatest uncertainty about future growth lies in the developing regions across all scenarios in the literature. An equally pervasive trend across all scenarios is urbanization (see Chapter 3). Altogether three different population projections were used in the 26 harmonized scenarios. Other scenarios explored alternative population projections consistent with the storylines. The lowest population trajectory is assumed for the A1 and B1 scenario families and is based on the low population projection in Lutz (1996), which combines low fertility with low mortality and central migration rate assumptions. After peaking at 8.7 billion in the middle of the 21st century, world population declines to 7.1 billion by the year 2100. As discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, this population development is somewhat higher than the previous low population used in the IS92 scenarios. The B2 scenario family is based on the UN median 1998 population projection (UN, 1998). The global population increases to about 9.4 billion people by 2050 and to about 10.4 billion by 2100. This population scenario is characteristic of recent median global population projections, which describe a continuation of historical trends towards a completion of the demographic transition that would lead to a level global population, and is consistent with recent faster fertility declines in the world together with declining mortality rates. Hence, the population is somewhat lower than previous UN median projections, as used in the IS92 scenarios. This median scenario projects very low population growth in today’s industrialized countries, with stabilization of growth in Asia in the second half of the 21st century and in the rest of the world towards the end of the 21st century. The A2 scenario family is based on the high population growth of 15 billion by 2100 reported in Lutz (1996), which assumes a significant decline in fertility for most regions and a stabilization at above replacement levels. It falls below the long-term 1998 UN high projection of 18 billion. It is also lower than in the highest IS92 scenario (17.6 billion by 2100). Nevertheless, this scenario represents very high population growth compared with that in current demographic literature. Demographers attach a probability of more than 90% that actual population will be lower than the trajectory adopted in the A2 scenario family (Lutz et al., 1997). A more detailed discussion of the population projections used to quantify the four scenario families is given in Chapters 3 and 4. Figure 6-2: Population projections - historical data from 1900 to 1990 (based on Durand, 1967; Demeny, 1990; UN, 1998), SRES scenarios (based on Lutz, 1996, for high and low, and UN, 1998, for medium), and IPCC IS92 scenarios (Leggett et al., 1992; Pepper et al., 1992) from 1990 to 2100. 6.2.2. Economic Development The SRES scenarios span a wide range of future levels of economic activity (expressed in gross world product). The A1 scenario family with a (“harmonized”) gross world product of US$529 trillion (all values in 1990 US dollars unless otherwise indicated) in 2100 delineates the SRES upper bound, whereas B2 with (“harmonized”) US$235 trillion in 2100 represents its lower bound. The range of gross world product across all scenarios is even higher, from US$197 to US$550 by 2100. Although the SRES scenarios span a wide range, still lower and higher gross world product levels can be found in the literature (see Chapters 2, 3, and 4). Uncertainties in future gross world product levels are governed by the pace of future productivity growth and population growth, especially in developing regions. Different assumptions on conditions and possibilities for development “catch-up” and for narrowing per capita income gaps in particular explain the wide range in projected future gross world product levels. Given a qualitatively negative relationship between population growth and per capita income growth discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, uncertainties in future population growth rates tend to narrow the range of associated gross world product projections. High population growth would, ceteris paribus, lower per capita income growth, whereas low population growth would tend to increase it. This relationship is evident in empiric data - high per capita income countries are generally also those that have completed their demographic transition. The affluent live long and generally have few children. (Exceptions are some countries with small populations, high birth rates, and significant income from commodity exports.) This relationship between affluence and longevity again identifies development as one of the most important indicators of human well being. Yet even assuming this relationship holds for an extended time into the have completed their demographic transition. The affluent live long and generally have few children. (Exceptions are some countries with small populations, high birth rates, and significant income from commodity exports.) This relationship between affluence and longevity again identifies development as one of the most important indicators of human well being. Yet even assuming this relationship holds for an extended time into the future, its quantification is subject to considerable theoretic and empiric uncertainties (Alcamo et al., 1995). Two of the SRES scenario families, A1 and B1, explicitly explore alternative pathways to gradually close existing income gaps. As a reflection of uncertainty, development "catch-up" diverges in terms of geographically distinct economic growth patterns across the four SRES scenario families. Table 6-1 summarizes per capita income for SRES and IS92 scenarios for the four SRES world regions. SRES scenarios indicate a smaller difference between the now industrialized and developing countries compared with the IS92 scenarios. This tendency toward a substantially narrower income "gap" compared with the IS92 scenarios overcomes one of the major shortcomings of the previous IPCC scenarios cited in the literature (Parikh, 1992). 6.2.3. Structural and Technological Change In this brief summary of the SRES scenarios, structural and technological changes are illustrated by using energy and land use as examples. These examples are characteristic for the driving forces of emissions because the energy system and land use are the major sources of GHG and sulfur emission. Chapter 4 gives a more detailed treatment of the full range of emissions driving forces across the SRES scenarios. Table 6-1: Income per capita in the world and by SRES region for the IS92 (Leggett et al., 1992) and four marker scenarios by 2050 and 2100, measured by GDP per capita in 1000 US dollars (at 1990 prices and exchange rates). The additional illustrative scenarios A1FI and A1T have GDP assumptions similar to the A1B marker, shared with all harmonized scenarios in the A1 family. Income per Capita by World and Regions (10³ 1990 US$ per capita) Regions Year Scenario OECD90 REF IND ASIA ALM DEV WORLD 1990 SRES MESSAGE 19.1 2.7 13.7 0.5 1.6 0.9 4.0 2050 IS92a,b 49.0 23.2 39.7 3.7 4.8 4.1 9.2 IS92c 35.2 14.6 27.4 2.2 2.9 2.5 6.3 IS92d 54.4 25.5 43.4 4.1 5.4 4.6 10.5 IS92e 67.4 38.3 56.9 5.9 7.7 6.6 13.8 IS92f 43.9 21.5 35.8 3.3 4.1 3.6 8.1 A1B 50.1 29.3 44.2 14.9 17.5 15.9 20.8 A2 34.6 7.1 26.1 2.6 6.0 3.9 7.2 B1 49.8 14.3 39.1 9.0 13.6 10.9 15.6 B2 39.2 16.3 32.5 8.9 6.9 8.1 11.7 2100 IS92a,b 85.9 40.6 69.5 15.0 14.2 14.6 21.5 IS92c 49.2 17.6 36.5 6.4 5.8 6.1 10.1 IS92d 113.9 51.3 88.8 20.3 17.7 19.1 28.2 IS92e 150.6 96.6 131.0 34.6 33.0 33.8 46.0 IS92f 69.7 31.3 54.9 11.9 10.7 11.4 16.8 A1B 109.4 100.9 107.3 71.9 60.9 66.5 74.9 A2 58.5 20.2 46.6 7.8 15.2 11.0 16.1 B1 79.7 52.2 72.8 35.7 44.9 40.2 46.6 B2 61.0 38.3 54.4 19.5 16.1 18.0 22.6 6.2.3.1. Energy Systems Figure 6-3 illustrates that the change of world primary energy structure diverges over time. It shows the contributions of individual primary energy sources - the percentage supplied by coal, that by oil and gas, and that by all non-fossil sources taken together (for simplicity of presentation and because not all models distinguish between renewables and nuclear energy). Each corner of the triangle corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which all primary energy is supplied by a single source - oil and gas, coal at the left, and non-fossil sources (renewables and nuclear) to the right. Historically, the primary energy structure has evolved clockwise according to the two "grand transitions" (discussed in Chapter 3) that are shown by the two segments of the "thick black" curve. From 1850 to 1920 the first transition can be characterized as the substitution of traditional (non-fossil) energy sources by coal. The share of coal increased from 20% to about 70%, while the share of non-fossils declined from 80% to about 20%. The second transition, from 1920 to 1990, can be characterized as the replacement of coal by oil and gas (while the share of non-fossils remained essentially constant). The share of oil and gas increased to about 50% and the share of coal declined to about 30%. Figure 6-3 gives an overview of the divergent evolution of global primary energy structures between 1990 and 2100, regrouped into their respective scenario families and four A1 scenarios groups that explore different technological developments in the energy systems. The SRES scenarios cover a wider range of energy structures than the previous IS92 scenario series, which reflects advances in knowledge on the uncertainty ranges of future fossil resource availability and technological change. In a clockwise direction, A1 and B1 scenario groups map the structural transitions toward higher shares of non-fossil energy in the future, which almost closes the historical "loop" that started in 1850. The B2 scenarios indicate a more "moderate" direction of change with about half of the energy coming from non-fossil sources and the other half shared by coal on one side and oil and gas on the other. Finally, the A2 scenario group marks a stark transition back to coal. Shares of oil and gas decline while non-fossils increase moderately. What is perhaps more significant than the diverging developments in these three marker scenarios is that the whole set of 40 scenarios covers virtually all possible directions of change, from high shares of oil and gas to high shares of coal and non-fossils. In particular, the A1 scenario family covers basically the same range of structural change as all other scenarios together. In contrast, the IS92 scenarios cluster into two groups; one contains IS92c and IS92d and the other the four others. In all of these the share of oil and gas declines, and the main structural change occurs between coal on the one hand and non-fossils on the other. This divergent nature in the structural change of the energy system and in the underlying technological base of the SRES results in a wide span of future GHG and sulfur emissions. 6.2.3.2. Land-use Patterns Figure 6-4 illustrates that the land-use patterns diverge over time. It shows the main land-use categories - the percentages of total land area use that constitute the forests, the joint shares of cropland and energy biomass, and all other categories including grasslands. As for the energy triangle in Figure 6-3, in Figure 6-4 each corner corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which land use is dedicated to a much greater extent than today to two of the three land-use categories: 40% to cropland and energy biomass and 20% to forests at the top, 60% to forests and 40% to other categories (including grasslands) to the left, and 80% to other categories (including grasslands) to the right. In most scenarios, the current trend of shrinking forests is eventually reversed because of slower population growth and increased agricultural productivity. Reversals of deforestation trends are strongest in the B1 and A1 families. In the B1 family pasture lands to other categories (including grasslands) to the left, and 80% to other categories (including grasslands) to the right. In most scenarios, the current trend of shrinking forests is eventually reversed because of slower population growth and increased agricultural productivity. Reversals of deforestation trends are strongest in the B1 and A1 families. In the B1 family pasture lands decrease significantly because of increased productivity in livestock management and dietary shifts away from meat, thus illustrating the importance of both technological and social developments. The main driving forces for land-use changes are related to increasing demands for food because of a growing population and changing diets. In addition, numerous other social, economic, and institutional factors govern land-use changes such as deforestation, expansion of cropland areas, or their reconversion back to forest cover (see Chapter 3). Global food production can be increased, either through intensification (by multi-cropping, raising cropping intensity, applying fertilizers, new seeds, improved farming technology) or through land expansion (cultivating land, converting forests). Especially in developing countries, there are many examples of the potential to intensify food production in a more or less ecologic way (e.g., multi-cropping; agroforestry) that may not lead to higher GHG emissions. Different assumptions on these processes translate into alternative scenarios of future land-use changes and GHG emissions, most notably CO2, CH4, and N2O. A distinguishing characteristic of several models (e.g., AIM, IMAGE, MARIA, and MiniCAM) used in SRES is the explicit modeling of land-use changes caused by expanding biomass uses and hence exploration of possible land-use conflicts between energy and agricultural sectors. The corresponding scenarios of land-use changes are illustrated in Figure 6-4 for all SRES scenarios. In some contrast to the structural changes in energy systems shown in Figure 6-3, different land-use scenarios in Figure 6-4 appear to be rather model specific, following the general trends as indicated by the respective marker scenario developed with a particular model. Figure 6-4: Global land-use patterns, shares (%) of croplands and energy biomass, forests, and other categories including grasslands – historical development from 1970 to 1990 (based on B1-IMAGE) and in SRES scenarios. As for the energy triangle in Figure 6-3, each corner corresponds to a hypothetical situation in which land use is dedicated to a much greater extent than today to one category – 60% to cropland and energy biomass at the top, 80% to forests to the left, and 80% to other categories (including grasslands) to the right. Constant shares in total land area of cropland and energy biomass, forests, and other categories are denoted by their respective isoshare lines. For 1990 to 2100, alternative trajectories are shown for the SRES scenarios. The three marker scenarios A1B, B1, and B2 are shown as thick colored lines, and other SRES scenarios as thin colored lines. The ASF model used to develop the A2 marker scenario projects only land-use-change-related GHG emissions. Comparable data on land cover changes are therefore not available. The trajectories appear to be largely model specific and illustrate the different views and interpretations of future land-use patterns across the scenarios (e.g., the scenario trajectories on the right that illustrate larger increases in grasslands and decreases in cropland are MiniCAM results). 6.3. Greenhouse Gases and Sulfur Emissions The SRES scenarios generally cover the full range of GHG and sulfur emissions consistent with the storylines and the underlying range of driving forces from studies in the literature, as documented in the SRES database. This section summarizes the emissions of CO2, CH4, and SO2. For simplicity, only these three important gases are presented separately, following the more detailed exposition in Chapter 5 (see Table 6.2b for a summary of the ranges of emissions across the scenario groups in 2020, 2050, and 2100). 6.3.1. Carbon Dioxide Emissions 6.3.1.1. Emissions from Energy, Industry, and Land Use Figure 6-5 illustrates the range of CO2 emissions for the 40 SRES scenarios against the background of all the emissions scenarios in the SRES scenario database shown in Figure 1-3. For simplicity, only energy-related and industrial sources of CO2 emissions are shown. Figure 6-5 shows that the marker scenarios by themselves cover a large portion of the overall scenario distribution. This is one reason why the SRES writing team recommends the use of at least the four marker scenarios. Together, they cover a large range of future emissions, both with respect to the scenarios in the literature and the full SRES scenario set. The SRES scenarios cover rather evenly the range of future emissions found in the literature, from high to low levels over the whole time horizon. In contrast, the distribution for emissions by 2100 of scenarios in the literature is very asymmetric. It has a structure that resembles a tri-nodal frequency distribution – those showing emissions of more than 30 gigatons of carbon (GtC; 20 scenarios), those with emissions between 12 and 30 GtC (88 scenarios), and those showing emissions of less than 12 GtC (82 scenarios). As discussed in Chapter 2, the lowest cluster appears to include many of the intervention scenarios; the second and third clusters are most likely the non-intervention cases. The lowest cluster may have been influenced by many analyses of stabilizing atmospheric concentrations. The middle cluster echoes the many analyses that took IS92a as a reference and is testament to the enormous influence of the IS92 series on emissions assessments in general. The range of CO2 and other GHG emissions for the four marker scenarios is generally somewhat lower than that of the six IS92 scenarios.1 However, the IS92 scenarios do not cover the “middle” range of emissions where the median and the average of all scenarios in the literature are situated. Adding the other 36 scenarios to the four SRES markers increases the covered emissions range beyond the IS92 series at the high end of the distribution but not at the low end. SRES scenarios stop short of the lower literature emissions because they are scenarios without additional climate initiatives (as per the Terms of References, see Appendix I). Figure 6-6 illustrates the range of CO2 emissions of the SRES scenarios against the background of all the IS92 scenarios and other emissions scenarios from the literature documented in the SRES scenario database. The shaded areas depict the range of the scenarios in the database that exceeds the SRES emissions range. The range of future emissions is very large so that the highest scenarios envisage more than a sevenfold increase of global emissions by 2100, while the lowest have emissions lower than today. The literature includes scenarios with additional climate initiatives and policies, which are also referred to as mitigation or intervention scenarios. As shown in Chapter 2, many ambiguities are associated with the classification of emissions scenarios into those that include additional climate initiatives and those that do not. Many cannot be classified in this way on basis of the information available from the SRES scenario database and the published literature. Figure 6-6a indicates the ranges of emissions from energy and industry in 2100 from scenarios that apparently include additional climate initiatives (designated as intervention emissions range), those that do not (non-intervention), and those that cannot be assigned to either of these two categories (non-classified). This classification is based on the subjective evaluation of the scenarios in the database by the members of the writing team and is explained in Chapter 2. The range of the whole sample of scenarios has significant overlap with the range of those that cannot be classified and they share virtually the same median (15.7 and 15.2 GtC in 2100, respectively), but the non-classified scenarios do not cover the high part of the range. Also, the range of the scenarios that apparently do not include climate polices (non-intervention) has considerable overlap with the other two ranges (lower bound is slightly higher), but with a significantly higher median (of 21.3 GtC in 2100). The median of all energy and industry emissions scenarios from the literature is 15.7 GtC by 2100. This is lower than the median of the IS92 set and is lower than the IS92a scenario often (inappropriately) considered as the “central” scenario. Again, the distribution of emissions is asymmetric (see the emissions histogram in Figure 6-5) and the thin tail that extends above 30 GtC includes only a few scenarios. Figure 6-6 shows the range of emissions of the four families (vertical bars next to each of the four marker scenarios), which illustrate that the scenarios groups by themselves cover a large portion of the overall scenario distribution. Together, they cover much of the range of future 1 This is still true when the two illustrative cases in the A1 family – as selected for the Summary for Policymakers, see footnote 2 – are added. Again, the distribution of emissions is asymmetric (see the emissions histogram in Figure 6-5) and the thin tail that extends above 30 GtC includes only a few scenarios. Figure 6-6 shows the range of emissions of the four families (vertical bars next to each of the four marker scenarios), which illustrate that the scenarios groups by themselves cover a large portion of the overall scenario distribution. Together, they cover much of the range of future emissions, both with respect to the scenarios in the literature and all SRES scenarios. Adding all other scenarios increases the covered range. For example, the SRES scenarios span jointly from the 95th percentile to just above the 5th percentile of the distribution of energy and industry emissions scenarios from the literature. This illustrates again that they only exclude the most extreme emissions scenarios found in the literature, which are situated out in the tails of the distribution. What is perhaps more important is that each of the four scenario families covers a substantial part of this distribution. This leads to a substantial overlap in the emissions ranges of the four scenario families. In other words, a similar quantification of driving forces can lead to a wide range of future emissions and a given level of future emissions can result from different combinations of driving forces. This result is of fundamental importance for the assessments of climate change impacts and possible mitigation and adaptation strategies. Thus, it warrants some further discussion. Another interpretation is that a given combination of the main driving forces, such as population and economic growth, is not sufficient to determine the future emissions paths. Different modeling approaches and different specifications of other scenario assumptions overshadow the influence of the main driving forces. A particular combination of driving forces, such as specified in the A1 scenario family, is associated with a whole range of possible emission paths for energy and industry. The nature of climate change impacts and adaptation and mitigation strategies would be fundamentally different depending on whether emissions are high or low, given a particular combination of scenario driving forces. Thus, the implication is that the whole range needs to be considered in the assessments of climate change, from high emissions and driving forces to low ones. The A1 scenario family explored variations in energy systems most explicitly and hence covers the largest part of the scenario distribution shown in Figures 6-5 and 6-6a, from the 95th to just above the 10th percentile. The A1 scenario family includes different groups of scenarios that explore different structures of future energy systems, from carbon-intensive development paths to high rates of decarbonization. All groups otherwise share the same assumptions about the main driving forces (see Section 6.2.3 and, for further detail, Chapters 4 and 5). This indicates that different structures of the energy system can lead to basically the same variation in future emissions as generated by different combinations of the other main driving forces – population, economic activities, and energy consumption levels. The implication is that decarbonization of energy systems – the shift from carbon-intensive to less carbon-intensive and carbon-free sources of energy – is of similar importance in determining the future emissions paths as other driving forces. Sustained decarbonization requires the development and successful diffusion of new technologies. Thus investments in new technologies during the coming decades might have the same order of influence on future emissions as population growth, economic development, and levels of energy consumption taken together. Figure 6-6b shows that CO2 emissions from deforestation peak in many SRES scenarios after several decades and subsequently gradually decline. This pattern is consistent with many scenarios in the literature and can be associated with slowing population growth and increasing agricultural productivity. These allow a reversal of current deforestation trends, leading to eventual CO2 sequestration. Emissions decline fastest in the B1 family. Only in the A2 family do net anthropogenic CO2 emissions from land use remain positive through to 2100. As was the case for energy-related emissions, CO2 emissions related to land-use in the A1 family cover the widest range. The range of land-use emissions across the IS92 scenarios is narrower in comparison. 6.3.1.2. Four Categories of Cumulative Emissions This comparison of some of the SRES scenario characteristics implies that similar future emissions can result from very different socio-economic developments, and similar developments of driving forces can result in different future emissions. Uncertainties in the future development of key emission driving forces create large uncertainties in future emissions, even within the same socio-economic development paths. Therefore, emissions from each scenario family overlap substantially with emissions from other scenario families. Figure 6-6 shows this for CO2 emissions. For example, comparison of the A1B and B2 marker scenarios indicates that they have similar emissions of about 13.5 and 13.7 GtC by 2100, respectively. The dynamics of the paths, however, are different so that they have different cumulative CO2 emissions and different emissions of other GHG gases and SO2. To facilitate comparisons of emissions and their driving forces across the scenarios, the writing team grouped them into four categories of cumulative emissions between 1990 and 2100. However, any categorization of scenarios based on emissions of multiple gases is quite difficult. Figure 6-7 shows total CO2 emissions from all sources (from Figures 6-6a and b). Most of the scenarios are shown aggregated into seven groups, the four A1 groups and the other three families. The scenarios that remain outside the seven groups adopted alternative interpretations of the four scenario storylines. The emission trajectories ("bands") of the seven groups display different dynamics, from monotonic increases to non-linear trajectories in which there is a subsequent decline from a maximum. The dynamics of the individual scenarios are also different across gases, sectors, or world regions. This particularly diminishes the significance of focusing scenario categorization on any given year, such as 2100. In addition, all gases that contribute to radiative forcing should be considered, but methods of combining gases such as the use of global warming potentials (GWP) are appropriate only for near-term GHG inventories.* In light of these difficulties, the classification approach presented here uses cumulative CO2 emissions between 1990 and 2100. CO2 is the dominant GHG and cumulative CO2 emissions are expected to be roughly proportional to CO2 radiative forcing over the time scale of a century. According to the IPCC SAR, "any eventual stabilised concentration is governed more by the accumulated anthropogenic CO2 emissions from now until the time of stabilisation than by the way emissions change over the period" (Houghton et al., 1996). Therefore, the writing team also grouped the scenarios according to their cumulative emissions (see Figure 6-8). This categorization can guide comparisons using either scenarios with different driving forces yet similar emissions, or scenarios with similar driving forces but different emissions. This characteristic of SRES scenarios also has very important implications for the assessment of climate-change impacts, mitigation, and adaptation strategies. Two future worlds with fundamentally different characteristic features, such as the A1 and B2 marker scenarios, also have different cumulative CO2 emissions, but very similar CO2 emissions in 2100. In contrast, scenarios that are in the same category of cumulative emissions can have fundamentally different driving forces and different CO2 emissions in 2100, but very similar cumulative emissions. Presumably, adverse impacts and effective adaptation measures would vary among the scenarios from different families that share similar cumulative emissions, but have different demographic, socio-economic, and technological driving forces. This is another reason for considering the entire range of emissions in future assessments of climate change. Figure 6-9 shows the in the same category of cumulative emissions can have fundamentally different driving forces and different CO2 emissions in 2100, but very similar cumulative emissions. Presumably, adverse impacts and effective adaptation measures would vary among the scenarios from different families that share similar cumulative emissions, but have different demographic, socio-economic, and technological driving forces. This is another reason for considering the entire range of emissions in future assessments of climate change. Figure 6-9 shows the histogram of cumulative CO2 emissions from 1990 to 2100 for the SRES scenarios subdivided into the four emissions categories. Relative positions of the four marker scenarios, and the ranges of the four families and the six IS92 scenarios, are marked. The SRES scenarios have a bimodal structure similar to the distribution of cumulative emissions from the scenarios in the literature. The groups of SRES scenarios span the whole range of cumulative emissions from the scenarios in the literature. The range of the four markers is from 1000 to 1900 GtC. In comparison, the IS92 cumulative emissions range from 700 GtC for IS92c to 2140 GtC for IS92e. The SRES emissions scenarios encompass emissions of other GHGs and chemically active species such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and non-methane volatile organic compounds. The emissions of other gases follow dynamic patterns much like those shown in Figures 6-5 and 6-6 for CO2 emissions. Further details of GHG emissions are given in Chapter 5. 6.3.2. Other Greenhouse Gases Of the GHGs, CO2 is the main contributor to anthropogenic radiative forcing because of changes in concentrations from pre-industrial times. According to Houghton et al. (1996) well-mixed GHGs (CO2, CH4, N2O, and the halocarbons) induced additional radiative forcing of around 2.5 W/m^2 on a global and annually averaged basis. CO2 accounted for 60% of the total, which indicates that the other GHGs are significant as well. Whereas CO2 emissions are by-and-large attributable to two major sources, energy consumption and land-use change, other emissions arise from many different sources and a large number of sectors and applications (e.g. see Table 5-3 in Chapter 5). The SRES emissions scenarios also have different emissions for other GHGs and chemically active species such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and non-methane volatile organic compounds. The uncertainties that surround the emissions sources of these gases, and the more complex set of driving forces behind them are considerable and unresolved. Hence, model projections of these gases are particularly uncertain and the scenarios presented here are no exception. Improved inventories and studies linking driving forces to changing emissions in order to improve the representation of these gases in global and regional emission models remain an important future research task. Therefore, the models and approaches employed for the SRES analyses cannot produce unambiguous and generally approved estimates for different sources and world regions over a century. Despite the limited knowledge, at some point in time causal relationships between driving forces and emissions need to be crafted into the models for the sake of completeness. Even if new insights are generated by research specialists in certain fields of environmental science, and these become accepted as mainstream view, adopting them in the models is often far from straightforward as appropriate links to drivers may not be readily available in the underlying model structures. Limited personnel and resources imply that priorities must be assigned when deciding on further model development, and as a consequence the models lag behind "common wisdom" in certain areas. Of course, this does not necessarily limit their capabilities to capture major trends at a more aggregate level, which is the main purpose of these models. Keeping the caveats above in mind, Table 6-2b (see later) shows the emissions in 2100 of all relevant direct and indirect GHGs for the four marker scenarios and, in brackets, the range of the other scenarios in the same family (or scenario groups for the A1 family). Chapter 5 gives further detail about the full range of GHG emissions across the SRES scenarios. Table 6-2b also compares the SRES scenarios emissions range to that of the IS92 scenario series (Pepper et al., 1992). 6.3.2.1. Methane Emissions Anthropogenic CH4 emissions in the year 1990 are estimated at 375 ± 75 Mt CH4 in the second IPCC assessment (Prather et al., 1995). They arise from a variety of activities, dominated by biologic processes, each associated with considerable uncertainty. Future CH4 emissions in the scenarios depend in part on the consumption of fossil fuels, adjusted for assumed changes in technology and operational practices, but more strongly on scenario-specific, regional demographic and affluence developments, together with assumptions on preferred diets and agricultural practices. For example, it is noted in Chapter 5 that the observed slowing of the rate of increase of CH4 concentrations in recent years might indicate that the emission factors that link emissions to changes in their drivers could be changing. The writing team recommends further research into the sources and modeling approaches to capture large uncertainties surrounding future CH4 emissions. The resultant CH4 emissions trajectories for the four SRES markers and other scenarios in the four families portray complex patterns (as displayed in Figure 5-5 in Chapter 5). For example, the emissions in A2 and B2 marker scenarios increase throughout the whole time horizon to the year 2100. This increase is most pronounced in the A2 marker scenario, in which emissions reach about 900 Mt CH4 by 2100 (about a three-fold increase since 1990). The range for other scenarios in the A2 scenario family is between 549 and 1069 Mt CH4 by 2100. The emissions level by 2100 for the B2 marker (600 Mt CH4) is about twice as high as in 1990 (310 Mt CH4) and ranges between 465 and 613 Mt CH4 for the other scenarios of the B2 family. In the A1B and B1 marker scenarios, the CH4 emissions level off and subsequently decline sooner or later in the 21st century. This phenomenon is most pronounced in the A1B marker, in which the fastest growth in the first few decades is followed by the steepest decline; the 2100 level ends up slightly below the current emission of 310 Mt CH4. The range of emissions in Table 6-2b indicate that alternative developments in energy technologies and resources could yield a higher range in CH4 emissions compared to the “balanced” technology A1 scenario group. In the two fossil fuel intensive scenario groups (A1C and A1G, combined into the fossil-intensive A1FI group in the Summary for Policymakers of this report), CH4 emissions could reach some 735 Mt CH4 by 2100, whereas in the post-fossil A1T scenario group emissions are correspondingly lower (some 300 Mt CH4 by 2100). Interestingly, the A1 scenarios generally have comparatively low CH4 emissions from non-energy sources because of a combination of low population growth and rapid advances in agricultural productivity. Hence the SRES scenarios extend the uncertainty range of the IS92 scenario series somewhat toward lower emissions. However, both scenario sets indicate an upper bound of emissions of some 1000 Mt CH4 by 2100. 6.3.2.2. Nitrous Ox comparatively low CH4 emissions from non-energy sources because of a combination of low population growth and rapid advances in agricultural productivity. Hence the SRES scenarios extend the uncertainty range of the IS92 scenario series somewhat toward lower emissions. However, both scenario sets indicate an upper bound of emissions of some 1000 Mt CH4 by 2100. 6.3.2.2. Nitrous Oxide Emissions Even more than for CH4, the assumed future food supply will be a key determinant of future N2O emissions. Size, age structure, and regional spread of the global population will be reflected in the emissions trajectories, together with assumptions on diets and improvements in agricultural practices. Again, as for CH4 in the SRES scenarios (see Section 5.4.1 in Chapter 5), continued growth of N2O emissions emerges only in the A2 scenario, largely because of high population growth. In the other three marker scenarios, emissions peak and then decline sooner or later in the course of the 21st century. Importantly, as the largest anthropogenic source of N2O (cultivated soils) is already very uncertain in the base year, all future emissions trajectories are affected by large uncertainties, especially if calculated with different models, as is the case in this SRES report. Therefore, the writing team recommends further research into the sources and modeling of long-term N2O emissions. Uncertainty ranges are correspondingly large, and are sometimes asymmetric. For example, while the range in 2100 reported in all A1 scenarios is between 5 and 10 MtN (7 MtN in the A1B marker), the A2 marker reports 17 MtN in 2100. Other A2 scenarios report emissions that fall within the range reported for A1 (from 8 to 19 MtN in 2100). Thus, different model representations of processes that lead to N2O emissions and uncertainties in source strength can outweigh easily any underlying differences between individual scenarios in terms of population growth, economic development, etc. Different assumptions with respect to future crop productivity, agricultural practices, and associated emission factors, especially in the very populous regions of the world, explain the very different global emission levels even for otherwise shared main scenario drivers. Hence, the SRES scenarios extend the uncertainty range of future emissions significantly toward higher emissions (4.8 to 20.2 MtN by 2100 in SRES compared to 5.4 to 10.8 MtN in the IS92 scenarios. (Note that natural sources are excluded in this comparison.) 6.3.2.3. Halocarbons and Halogenated Compounds The emissions of halocarbons (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), halons, methylbromide, and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)) and other halogenated compounds (polyfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)) across the SRES scenarios are described in detail on a substance-by-substance basis in Chapter 5 and Fenhann (2000). However, none of the six SRES models has its own projections for emissions of ozone depleting substances (ODSs), their detailed driving forces, and their substitutes. Hence, a different approach for scenario generation was adopted. First, for ODSs, an external scenario, the Montreal Protocol scenario (A3, maximum allowed production) from WMO/UNEP (1998) is used as direct input to SRES. In this scenario corresponding emissions decline to zero by 2100 as a result of international environmental agreements, a development not yet anticipated in some of the IS92 scenarios (Pepper et al., 1992). For the other gas species, most notably for CFC and HCFC substitutes, a simple methodology of developing different emissions trajectories consistent with the aggregate SRES scenario driving force assumptions (population, GDP, etc.) was developed. Scenarios are equally further differentiated as to assumed future technological change and control rates for these gases, varied across the scenarios consistently within the interpretation of the SRES storylines presented in Chapter 4. The literature, as well as the scenario methodology and data, are documented in more detail in Fenhann (2000) and are summarized in Chapter 5. Second, different assumptions about CFC applications as well as substitute candidates were developed. These were initially based on Kroeze and Reijnders (1992) and information given in Midgley and McCulloch (1999), but updated with the most recent information from the Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs (WMO/UNEP, 1999) as described below. An important assumption, on the basis of the latest information from the industry, is that relatively few Montreal gases will be replaced fully by HFCs. Current indications are that substitution rates of CFCs by HFCs will be less than 50% (McCulloch and Midgley, 1998). In Fenhann (2000) a further technological development is assumed that would result in about 25% of the CFCs ultimately being substituted by HFCs (see Table 5-9 in Chapter 5). This low percentage not only reflects the introduction of non-HFC substitutes, but also the notion that smaller amounts of halocarbons will be used in many applications when changing to HFCs (efficiency gains with technological change). A general assumption is that the present trend, not to substitute with high GWP substances (including PFCs and SF6), will continue. As a result of this assumption, the emissions reported here may be underestimates. This substitution approach is used in all four scenarios, and the technological options adopted are those known at present. Further substitution away from HFCs is assumed to require a climate policy and is therefore not considered in SRES scenarios. Policy measures that may indirectly induce lower halocarbon emissions in the scenarios are adopted for reasons other than climate change. For one scenario (A2) no reductions were assumed, whereas in the other scenarios intermediary reduction rates and levels were assumed. Expressed in HFC-134a equivalents (based on SAR equivalents), HFCs in the SRES scenarios range between 843 and 2123 kt HFC-134a equivalent by 2100, compared to 1188 to 2375 kt HFC-134a equivalent in IS92. The range of emissions of HFCs in the SRES scenario is initially generally lower than in earlier IPCC scenarios because of new insights about the availability of alternatives to HFCs as replacements for substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol. In two of the four scenarios in the report, HFC emissions increase rapidly in the second half of the 21st century, while in two others the growth of emissions is significantly slowed down or reversed in that period. Aggregating all the different halocarbons (CFCs, HCFCs, HFCs) as well as halogenated compounds (PFCs and SF6) into MtC-equivalents (using SAR GWPs) indicates a range between 386 and 1096 MtC-equivalent by 2100 for the SRES scenarios. This compares (see Table 6-2b) with a range of 746 to 875 MtC-equivalent for IS92 (which, however, does not include PFCs and SF6). (The comparable SRES range, excluding PFCs and SF6, is between 299 and 753 MtC-equivalent by 2100.) The scenarios presented here indicate a wider range of uncertainty compared to IS92, particularly toward lower emissions (because of the technological and substitution reasons discussed above). The effect on climate of each of the substances aggregated to MtC-equivalents given in Table 6-2b varies greatly, because of differences in both atmospheric lifetime and the radiative effect per molecule of each gas. The net effect on climate of these substances is best determined by a calculation of their radiative forcing - which is the amount by which these gases enhance the anthropogenic greenhouse effect. The net radiative effect of all halocarbons, PFCs, and SF6 from 1990 to 2100, including a current estimate of the radiative effect of stratospheric ozone depletion and subsequent recovery, ranges from 6% to 9% of the total radiative forcing from all GHGs and SO2. Preliminary calculations indicate that the net radiative effect of PFCs and SF6 in SRES scenarios will be no greater, relative to total anthropogenic forcing, by 2100 than it is at present. 6.3.3. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions Emissions of sulfur portray even more dynamic patterns in time and space than the CO2 emissions shown in Figures 6-5 and 6-6. Factors other than climate change (namely regional and local air quality, and transformations in the structure of the energy system and end use) intervene to limit future emissions. Figure 6-10 shows the range of global sulfur emissions for all SRES scenarios and the four markers against the emissions range of the IS92 scenarios, more than 80 scenarios from the literature, and the historical development. A detailed review of long-term global and regional sulfur emission scenarios is given in Grübler (1998) and summarized in Chapter 3. The most important new finding from the scenario literature is recognition of the significant adverse impacts of sulfur emissions on human health, food production, and ecosystems. As a result, scenarios published since 1995 generally assume various degrees of sulfur controls to be implemented in the future, and thus have projections substantially lower than previous ones, including the IS92 scenario series. Of these, only the two low-demand scenarios IS92c and IS92d fall within the range of more recent long-term sulfur emission scenarios. A related reason for lower sulfur emission projections is the recent tightening of sulfur-control policies in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, such as the Amendments of the Clean Air Act in the USA and the implementation of the Second European Sulfur Protocol. Such legislative changes were not reflected in previous long-term emission scenarios, as noted in Alcamo et al. range of more recent long-term sulfur emission scenarios. A related reason for lower sulfur emission projections is the recent tightening of sulfur-control policies in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, such as the Amendments of the Clean Air Act in the USA and the implementation of the Second European Sulfur Protocol. Such legislative changes were not reflected in previous long-term emission scenarios, as noted in Alcamo et al. (1995) and Houghton et al. (1995). Similar sulfur control initiatives due to local air quality concerns are beginning to impact sulfur emissions also in a number of developing countries in Asia and Latin America (see IEA, 1999; La Rovere and Americano, 1998; Streets and Waldhoff, 2000; for a more detailed discussion see Chapter 3). As a result, the median from recent sulfur scenarios (see Chapter 3) is consequently significantly lower compared to IS92, indicating a continual decline in global sulfur emissions in the long-term. The median and mean of sulfur control scenarios are almost identical. As mentioned above, even the highest range of recent sulfur-control scenarios is significantly below that of comparable, high-demand IS92 scenarios (IS92a, IS92b, IS92e, and IS92f). The scenarios with the lowest ranges project stringent sulfur-control levels that lead to a substantial decline in long-term emissions and a return to emission levels that prevailed at the beginning of the 20th century. Reflecting recent developments and the literature (reviewed in Chapter 3), it is assumed that sulfur emissions in the SRES scenarios will also be controlled increasingly outside the OECD. As a result, both long-term trends and regional patterns of sulfur emissions evolve differently from carbon emissions in the SRES scenarios. As a general pattern, global sulfur emissions do not rise substantially, and eventually decline, even in absolute terms, during the second half of the 21st century (see also Chapters 2 and 3). The spatial distribution of emissions changes markedly. Emissions in the OECD countries continue their recent declining trend (reflecting the tightening of control measures). Emissions outside the OECD rise initially, most notably in Asia, which compensates for the declining OECD emissions. Over the long term, however, sulfur emissions decline throughout the world, but the timing and magnitude vary across the scenarios. The SRES scenario set brackets global anthropogenic sulfur emissions between 27 and 169 MtS by 2050 and between 11 and 93 MtS by 2100 (see Table 6-2b). The range of emissions for the four markers is smaller. In contrast, the range of the IS92 scenarios (Pepper et al., 1992; Alcamo et al., 1995) is substantially higher, starting at 80 MtS and extending all the way to 200 MtS by 2050 and from 55 to 230 MtS by 2100. The two lowest scenarios, IS92c and IS92d, approach the higher end estimates of the SRES scenarios in 2100, while others are above the SRES range. As mentioned, this difference reflects the expected future consequences of recent policies that aim to achieve a drastic reduction in sulfur emissions in OECD countries, as well as an anticipated gradual introduction of sulfur controls in developing regions in the long-term, as reported in the underlying literature (see Chapter 3). In other words, all SRES scenarios assume sulfur control measures, although the uncertainty in timing and magnitude of implementation is reflected in the variation across different scenarios. Importantly, SRES scenarios assume sulfur controls only and do not assume any additional climate policy measures. Nevertheless, one important implication of this varying pattern of sulfur emissions is that the historically important, but uncertain, negative radiative forcing of sulfate aerosols may decline in the very long run. This view is also confirmed by model calculations reported in Subak et al. (1997) and Nakicenovic et al. (1998), on the basis of recent long-term GHG and sulfur emission scenarios. 6.3.4. Nitrogen Oxides and Volatile Organic Compounds 6.3.4.1. Nitrogen Oxides Emissions The 1990 NOx emissions in the six SRES models range between 26.5 and 34.2 MtN, but not all the models provide a comprehensive description of NOx emissions. Some models do not estimate NOx emissions at all (MARIA, MiniCAM), whereas others only include energy-related sources (MESSAGE) and have adopted other sources of emissions from corresponding scenarios derived from other models (i.e. MESSAGE uses corresponding AIM scenarios). Standardized (see Box 5-1 on Standardization) 1990 NOx emissions in the SRES scenarios, measured as nitrogen, amount to 31 MtN (Figure 5-9 in Chapter 5). As mentioned in Chapter 4, the volume of fossil fuels used for various energy purposes varies widely in the SRES scenario families. In addition, the level and timing of emission controls, inspired by local air quality concerns, is assumed to differ. As a result the spread of NOx emissions is largest within the A1 scenario family (28-151 MtN by 2100), almost as large as the range across all 40 SRES scenarios (see Table 6-2b). Only in the highest emission scenarios (the fossil fuel intensive A1C and A1G scenario groups within the A1 scenario family and the high population, coal intensive A2 scenario family) do emissions rise continuously throughout the 21st century. In the A1 (“balanced”) scenario group and in the B2 scenario family, NOx emission levels rise less. NOx emissions tend to increase up to 2050 and stabilize thereafter, the result of a gradual substitution of fossil fuels by alternatives as well as of the increasing diffusion of NOx control technologies. Low emission futures are described by various B1 family scenarios, as well as in the A1T scenario group that describe futures in which NOx emissions are controlled because of either local air quality concerns or rapid technological change away from conventional fossil technologies. Overall, the SRES scenarios describe a similar upper range of NOx emissions as the previous IS92 scenarios (151 MtN versus 134 MtN, respectively, by 2100), but extend the IS92 uncertainty range toward lower emission levels (16 versus 54 MtN by 2100 in the SRES and IS92 scenarios, respectively). 6.3.4.2. Volatile Organic Compounds, Excluding Methane Non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs) arise from fossil fuel combustion (as with NOx, wide ranges of emission factors are typical for internal combustion engines), and also from industrial processes, fuel storage (fugitive emissions), use of solvents (e.g., in paint and cleaners), and a variety of other activities. As chemical reactivities of the various substances grouped under the NMVOCs category are very different, so are their roles in ozone formation and the (potential) health hazards associated with them. In this report, NMVOCs are discussed as one group. In 1990, the estimated emissions range was between 83 and 178 Mt NMVOC, which after standardization (see Box 5-1) translates into 140 Mt NMVOC. As for NOx emissions, not all models include this emissions category or all of its sources; the most detailed treatment of NMVOC emissions is given in the ASF model. A relatively robust trend across all 40 scenarios (see Figure 5-10 in Chapter 5) is a gradual increase in NMVOC emissions up to about 2050, with a range of between 190 and 260 Mt. Beyond 2050, uncertainties increase with respect to both emission levels and trends. By 2100, the range is between 58 and 552 Mt, which extends the IS92 scenario range of 136 to 403 Mt by 2100 toward both higher and lower emissions (see Table 6-2b). As for NOx emissions, the upper bounds of NMVOC emissions are formed by fossil fuel intensive scenario groups within the A1 scenario family (A1C, A1G, combined into one fossil intensive scenario group A1FI in the Summary for Policymakers, see also footnote 2), and the lower bounds by the scenarios within the B1 scenario family. Characteristic ranges are between 60 and 90 Mt NMVOC by 2100 in the low emissions cluster and between 370 and 550 Mt NMVOC in the high emissions cluster. All other scenario families and individual scenarios fall between these two emissions clusters; the B2 marker scenario (B2-MESSAGE) closely tracks the median of global NMVOC emissions from all the SRES scenarios (see Figure 5-10 in Chapter 5). 6.3.4.3. Carbon Monoxide CO emissions in 1990 are estimated to range between 752 and 984 Mt CO (880 Mt CO after standardization) across the models used to derive the SRES scenarios. The same caveats as for NOx and NMVOC emissions also apply to CO emissions – the number of models that represent all the emission source categories is limited and modeling and data uncertainties, such as emission factors, are considerable. As a result, CO emission estimates across scenarios are highly model specific and future emission levels overlap considerably between the four SRES scenario families (see Table 6-2b). By 2100, emissions range between 363 and 3766 Mt CO, a considerably larger uncertainty range, particularly toward higher emissions, than in IS92, for which the 2100 emission range was between 450 and 929 Mt CO (see Table 6-2b). As for the NOx and NMVOC emissions discussed above, the highest CO emission levels are associated with the high-growth fossil fuel intensive scenarios (A1C and A1G scenario groups, combined into one fossil intensive scenario group A1FI in the Summary for Policymakers; see also footnote 2) within the A1 scenario family, and the lowest emission levels are generally associated with the B1 and B2 scenario families. However, inter-model variability is considerable, which indicates that uncertainties are equally large with respect to scenario driving forces (such as energy demand and supply growth) and other combined into one fossil intensive scenario group A1FI in the Summary for Policymakers; see also footnote 2) within the A1 scenario family, and the lowest emission levels are generally associated with the B1 and B2 scenario families. However, inter-model variability is considerable, which indicates that uncertainties are equally large with respect to scenario driving forces (such as energy demand and supply growth) and other factors that influence CO emissions (such as local air quality concerns or technological change). 6.4. Summary and Conclusions In summary, the SRES scenarios lead to the following findings: • Alternative combinations of driving forces can lead to similar levels and structure of energy and land-use patterns, as illustrated by different scenarios and groups. Hence, even for a given scenario outcome (e.g. in terms of GHG emissions) there are alternative combinations of driving forces and pathways that could lead to that outcome. For instance, significant global changes could result from a scenario of high population growth, even if per capita incomes rise only modestly, as well as from a scenario in which a rapid demographic transition (to low population levels) coincides with high rates of income growth and affluence. • Important possibilities for further bifurcations in future development trends exist within one scenario family, even when particular values are adopted for the important scenario driving force variables to illustrate a particular development path. The four technology scenario groups in A1 family (combined into three in the Summary for Policymakers) illustrate such alternative development paths with similar quantifications of the main driving forces. • Emissions profiles are dynamic across the range of SRES scenarios. They portray trend reversals and indicate possible emissions crossover among different scenarios. They do not represent mere extensions of continuous increase of GHGs and SO2 emissions into the future. This more complex pattern of future emissions across the range of SRES scenarios, time periods, world regions, and sectors reflects recent scenario literature. • Describing potential future developments involves inherent ambiguities and uncertainties. One and only one possible development path (as alluded to, for instance, in concepts such as “business-as-usual scenario”) simply does not exist alone. And even for each alternative development path described by any given scenario, there are numerous combinations of driving forces and numeric values that can be consistent with a particular scenario description. The numeric precision of any model result should not distract from the basic fact that uncertainty abounds. However, the multi-model approach increases the value of the SRES scenario set, since uncertainties in the choice of model input assumptions can be separated more explicitly from the specific model behavior and related modeling uncertainties. • Any scenario has subjective elements and is open to various interpretations. While the writing team as a whole has no preference for any of the scenarios, and has no judgment as to the probability or desirability of different scenarios, the open process and initial reactions to draft versions of this report show that individuals and interest groups do have such judgments. The writing team hopes that this will stimulate an open discussion in the policy making arena about potential futures and choices that can be made in the context of climate change response. For the scientific community, the SRES scenario exercise has led to the identification of a number of recommendations for future research that can further increase the understanding of potential developments of socio-economic driving forces and their interactions, and the associated GHG emissions. A summary of main findings and recommendations for potential users of the SRES scenarios is given in Box 6-3 and Box 6-4. The writing teams’ suggestions for consideration by the IPCC are summarized in Box 6-5. • Finally, the writing team believes that the SRES scenarios largely fulfill all the specifications set out in Chapter 1. To support reproducibility, more detailed information than can be included in this report will be made available by individual modeling groups and members of the writing team through other means, such as web sites, peer-reviewed literature, or background documentation if additional resources can be made available. In conclusion, Tables 6-2a and 6-2b summarize the main characteristics of the seven scenario groups that constitute the four families (combined into six groups in the Summary for Policymakers). The tables give the global ranges of driving Box 6-3 Main Findings and Implications of SRES Scenarios • The four scenario families each have a narrative storyline and consist of 40 scenarios developed by six modeling groups. • The 40 scenarios cover the full range of GHGs and SO2 emissions consistent with the underlying range of driving forces from scenario literature. • The 40 SRES scenarios fall into different groups – the three scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus four groups within the A1 scenario family, two of which (A1C and A1G) have been combined into one fossil-intensive group A1FI in the Summary for Policymakers; see also footnote 2. The four A1 groups are distinguished by their technological emphasis – on coal (A1C), oil and gas (A1G), non-fossil energy sources (A1T), or a balance across all sources (A1). • The scenarios are grouped into four categories of cumulative CO2 emissions, which indicate that scenarios with different driving forces can lead to similar cumulative emissions and those with similar driving forces can branch out into different categories of cumulative emissions. • Four from 40 scenarios are designated as marker scenarios that are characteristic of the four scenarios families. Together with the two additional illustrative scenarios selected from the scenario groups in the A1 family, they capture most of the emissions and driving forces spanned by the full set of the scenarios. • There is no single central or “best guess” scenario, and probabilities or likelihood are not assigned to individual scenarios. Instead, the writing team recommends that the smallest set of scenarios used should include the four designated marker scenarios and the two additional illustrative scenarios selected from the scenario groups in the A1 family. • Distinction between scenarios that envisage stringent environmental policies and those that include direct climate policies was very difficult to make, a difficulty associated with many definitional and other ambiguities. • All scenarios describe futures that are generally more affluent than today. Many of the scenarios envisage a more rapid convergence in per capita income ratios in the world compared to the IS92 scenarios while, at the same time, they jointly cover a wide range of GHG and SO2 emissions. • Emissions profiles are more dynamic than the IS92 scenarios, which reflects changes in future emissions trends for some scenarios and GHG species. • The levels of GHG emissions are generally lower than the IS92 levels, especially toward the end of the 21st century, while emissions of SO2, which have a cooling effect on the atmosphere, are significantly lower than in IS92. • Alternative combinations of main scenario driving forces can lead to similar levels of GHG emissions by the end of the 21st century. Scenarios with different underlying assumptions can result in very similar climate changes. • Technology is at least as important a driving force of GHG emissions as population and economic development across the set of 40 SRES scenarios. Box 6-4: Recommendations for Consideration by the User Communities The writing team recommends that the SRES scenarios be the main basis for the assessment of future emissions and their driving forces in the Third Assessment Report (TAR). Accordingly, the SRES writing team makes the following recommendations regarding the emissions scenarios to be used in the atmosphere/ocean general circulation models (A/O GCMs) simulations for Working Group I (WGI), for the models that will be used in the assessment of climate change impacts by Working Group II (WGII), and for the mitigation and stabilization assessments by WGIII: • It is recommended that a range of SRES scenarios from more than one family be used in any analysis. The scenario groups – the scenario families A2, B1, and B2, plus the groups within the A1 scenario family, and four cumulative emissions categories were developed as the smallest subsets of SRES scenarios that capture the range of uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions. • The important uncertainties may be different in different applications – for example climate modeling; assessment of impacts, vulnerability, mitigation, and adaptation options; and policy analysis. Climate modelers may want to cover the range reflected by the cumulative emissions categories. To assess the robustness of options in terms of impacts, vulnerability, and adaptation may require scenarios with similar emissions but different socio-economic characteristics, as reflected by the scenario groups. For mitigation analysis, variation in both emissions and socio-economic characteristics may be necessary. For analysis at the national or regional scale, the most appropriate scenarios may be those that best reflect specific circumstances and perspectives. • There is no single most likely, “central”, or “best-guess” scenario, either with respect to other SRES specific circumstances and perspectives. • There is no single most likely, “central”, or “best-guess” scenario, either with respect to other SRES scenarios or to the underlying scenario literature. Probabilities or likelihoods are not assigned to individual SRES scenarios. None of the SRES scenarios represents an estimate of a central tendency for all driving forces and emissions, such as the mean or median, and none should be interpreted as such. The statistics associated with the frequency distributions of SRES scenarios do not represent the likelihood of their occurrence. The writing team cautions against constructing a central, “best-estimate” scenario from the SRES scenarios; instead it recommends use of the SRES scenarios as they are. • Concerning large-scale climate models, the writing team recommends that the minimum set of SRES scenarios should include the four designated marker scenarios and the two additional illustrative scenarios selected from the scenario groups in the A1 family. At the minimum (a) a simulation for one and the same SRES marker or illustrative scenario should be performed by every TAR climate model for a given stabilization ceiling, and (b) the set of simulations performed by the TAR climate models and stabilization runs for a given ceiling should include all four of the SRES marker scenarios. • The driving forces and emissions of each SRES scenario should be used together. To avoid internal inconsistencies, components of SRES scenarios should not be mixed. For example, the GHG emissions from one scenario and the SO2 emissions from another scenario, or the population from one and economic development path from another, should not be combined. • The SRES scenarios can provide policy makers with a long-term context for near-term decisions. This implies that they are not necessarily well suited for the analysis of near-term developments. When analyzing mitigation and adaptation options, the user should be aware that although no additional climate initiatives are included in the SRES scenarios, various changes have been assumed to occur that would require other policy interventions. • More detailed information on assumptions, inputs, and the results of the 40 SRES scenarios should be made available at a web site and on a CD-ROM. Regular maintenance of the SRES web site is Box 6-5: Recommendations for Consideration by the IPCC • Extend the SRES web site and CD-ROM to provide, if appropriate, time-dependent geographic distributions of driving forces and emissions, and concentrations of GHGs and sulfate aerosols. • Development of a classification scheme for classifying scenarios as intervention or non-intervention scenarios. • Establish a programme for on-going evaluations and comparisons of long-term emissions scenarios, including a regularly updated scenario database. • An effort should be made in the future to develop an appropriate emissions scenario classification scheme. • Identify resources for capacity building in the area of emissions scenarios for future IPCC assessments, with a particular emphasis to involve strong participation from developing countries. • Promote activities within and outside the IPCC to extend the SRES multi-baseline and multi-model approach in future assessments of climate change impacts, adaptation, and mitigation. • Initiate new programs to assess GHG emissions from land use and sources of emissions other than energy-related CO2 emissions, to go beyond the effort of SRES, which was limited by time and resources. • Initiate new programs to assess future developments of driving forces and GHG emissions for different regions and for different sectors (taking the set of SRES scenarios as reference for overall global and regional developments) to provide more regional and sectorial detail than time and resources allowed SRES to achieve. forces and emissions in 2020, 2050, and 2100. Table 6-2a summarizes the ranges of the main scenario driving forces: global population, economic development, per capita income levels and income ratios, energy intensity, primary energy use, and structure of energy supply. Table 6-2b summarizes the emissions of GHGs, SO2, and ozone precursors emissions for the years 2020, 2050, and 2100 as well as cumulative 1990-2100 CO2 emissions broken down into energy- and land-use related sources. Together, the two tables provide a concise summary of the new SRES scenarios. N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 233-304. Alcamo, J., E. Kreileman and R. Leemans (eds.), 1998: Global Change Scenarios of the 21st Century: Results from the IMAGE 2.1 model. Elsevier Science, London. De Jong, A. and G. Zalm, 1991: Scanning the Future: A long-term Scenario Study of the World Economy 1990-2015. In Long-term Prospects of the World Economy, OECD, Paris, France, pp. 27-74. Demeny, P., 1990: Population. In The Earth As Transformed by Human Action, B.L. Turner II et al. (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. De Vries, B., J.G.J. Olivier, R.A. van den Wijngaart, G.J.J. Kreileman, and A.M.C. Toet, 1994: Model for calculating regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 76, 79-131. De Vries, B., M. Janssen, and A. Beusen, 1999: Perspectives on global energy futures - simulations with the TIME model. Energy Policy, 27, 477-494. De Vries, B., J. Bollen, L. Bouwman, M. den Elzen, M. Janssen, and E. Kreileman, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in an equity-, environment- and service-oriented world. An IMAGE-based scenario for the next century. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3). (In press) Durand, J.D., 1967: The modern expansion of world population. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 111(3), 136-159. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, and C. MacCracken, 1994: Advanced Energy Technologies and Climate Change: An Analysis Using the Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM). PNL-9798, UC-402, Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, H. Pitcher, R. Richels, T. Wigley, and C. MacCracken, 1996a: An integrated assessment of climate change and the accelerated introduction of advanced energy technologies: An application of MiniCAM 1.0. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1(4), 311-339. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, R. Sands, R. Brown, and H. Kheshgi, 1996b: Agriculture, Land-Use, and Commercial Biomass Energy: A Preliminary Integrated Analysis of the Potential Role of Biomass Energy for Redu… Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 383-418. Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1995: Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emissions Scenarios. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 339 pp. Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.), 1996: Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. IEA (International Energy Agency), 1999: Non-OECD Coal-Fired Power Generation – trends in the 1990s. IEA Coal Research, London. Kroeze, C. and Reijnders, L., 1992: Halocarbons and global warming III. The Science of Total Environment, 112, 291-314. La Rovere, E.L., and B. Americano, 1998: Environmental Impacts of Privatizing the Brazilian Power Sector. Proceedings of the International Association of Impact Assessment Annual Meeting, Christchurch, New Zealand, April 1998. Lashof, D., and Tirpak, D.A., 1990: Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate. 21P-2003. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. Leggett, J., W.J. Pepper, and R.J. Swart, 1992: Emissions scenarios for IPCC: An update. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander, S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 69-95. Lutz, W. (ed.), 1996: The Future Population of the World: What can we assume today? 2nd Edition. Earthscan, London. Lutz, W., W. Sanderson, and S. Scherbov, 1997: Doubling of world population unlikely. Nature, 387(6635), 803-805. McCulloch, A., P.M. Midgley, 1998: Estimated historic emissions of fluorocarbons from the European Union. Atmospheric Environment, 32(9), 1571-1580. Messner, S., and M. Strubegger, 1995: User’s Guide for MESSAGE III. WP-95-69, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 155 pp. Midgley, P.M., and A. McCulloch, 1999: Properties and applications of industrial halocarbons. In Reactive Halogen Compounds in the Atmosphere, 4, Part E. P. Fabian, and O.N. Singh (eds.), The Handbook of Environmental Chemistry, Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg. Mori, S., and M. Takahashi, 1999: An integrated assessment model for the evaluation of new energy technologies and food productivity. International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 11(1-4), 1-18. Mori, S., 2000: The development of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios using an extension of the MARIA model for the assessment of resource and energy technologies. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Morita, T., Y. Matsuoka, I. Penna, and M. Kainuma, 1994: Global Carbon Dioxide Emission Scenarios and their Basic Assumptions: 1994 Survey. CGER-1011-94. Center for Global Environmental Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. Nakicenovic, N., N. Victor, and T. Morita, 1998: Emissions scenarios database and review of scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 95-120. Parikh, J.K., 1992: IPCC strategies unfair to the south. Nature, 360, 507-508. Pepper, W.J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992: Emissions scenarios for the IPCC: An update. Assumptions, methodology, and results: Support Document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992: Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callandar, S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pepper, W.J., Barbour, W., Sankovski, A., and Braaz, B., 1998: No-policy greenhouse gas emission scenarios – revisiting IPCC 1992. Environmental Science & Policy, 1, 289-312. Prather, M., R. Derwent, D. Ehhalt, P. Fraser, E. Sanhueza, and X. Zhou, 1995: Other trace gases and atmospheric chemistry. In Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 77-119. Riahi, K., and R.A. Roehrl, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in a dynamics-as-usual scenario of economic and energy development. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Sankovski, A., W. Barbour, and W. Pepper, 2000: Quantification of the IS99 emission scenario storylines using the atmospheric stabilization framework (ASF). Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63(2-3) (In press). Streets, D.G., and S.T. Waldhoff, 2000: Present and future emissions of air pollutants in China: SO2, NOx, and CO. Atmospheric… Environment, 34(3), 363-374. Subak, S., M. Hulme and L. Bohn, 1997: The Implications of FCCC Protocol Proposals for Future Global Temperature Results Considering Alternative Sulfur Forcing. CSERGE Working Paper GEC-97-19, CSERGE University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK. UN (United Nations), 1998: World Population Projections to 2150. UN Department of Economics and Social Affairs (Population Division), United Nations, New York, NY. UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change), 1997: Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, FCCC/CP/17/Add.1, 10 December 1997, UN, New York, NY. WMO/UNEP (World Meteorological Organisation and United Nations Environment Programme), 1998: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1998. WMO Global Ozone Research & Monitoring Project, December 1998, WMO, Geneva. WMO/UNEP (World Meteorological Organisation and United Nations Environment Programme), 1999: Conference Report, Joint IPCC/TEAP Expert Meeting on Options for the Limitation of Emissions of HFCs and PFCs, 26-28 May 1999, Petten, the Netherlands. World Bank, 1999: 1999 World Development Indicators. World Bank. SPECIAL REPORT ON EMISSIONS SCENARIOS: APPENDICES SRES Terms of Reference: New IPCC Emission Scenarios SRES Terms of Reference: New IPCC Emissions Scenarios SRES Terms of Reference New IPCC Emissions Scenarios It is proposed that Working Group III coordinate the development of new emissions scenarios that assume no additional climate policy initiatives. 1.1. Background In 1992 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released six emissions scenarios (Leggett et al., 1992) providing alternative emissions trajectories spanning the years 1990 through 2100 for greenhouse-related gases, carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), nitrogen oxide (NOx), and sulfur dioxide (SO2). These scenarios were intended for use by atmospheric and climate scientists in the preparation of scenarios of atmospheric composition and climate change. The work updated and extended earlier work prepared for the IPCC First Assessment Report. These six scenarios are referred to as the IS92 scenarios. In many ways the IS92 scenarios were pathbreaking. They were the first global scenarios to provide estimates of the full suite of greenhouse gases. At the time, they were the only scenarios to provide emission trajectories for SO2. Alcamo et al. (1995) reviewed the scenarios and found that the fossil fuel carbon emissions trajectories spanned more than half of the open literature emissions scenarios reviewed. Other emissions trajectories had received less scrutiny in the open literature and, while the IS92 cases were not dissimilar to those in the open literature, the open literature was extremely sparse in many instances. Much has changed in the period following the creation of the IS92 scenarios. Sulfur emissions have been recognized as a more important radiative forcing factor than other non-CO2 greenhouse-related gases, and some regional control policies have been adopted. Restructuring in the states of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union has had far more powerful effects on economic activity and emissions than were foreseen in the IS92 scenarios. For some regions these scenarios are not representative of those found in the literature. The advent of integrated assessment (IA) models has made it possible to construct self-consistent emissions scenarios that jointly consider the interactions between energy, economy, and land-use changes. Alcamo et al. (1995) found that for the purposes of driving atmospheric climate models, the CO2 emissions trajectories of the IS92 scenarios provided a reasonable reflection of variations found in the open literature. However, scenarios are also required for other purposes, and the IS92 scenarios are not suitable for purposes for which they were not developed. It was concluded that, if the scenarios were intended to have broader uses than simply a set of emissions trajectories to drive climate models, new scenarios should be developed. Further, a new approach should be adopted. The new approach should open the process to the broader research community. 1.2. Approach It is proposed that new scenarios should be developed through a coordinated effort that draws upon the expertise of all researchers in the relevant community. A three-step process is envisaged. First, key input assumptions would be reviewed and provided to modelers. Second, modelers would be asked to construct emissions scenarios based on the input assumptions provided. Finally, the model results will be used to develop new emissions scenarios in the form of average results for participating models or results from a representative model. A writing team would be established to consider key input assumptions (such as population projections and technologic change) and emissions from specific sources (such as SO2 emissions and CO2 emissions due to land-use change), possibly with the assistance of specialized task groups. The writing team will also stipulate a set of geographical reporting regions, reporting years, units of measure, etc., designed to provide climate modelers, impact assessment analysts, and other users with the detail they need for their work. Finally, the writing team would ensure that the range of results reflects the underlying uncertainty and, to the extent possible, that the assumptions for specific scenarios are internally consistent. Scenario development will be an open process. There will be no “official” model. There will be no “expert teams.” Any research group with the capability of preparing scenarios for any region can participate. This means that, while modeling teams which employ global coverage will be able to participate, so too will regional modelers. By opening the process in this way, developing and developed region researchers with local expertise can participate even if they do not have global coverage. Modeling teams will be provided with information on the input assumptions and other necessary information such as, for example, the world oil price, to regional modeling teams. Once the modeling teams have completed their work, a set of scenarios will be chosen. This will likely be the inputs and outputs of a “representative” model, but it could also be the average of the participating models or some other representation of the model results. 1.3. Reporting and Distribution of Results To maximize the usefulness of the new scenarios, two steps should be taken. First, arrangements should be made with an organization whose mission it is to disseminate information to provide a means by which users can access scenario results. All results from research institutions will be included in the database along with associated assumptions. In addition, for research teams willing to participate, the associated models will also be made available so that users can not only have access to scenario assumptions and outputs, but have the capability of independently creating derivative scenarios. 1.4. Timing and Coordination It is proposed that the writing team begin work before the end of 1996. The team should establish the parameters – geographic reporting regions, reporting years, time horizon, units, etc. – by the end of the first quarter of 1997. Reports of the expert groups on the range of values for each of the input assumptions should be available by the end of the third quarter of 1997. The scenario results corresponding to these input assumptions should be available from participating modeling groups during the first quarter of 1998. Peer and government review should be complete by the end of 1998. References: Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grübler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios. In: Climate Change 1994, Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 233-304. Leggett, Emissions Scenarios for IPCC: An Update. In: Climate Change 1992. The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment [Houghton, J.T., B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 69-95. II SRES Writing Team and SRES Reviewers SRES Writing Team and SRES Reviewers SRES Writing Team and SRES Reviewers II.1 SRES Writing Team Joseph M. Alcamo University of Kassel Kassel, Germany Dennis Anderson Oxford University Oxford, UK Johannes Bollen National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands Lex Bouwman National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands Ogunlade R. Davidson Co-chair of IPCC-WGIII University of Sierra Leone Fourah Bay College Freetown, Sierra Leone Gerald R. Davis Shell International Petroleum London, UK Bert de Vries National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands Michel den Elzen National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands Jae Edmonds Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) Washington, DC, USA Christopher Elvidge NOAA National Geophysical Data Center Boulder, CO, USA Jørgen Fenhann Risø National Laboratory Roskilde, Denmark Stuart R. Gaffin Environmental Defense Fund New York, NY, USA Henryk Gaj ENERGSYS Ltd. Warsaw, Poland Kenneth Gregory Centre for Business and the Environment Middlesex, UK Arnulf Grübler International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) Laxenburg, Austria William Hare Greenpeace International Amsterdam, The Netherlands Marco Janssen National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands Kejun Jiang National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) Tsukuba, Japan Anne Johnson US Environmental Protection Agency Washington, DC, USA Tae-Yong Jung Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES) Kanagawa, Japan Tom Kram Netherlands Energy Research Foundation (ECN) Petten, The Netherlands Eric Kreileman National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands Emilio Lebre La Rovere Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Mathew Luhanga University of Dar es Salaam Dar es Salaam, United Rep. of Tanzania Nicolette Manson Inform, Inc. New York, NY, USA Toshihiko Masui National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) Tsukuba, Japan Alan McDonald International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) Laxenburg, Austria Douglas McKay Shell International Petroleum London, UK Bert Metz Co-chair of IPCC-WGIII National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands Laurie Michaelis Oxford Centre for the Environment, Ethics and Society (OCEES) Oxford, UK Shunsuke Mori Science University of Tokyo Chiba, Japan Tsuneyuki Morita National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) Tsukuba, Japan Nebojsa Nakicenovic International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) Laxenburg, Austria William Pepper ICF Consulting Fairfax, VA, USA Hugh Martin Pitcher Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) Washington, DC, USA Lynn Price Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) Berkeley, CA, USA Keywan Riahi International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) Laxenburg, Austria R. Alexander Roehrl International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) Laxenburg, Austria Hans-Holger Rogner International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Vienna, Austria Alexei Sankovski ICF Consulting Washington, DC, USA Michael Schlesinger University of Illinois Urbana, IL, USA S. Baldwin Office of Science and Technology Policy USA Priyadarshi Shukla Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, India W. Barbour US Environmental Protection Agency USA Steven Smith National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Boulder, CO, USA W. Bjerke IPAI - International Primary Aluminium Institute United Kingdom Leena Srivastava Tata Energy Research Institute (TERI) New Delhi, India R. Boeck University of Gent Belgium Robert Swart National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) Bilthoven, The Netherlands E. Bruci Hydrometeorological Institute Albania B. Burdick Wuppertal Institut für Klima, Umwelt, Energie Germany P. Burschel Universität München Germany T. Bye Statistics Norway Norway C.C. Chang US Department of Energy USA R.C. Dahlman US Department of Energy USA R. Darwin US Department of Agriculture USA B. De Angelo US Environmental Protection Agency USA U. Dethlefsen Vattenfall Utveckling AB Sweden Y. Ding China Meteorological Administration China Zhou Dadi State Planning Commission Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing, China C. Doyle The Scottish Agricultural College United Kingdom E.L. Fletzer Department of State USA R. Forte US Environmental Protection Agency USA L. Fresco FAO Italy M. Abduli Faculty of Environment Iran H. Ahlgrimm Institut für Technologie Germany M. Giroux International Atomic Energy Agency Austria M. Aho VTT Energy Finland R. Gommes FAO Italy C. Albrecht State Secretariat for Economic Affairs Switzerland A. Grambsch US Environmental Protection Agency USA K. Alfsen University of Oslo Norway V.R. Gray Consultant New Zealand M. Anderson US Department of Agriculture USA K. Green Volpe Center USA P. Ashford Arran Cottage United Kingdom H. Gruenspecht Department of Energy USA H. Audus CRE Group Ltd. United Kingdom G. Guilpain ELF ATOCHEM France C. Azar Chalmers University of Technology Sweden P. Hall Canadian Forest Service, Natural Resources Canada A. Baker IEA Coal Industry Advisory Board United Kingdom K. Heinloth Universität Bonn Germany W. Hohenstein US Environmental Protection Agency USA R. House US Department of Agriculture USA G. Hovsenius ELFORSK - Swedish Electrical Utilities R & D Company Sweden S. Hrubovcak US Department of Agriculture USA M. Hulme University of East Anglia United Kingdom H. Jacoby Sloan School of Management USA M.J. Jawson US Department of Agriculture USA A. Jhaveri Seattle Regional Support Office USA M. Jefferson World Energy Council United Kingdom V. Kagramanian International Atomic Energy Agency Austria S. Kane National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration USA A. Khan International Atomic Energy Agency Austria F. Krambeck Mobil USA S. Kononov International Atomic Energy Agency Austria C. Kroeze Wageningen Agricultural University The Netherlands D. Kruger US Environmental Protection Agency Washington, DC, USA L.L. Langlois International Atomic Energy Agency Austria D. Lashof Natural Resources Defense Council USA M. MacCracken US Global Change Research Program USA P. MacLaren New Zealand Forest Research Institute New Zealand J. Maues Petrobras/Conpet Brazil M. Mazur US Department of Energy USA A. McCulloch ICI United Kingdom P. Menna ENEA Italy S. Montzka National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration USA L. Nadler Mobil USA P. Nagelhout US Environmental Protection Agency USA A.A. Niederberger State Secretariat for Economic Affairs Switzerland A. Olecka Polish UNFCCC Executive Bureau Poland Z. Ozdogan Tubitak-Marmara Research Center Turkey J. Pacyna Norwegian Institute for Air Research (NILU) Norway D. Pearlman Climate Council USA L. Perez Ministerio del Ambiente y de los Recursos Naturales Venezuela T. Pieper US Global Change Research Program USA R. Piltz US Global Change Research Program USA J. Pretel Czech Hydrometeorological Institute Czech Republic X. Querol Spanish Council for Scientific Research Spain B. Rhodes US Environmental Protection Agency USA D. Rothman Columbia University USA E. Scheehle US Environmental Protection Agency USA J. Shrouds Federal Highway Administration USA B. Sorensen Roskilde University Denmark T. Tajima Ministry of International Trade and Industry Japan T. Terry US Department of Energy USA D. Trilling US Department of Transportation USA P. Tseng US Environmental Protection Agency USA R. Tsui Mobil USA O. van Cleemput University of Gent Belgium E. Wilson US Environmental Protection Agency USA I. Yesserkepova KazHydromet Kazakhstan H. Yokota Environment Agency of Japan Japan III Definition of SRES World Regions Definition of SRES World Regions OECD90 REGION North America (NAM) Canada United States of America Western Europe (WEU) Andorra Austria Azores Belgium Canary Islands Channel Islands Cyprus Denmark Faeroe Islands Finland France Germany Gibraltar Greece Greenland Iceland Ireland Isle of Man Italy Liechtenstein Luxembourg Madeira Malta Monaco Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Pacific OECD (PAO) Australia New Zealand Japan ASIA REGION Centrally planned Asia and China (CPA) Cambodia China Guam Hong Kong Korea (DPR) Laos (PDR) Mongolia Viet Nam South Asia (SAS) Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Other Pacific Asia (PAS) American Samoa Brunei Darussalam Fiji French Polynesia Gilbert-Kiribati Indonesia Malaysia Myanmar New Caledonia Papua New Guinea Philippines Republic of Korea Singapore Solomon Islands Taiwan, province of China Thailand Tonga Vanuatu Western Samoa ALM REGION (Africa and Latin America) Middle East and North Africa (MEA) Algeria Bahrain Egypt (Arab Republic) Iran (Islamic Republic) Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya/SPLAJ Morocco Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Sudan Syria (Arab Republic) Tunisia United Arab Emirates Yemen Latin America and the Caribbean (LAM) REF REGION (countries undergoing economic reform) Central and Eastern Europe (EEU) Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Hungary Poland Romania Slovak Republic Slovenia The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Newly independent states (NIS) of the former Soviet Uni Arab Emirates The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Lebanon Yemen Libya/SPLAJ Newly independent states (NIS) of the former Soviet Union (FSU) Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Republic of Moldova Russian Federation Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Latin America and the Caribbean (LAM) Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador French Guyana Grenada Guadeloupe Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Netherlands Antilles Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Reunion Saint Kitts and Nevis Santa Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago Uruguay Venezuela Sub-Saharan Africa (AFR) Angola Benin Botswana British Indian Ocean Territory Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Congo Côte d’Ivoire Djibouti Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Kenya Lesotho Liberia Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Reunion Rwanda Sao Tome and Principe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Saint Helena Swaziland Tanzania Togo Uganda Zaire Zambia Zimbabwe Definition of SRES World Regions IV Six Modeling Approaches Six Modeling Approaches The SRES Terms of Reference call for a multi-model approach for developing emissions scenarios (see Appendix I). In all, six different modeling approaches were used to generate the 40 SRES scenarios. These six models are representative of the approaches to emissions scenario modeling and the different integrated assessment frameworks used in the scenario literature and include both macro-economic (so-called top-down) and systems-engineering (so-called bottom-up) models. Some modeling teams developed scenarios to reflect all four storylines, while some presented scenarios for fewer storylines. Chapter 4 lists all the SRES scenarios, by modeling group and by scenario family. The six modeling approaches include: • Asian Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) from the National Institute of Environmental Studies in Japan (Morita et al., 1994); • Atmospheric Stabilization Framework Model (ASF) from ICF Consulting in the USA (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990; Pepper et al., 1992, 1998; Sankovski et al., 2000); • Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect (IMAGE) from the National Institute for Public Health and Environmental Hygiene (RIVM) (Alcamo et al., 1998; de Vries et al., 1994, 1999, 2000), used in connection with the Dutch Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) WorldScan model (de Jong and Zalm, 1991), the Netherlands; • Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation (MARIA) from the Science University of Tokyo in Japan (Mori and Takahashi, 1999; Mori, 2000); • Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (MESSAGE) from the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria (Messner and Strubegger, 1995; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000); and • the Mini Climate Assessment Model (MiniCAM) from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) in the USA (Edmonds et al., 1994, 1996a, 1996b). IV.1. Asian Pacific Integrated Model The Asian Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) is a large-scale computer simulation model for scenario analyses of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and the impacts of global warming in the Asian-Pacific region. This model is being developed mainly to examine global warming response measures in the region, but it is linked to a world model so that it is possible to make global estimates. AIM comprises three main models - the GHG emission model (AIM/emission), the global climate change model (AIM/climate), and the climate change impact model (AIM/impact). The AIM-based quantification was conducted as an Asian collaborative project using a new linked version of the AIM/emission model, which covers the world but has a more detailed structure for the Asian-Pacific region than for other regions. The new linked version couples bottom-up models and top-down models (Figure IV-1). The bottom-up models were prepared using the original AIM bottom-up components, which can reproduce detailed processes of energy consumption, industrial production, land-use changes, and waste management as well as technology development and social demand changes. However, two kinds of top-down models were prepared for this quantification: • An energy-economic model based on the revised Edmonds-Reilly-Barns (ERB) Model, which can estimate interactions between energy sectors and economic sectors. • An original land equilibrium model that can reproduce interactions between land-use changes and economic sectors. The original AIM bottom-up components were integrated with these two top-down models through a newly developed linkage module. This new structure maximizes the ability to simulate a variety of inputs at a variety of levels, and to calculate future GHG emissions in a relatively full-range analysis. The AIM model has nine regions for the energy-economic model and 17 regions for the bottom-up and land equilibrium models (see Table IV-1). Its time horizon is from 1990 to 2100. Before 2030, it uses 5-year time steps, but then jumps to 2050, 2075, and 2100. The GHGs and related gases include: • Carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), carbon monoxide (CO), non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions from energy combustion-production processes. • CO2 from deforestation. • CH4 and N2O from agricultural production. • NMVOCs and SO2 from biomass combustion. • CO2, CH4, N2O, NOx, CO, NMVOCs, and SO2 emissions from industrial processes, waste management, and land-use changes. More detailed information can be obtained by referring to the web site: www-cger.nies.go.jp/ipcc/aim/ The ASF energy model consists of four end-use sectors (residential, commercial, industrial, and transportation). These sectors consume liquid fuels, solid fuels, gaseous fuels, and electricity. An electricity generation sector converts liquid fuels, solid fuels, gaseous fuels, nuclear energy, hydro energy, and solar energy into electricity. A synfuels sector converts coal and/or biomass into either a liquid or gaseous fuel. There is no direct consumption of solar energy or biomass by the end-use sectors. Table IV-2: ASF regions. Region – Countries Africa (AFRICA) All African countries Centrally Planned Asia (CPASIA) China, Laos, Mongolia, Korea (DPR), Vietnam Eastern Europe and newly independent states (EENIS) Albania, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, former USSR, former Yugoslavia Latin America (LAMER) All Latin American countries (including Mexico, Central and South America) Middle East (MEAST) All Middle Eastern countries including Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE OECD-East (OECDA) Australia, Japan, New Zealand OECD-West (OECDW) Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom South East Asia and Oceania (SEASIA) Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Republic of Korea, Burma, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and other countries of the region USA (USA) USA, Puerto Rico, and other US territories IV.2. The Atmospheric Stabilization Framework (ASF) Model The current version of ASF includes energy, agricultural, and deforestation GHG emissions and atmospheric models and provides emission estimates for nine world regions (Tables IV-1 and IV-2). In the ASF model balancing the supply and demand for energy is achieved ultimately by adjusting energy prices. Energy prices differ by region to reflect regional market conditions, and by type of energy to reflect supply constraints, conversion costs, and the value of the energy to end users. ASF estimates the supply-demand balance by an iterative search technique to determine supply prices. These supply prices, which energy producers charge for the fuel at the wellhead or at the mine, are used to estimate the secondary energy prices in each region. These secondary prices are based on the supply price for the marginal export region, the interregional transportation cost, refining and distribution costs, and regional tax policies. For electricity, the secondary prices reflect the relative proportions of each fuel an iterative search technique to determine supply prices. These supply prices, which energy producers charge for the fuel at the wellhead or at the mine, are used to estimate the secondary energy prices in each region. These secondary prices are based on the supply price for the marginal export region, the interregional transportation cost, refining and distribution costs, and regional tax policies. For electricity, the secondary prices reflect the relative proportions of each fuel used to produce the electricity, the secondary prices of those fuels, the non-fossil costs of converting the fuels into electricity, and the conversion efficiency. The agricultural ASF model estimates the production of major agricultural products, such as meat, milk, and grain, which is driven by population and gross national product (GNP) growth. This model is linked with the ASF deforestation model, which estimates the area of land deforested annually as a function of population growth and demand for agricultural products. The ASF GHG emissions model uses outputs of the energy, agricultural, and deforestation models to estimate GHG emissions in each ASF region. These emissions are estimated by mapping GHG emission sources to the corresponding emission drivers and changing them according to changes in these drivers. For example, CH₄ emissions from landfills are mapped to population, while CO₂ emissions from cement production are mapped to GNP. Finally, the ASF atmospheric model uses GHG emission estimates to calculate GHG concentrations, and corresponding radiative forcing and temperature effects. A detailed description of the ASF is provided in the ASF 1990 Report to Congress (Lashof and Tirpak, 1990), and recent applications of the model are reported in Pepper et al. (1998) and Sankovski et al. (2000). IV.3. Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect The Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect (IMAGE 2) consists of three fully linked systems of models: • The Energy-Industry System (EIS). • The Terrestrial Environment System (TES). • The Atmosphere-Ocean System (AOS). Population Gross Regional Product (GRP) Industrial Value Added Service Value Added Consumer Expenditures Energy Demand Module * Useful Energy Demand (electric and non-electric) * Autonomous Energy Efficiency Improvement (AEEI) * Price Induced Energy Efficiency Improvement (PIEEI) * Secondary Fuel Substitution Electricity Generation Module * Thermal Electric (TE) inputs and efficiency * Non-Thermal Electric (NTE) technological innovation * Exogenous Hydropower Cost of [fuels for] electricity Demand for Solid (coal), Liquid (oil, BLF) and Gaseous (gas, BGF) fuels leads to investment in production Cost of secondary fuels Fuel Supply Module * Exploration for and exploitation of coal, crude oil and natural gas * Changing costs of fossil fuels due to innovation, depletion and wages * Investment in commercial Liquid and/or Gaseous Biofuel (BLF, BGF) * Interregional trade in fuels based on relative producer plus transport cost Figure IV-2: Overview of the IMAGE EIS/TIMER model. Atmosphere-Ocean System Atmospheric Composition Zonal Atmospheric Climate Primary driving forces • Population growth • Economic growth • Technological improvements • Animal husbandry Land Use Emissions • All major greenhouse gases • Land cover conversions • Land use emissions • Natural emissions Terrestrial Carbon • Land cover conversions • Adaptation of vegetation • Regrowth of vegetation • Feedback processes Agricultural Economy • Demand for food • Number of animals • Demand for biofuels • Demand for timber Land Cover • Adaptation of vegetation • Unsuitable land • Extensive grassland Land use rules • Crop Allocation • Expanding agricultural land • Abandoning agricultural land • Timber extraction Land quality indicators Terrestrial Vegetation • Climate Indicators • Potential vegetation • Crop productivity • Soil conditions Figure IV-3: The structure of the TES of IMAGE 2 (including links to other modules). Table IV-3: IMAGE 2 regions (see also Table IV-1). Canada USA Latin America (Central and South) Africa OECD Europe Eastern Europe CIS (former Soviet Union) Middle East India (including Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka) China (including China, Korea (DPR), Kampuchea, Laos, Mongolia, Vietnam) East Asia South (Indonesia, Republic of Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand) Oceania Japan EIS computes the emissions of GHGs in 13 world regions (Tables IV-1 and IV-3). The energy-related emissions are based on the Targets Image Energy Regional (TIMER) simulation model (Figure IV-2). TIMER is a systems dynamics model with investment decisions in energy efficiency, electricity generation, and energy supply based on anticipated demand, relative costs or prices, and institutional and informational delays. The model uses five economic sectors. Technological change and fuel price dynamics influence energy intensity, fuel substitution, and the penetration of non-fossil options such as solar electricity and biomass-based fuels. The objective of TES is to simulate global land-use and land-cover changes and then effect on emissions of GHGs and ozone precursors, and on carbon fluxes between the biosphere and the atmosphere (Figure IV-3). This subsystem can be used to: • Evaluate the effectiveness of land-use policies to control the build-up of GHGs. • Assess the land consequences of large-scale use of biofuels. • Evaluate the impact of climate change on global ecosystems and agriculture. • Investigate the effects of population, economic, and technological trends on changing global land cover. More detailed information can be obtained by referring to the following web site: http://sedac.ciesin.org/mva/. IV.4. Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (MESSAGE) A set of integrated models was used to formulate the SRES scenarios at IIASA (Nakicenovic, et al., 1998). Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (MESSAGE) is one of the six models that constitute IIASA's integrated modeling framework (Messner and Strubegger, 1995; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000; Roehrl and Riahi, 2000). The scenario formulation process starts with exogenous assumptions about population and per capita economic growth by region. Energy demand (defined at the useful energy level) is derived using the Scenario Generator (SG) model, a dynamic model of future economic and energy development. It combines extensive historical data about economic development and energy systems with empirically estimated equations of trends to determine future structural change. For each scenario, SG generates future paths of energy use consistent with historical dynamics and with the specific scenario features (e.g., high or moderate economic growth, rapid or more gradual energy intensity improvements). The economic and energy development profiles serve as inputs for the energy systems engineering model MESSAGE (Messner and Strubegger, 1995; Riahi and Roehrl, 2000; Roehrl and Riahi, 2000) and the macro-economic model MACRO (Manne and Richels, 1992). MESSAGE is a dynamic linear programming model that calculates cost-minimal supply structures under the constraints of resource availability, the menu of given technologies, and the demand for useful energy. It estimates detailed energy system structures, including energy demand, supply, and emissions patterns, consistent with the evolution of the energy demand produced by SG. MACRO is a modified version of the Global 2100 model, originally published in 1992 (Manne and Richels, 1992) and subsequently used widely in many energy studies around the world. MACRO maximizes the inter-temporal utility function of a single representative producer-consumer in each world region and estimates the relationships between macro-economic development and energy use. MESSAGE and MACRO are linked and used in tandem to test scenario consistency because they correspond to the two different perspectives from which energy modeling is usually carried out - top-down (MACRO) and bottom-up (MESSAGE). The impacts of energy price changes on energy demand and gross domestic product (GDP) growth are estimated by iterating shadow prices from MESSAGE and energy demands from the MACRO model. The iteration is repeated until energy intensities and GDP growth rates are consistent with the output of the SG model adopted as exogenous input assumptions at the beginning of the scenario formulation process. The demand reductions caused by increasing energy prices in the B2 marker compared to a hypothetical case with constant energy prices were calculated with MACRO. Compared to this hypothetical case the price-induced energy demand savings in the B2 marker are 8% by 2020, 23% by 2050, and 30% by 2100. Table IV-4 gives the shadow prices for international trade for gas, oil, and coal in the B2 marker. Table IV-5 summarizes the regional ranges for extraction costs of gas, oil, and coal in the B2 marker. The atmospheric concentrations of GHGs and the resultant warming potentials can be estimated by the Model for the Table IV-4: Shadow prices for international trade in the B2 marker (1990 US$/GJ). Year Gas Coal Oil 2020 0.4 0.3 0.5 2050 0.7 0.4 1.1 2100 0.7 1.1 2.3 Table IV-5: Ranges of extraction costs for the four SRES regions in the B2 marker climate change model developed by Wigley et al. (1994). Figure IV-4 illustrates the IIASA integrated modeling framework and shows how the models are linked (Nakicenovic, et al., 1998). Of the six models shown in Figure IV-4, four (SG, MESSAGE, MACRO, and MAGICC) were used for the formulation and analysis of SRES scenarios, including the B2 marker scenario. In addition the MESSAGE model was used to quantify all four scenario groups of the A1 storyline and scenario family and a number of scenarios of the B1 storyline and scenario family. Altogether, the IIASA team formulated nine SRES scenarios, including the B2 marker. The other two models shown in Figure IV-4, RAINS and BLS, were not used to model the SRES scenarios. RAINS (Alcamo et al., 1990) is a simulation model of sulfur and NOx emissions, their subsequent atmospheric transport, chemical transformations of those emissions, deposition, and ecological impacts. BLS (Fischer et al., 1988, 1994) is a sectorial macro-economic model that accounts for all major inputs (such as land, fertilizer, capital, and labor) required for the production of 11 agricultural commodities. The IIASA model set covers energy sector and industrial emission sources only. Agricultural and land-use related emissions for the B2 marker scenario and other SRES scenarios were derived from corresponding quantifications by the AIM model. They are consistent with the energy-related emissions because they are based on assumptions about the main driving forces that are in line with those in the quantifications with the MESSAGE model. More detailed information can be obtained by referring to the web site: http://www.iiasa.ac.at/Research/ECS/. IV.5. The Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation Model (MARIA) The Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation Model (MARIA) is a compact integrated assessment model to assess the interrelationships among the economy, energy, resources, land use, and global climate change (Mori and Takahashi, 1999; Mori 2000). The origin of the model is the Dynamic Integrated Model of Climate and the Economy (DICE) model, developed by Nordhaus (1994). Involving energy flows and dividing the world into regions, MARIA has been developed to assess technology and policy options to address global warming. Like Global 2100 developed by Manne and Richels (1992), MARIA is currently an intertemporal non-linear optimization model that deals with international trading among eight regions - NAM (USA and Canada), Japan, Other OECD countries, China, ASEAN countries (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Republic of Korea, Thailand), SAS (India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri-Lanka), EEFSU (Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union), and ALM (Africa and Latin America). It also encompasses energy flows and simplified food production and land use changes to show the potential contribution of biomass. Economic activities are represented by a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function with capital stock, labor, electricity, and non-electric energy set for the above eight world regions. Future GDP growth is projected by considering potential GDP growth rates (the product of two exogenous assumptions - population and potential per capita GDP growth) as well as endogenously determined energy costs and prices. The energy module in MARIA involves three fossil primary energy resources (i.e., coal, natural gas, and oil), biomass, nuclear power, and renewable energy technologies (e.g., hydropower, solar, wind, and geothermal). Energy demand consists of industry, transportation, and other public uses. Nuclear fuel recycling technologies are simply but explicitly formulated. Carbon sequestration technologies are also taken into account. Typically, MARIA basically generates resource extraction profiles in which gas is mainly used in the first half of the 21st century, and subsequently carbon-free sources (e.g., solar, nuclear, and biomass) and coal assume the main roles in the second half of the 21st century. Energy costs in the model consist of energy production and utilization costs. Market prices are determined endogenously on the basis of model-calculated shadow prices. Among various parameters, the extraction costs of fossil fuel resources and energy conversion cost coefficients contribute substantially to determining the model's energy mix and emissions. The latest model version, MARIA-8, applied Rogner's estimates on fossil resource availability (Rogner, 1997). For the sake of simplicity, the fossil resource and reserve categories are aggregated into two classes, assuming a quadratic production function to interpolate the relationships between resource occurrences and extraction costs. Corresponding model parameters are summarized in Table IV-6. The cost coefficients of energy conversion technologies are basically extracted from the GLOBAL 2100 model (Manne and Richels, 1992). The basic values used in the case of the B2 scenario are illustrated in Table IV-7, and important model parameters deployed for MARIA's other SRES scenario quantifications are shown in Table IV-8. Other energy-related cost parameters correspond to renewable energy sources, methanol and ethanol processes, nuclear fuel recycle, carbon sequestration, etc. They are described in more detail in Mori and Takahashi (1999). International trade prices are generated by the Lagrange multipliers of the corresponding constraints as a feature of optimization models. The Negishi weight technique was employed to assess the international equilibrium prices of tradable goods under the budget constraints (Negishi, 1972). Illustrative international energy trade prices for scenario B2 are summarized in Chapter 4 and are not repeated here. The Global Warming Subsystem in MARIA is based on Wigley's five-time constant model for the emission-concentration mechanism. A two-level thermal reservoir model is also employed following the DICE model (Wigley, 1994; Nordhaus, 1994). Only global carbon emissions are currently treated in this model component. MARIA's Food and Land Use module serves to assess the potential contributions of biomass. A simplified food demand and land-use subsystem was included. Nutrition, calorie, and protein demand is a function of per capita income. Either directly or via meat, crop and pasture supply these demands. Forests are a source of biomass and wood products, but also their function as a carbon sink is evaluated. The relationships among the above-mentioned subsystems are shown in Figure IV-5. Since MARIA is designed for macro-level evaluation of various options consistently, detailed information, such as gridded SO2 emissions, industrial structure change, and urbanization issues, is not generated. However, MARIA can provide long-term profiles of fuel mix changes and possible trade premiums under various scenarios. More detailed information can be obtained by referring to the following web site: http://shun-sea.ia.noda.sut.ac.jp/indexj.html. IV.6. The Mini Climate Assessment Model The Mini Climate Assessment Model (MiniCAM) is a small rapidly running Integrated Assessment Model that estimates global GHG emissions with the ERB model (Edmonds et al., 1994, 1996a) and the agriculture, forestry and land-use model (Edmonds et al., 1996b). MiniCAM uses the Wigley and Raper MAGICC (Wigley and Raper, 1993) model to estimate climate changes, the Hulme et al. (1995) SCENGEN tool to estimate regional Assessment Model (MiniCAM) is a small rapidly running Integrated Assessment Model that estimates global GHG emissions with the ERB model (Edmonds et al., 1994, 1996a) and the agriculture, forestry and land-use model (Edmonds et al., 1996b). MiniCAM uses the Wigley and Raper MAGICC (Wigley and Raper, 1993) model to estimate climate changes, the Hulme et al. (1995) SCENGEN tool to estimate regional climate changes, and the Manne et al. (1995) damage functions to examine the impacts of climate change. MiniCAM, developed by the Global Change Group at Pacific Northwest Laboratory, undergoes regular enhancements. Recent changes include the addition of an agriculture land-use module and the capability to estimate emissions of all the Kyoto gases. At present the model consists of 11 regions (USA, Canada, Western Europe, Japan, Australia, Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union, Centrally Planned Asia, the Mid-East, Africa, Latin America, and South and East Asia) that provide complete world coverage (see Table IV-1). A 14-region version is nearing completion. MiniCAM uses a straightforward population times labor productivity process to estimate aggregate labor productivity levels. The resultant estimate of GNP is corrected for the impact of changes in energy prices using GNP/energy elasticity. For the scenario exercise, an extended economic activity level process was developed to allow a clearer understanding of the potential impacts of the new population scenarios. First, a detailed age breakdown was included so working age populations could be computed. Second, a labor force participation rate was added to estimate the labor force, and third an external process was created to estimate the long-term evolution of the rate of labor productivity increase. ERB is a partial equilibrium model that uses prices to balance energy supply and demand for the seven major primary energy categories (coal, oil, gas, nuclear, hydro, solar, and biomass) in the eleven regions in the model. The energy demand module initially estimates demands for three categories of energy services (residential/commercial, industrial, and transportation) as a function of price and income. Energy services are provided by four secondary fuels (solids, liquids, gases, and electricity). Demand for the secondary fuels depends upon their relative costs and the evolution of the end-use technologies, represented by the improvement in end-use energy efficiency. Demand for primary fuels is determined by the relative costs of transforming them into the secondary fuels. Nuclear, solar, and hydro are directly consumed by the electricity sector, while coal and biomass can be transformed into gas and liquids if the fossil oil and gas become too expensive or run out. Hydrogen has recently been added to the model, and it, like refined gas and oil, can be used to generate electricity or as a secondary fuel for the three final demand sectors. The energy supply sector provides both renewable (hydro, solar, and biomass) and non-renewable (coal, oil, gas, and nuclear) resources. The cost of the fossil resources relates to the resource base by grade, the cost of production (both technical and environmental), and to historical production capacity. The introduction of a graded resource base for fossil fuel allows the model to test explicitly the importance of fossil fuel resource constraints as well as to represent unconventional fuels such as shale oil and methane hydrates. For unconventional fuels only small amounts are available at low costs, but large amounts are potentially available at high cost, or after extensive technology development. Fuel-specific rates of technical change are available for primary fuel production and conversion, as are technical change coefficients for each category of electricity production. Biomass is supplied by the agriculture sector, and provides the link between the agriculture, forestry, and land-use module and the energy module. The former module estimates the allocation of land to one of five activities (crops, pasture, forestry, modern biomass, and other) in each region. This allocation reflects the relative profitability of each of these uses. Profitability is determined by the prices for crops, livestock, forest products, and biomass, which reflect regional demand and supply functions for each product. There are separate technical change coefficients for crops, livestock/pasture, forestry, and modern biomass production. Once the model has reached equilibrium for a period, emissions of GHGs are computed. For energy, emissions of CO2, CH4, and N2O reflect fossil fuel use by type of fuel, while agriculture emissions of these gases reflect land-use change, the use of fertilizer, and the amount and type of livestock produced. The high global warming gases (chlorofluorocarbons, hydrochlorofluorocarbons, hydrofluorocarbons, and perfluorocarbons) are estimated only for each category and not by their individual components. Sulfur emissions are estimated as a function of fossil fuel use and reflect sulfur controls, the effectiveness of which is determined by a Kuznets curve that relates control levels to per capita income. The emissions estimates are aggregated to a global level and used as inputs to MAGICC to produce estimates of GHG concentrations, changes in radiative forcing, and consequent changes in global mean temperature. The global mean temperature change is used to drive SCENGEN-derived changes in climate patterns and to produce estimates of regional change in temperature, precipitation, and cloud cover. Finally, the regional changes in temperature are used to estimate market and non-market based damages. Developing-region damage functions produce higher damages than those for developed regions, reflecting the higher vulnerability of regions with low per capita income. More detailed information can be obtained by referring to the following web site: http://sedac.ciesin.org/mva/. References: Alcamo, J., R. Shaw, and L. Hordijk, 1990: The RAINS model of acidification: Science and Strategies in Europe, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. Alcamo, J., R. Leemans, and E. Kreileman (eds.), 1998. Global Change Scenarios of the 21st Century: Results from the IMAGE 2.1 model. Elsevier Science, London, UK. De Jong, A., and G. Zalm, 1991: Scanning the Future: A long-term scenario study of the world economy 1990-2015. In Long-term Prospects of the World Economy. OECD, Paris, pp. 27-74. De Vries, H.J.M., J.G.J. Olivier, R.A. van den Wijngaart, G.J.J. Kreileman, and A.M.C. Toet, 1994: Model for calculating regional energy use, industrial production and greenhouse gas emissions for evaluating global climate scenarios. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 76, 79-131. De Vries, B., M. Janssen, and A. Beusen, 1999: Perspectives on global energy futures - simulations with the TIME model. Energy Policy 27, 477-494. De Vries, B., J. Bollen, L. Bouwman, M. den Elzen, M. Janssen, and E. Kreileman, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in an equity-, environment- and service-oriented world: An IMAGE-based scenario for the next century. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63, (2-3) (in press). Edmonds, J., M. Wise, and C. MacCracken, 1994: Advanced Energy Technologies and Climate Change: An Analysis Using the Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM), PNL-9798, UC-402. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA. Edmonds, MiniCAM 1.0. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 1(4), 311-339. Edmonds, J., M. Wise, R. Sands, R. Brown, and H. Kheshgi, 1996b: Agriculture, land-use, and commercial biomass energy. A preliminary integrated analysis of the potential role of Biomass Energy for Reducing Future Greenhouse Related Emissions. PNNL-11155, Pacific Northwest National Laboratories, Washington, D.C. Fischer, G., K. Frohberg, M.A. Keyzer, and K.S. Parikh, 1988: Linked National Models: A Tool for International Policy Analysis, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands. Fischer, G., K. Frohberg, M.L. Parry, and C. Rosenzweig, 1994: Climate Change and World Food Supply, Demand and Trade - Who Benefits, Who Loses? Global Environmental Change, 4/1, 7-23. Hulme, M., T. Jiang, and T. Wigley, 1995: SCENGEN. A Climate Change Scenario Generator. Software User Manual, Version 1.0. Climate Change Research Unit, School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom. Lashof, D., and Tirpak, D.A., 1990: Policy Options for Stabilizing Global Climate. 21P-2003. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels, 1992: Buying Greenhouse Insurance, The Economic Costs of CO2 Emissions Limits, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. Manne, A.S., R. Mendelsohn, and R. Richels, 1995: MERGE — A Model for Evaluating Regional and Global Effects of GHG Reduction Policies. Energy Policy, 23(1), 17-34. Messner, S., and M. Strubegger, 1995: User’s Guide for MESSAGE III, WP-95-69, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Mori, S., and M. Takahashi, 1999: An integrated assessment model for the evaluation of new energy technologies and food productivity. International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 11(1-4), 1-18. Mori, S., 2000: The development of greenhouse gas emissions scenarios using an extension of the MARIA model for the assessment of resource and energy technologies. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63, (2-3) (in press). Morita, T., Y. Matsuoka, I. Penna, and M. Kainuma, 1994: Global Carbon Dioxide Emission Scenarios and Their Basic Assumptions - 1994 Survey. CGER-1011-94. Center for Global Environmental Research, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan. Nakicenovic, N., A. Grübler, and A. McDonald (eds.), 1998: Global Energy Perspectives. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. (see also http://www.iiasa.ac.at/cgi-bin/ecs/book_dyn/bookcnt.py) Negishi, T., 1972: General Equilibrium Theory and International Trade, American Elsevier, New York. Nordhaus, W., 1994: Managing the Global Commons. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. Pepper, W.J., J. Leggett, R. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds, and I. Mintzer, 1992: Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC. An update: Assumptions, methodology, and results. Support document for Chapter A3. In Climate Change 1992. Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander, S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Pepper, W.J., Barbour, W., Sankovski, A., and Braaz, B., 1998: No-policy greenhouse gas emission scenarios: revisiting IPCC 1992. Environmental Science & Policy 1:289-312. Riahi, K., and R.A. Roehrl, 2000: Greenhouse gas emissions in a dynamics as usual scenario of economic and energy development. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63, (2-3) (in press). Roehrl, R.A., and K. Riahi, Greenhouse gas emissions mitigation and the role of technology dynamics and path dependency - a cost assessment. Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63, (2-3) (in press). Rogner, H.-H., 1997: An assessment of world hydrocarbon resources. Ann. Rev. Energy Environ., 22, 217-262. Sankovski, A., W. Barbour, and W. Pepper, 2000: Quantification of the IS99 emission scenario storylines using the atmospheric stabilization framework (ASF). Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 63, (2-3) (in press). Timmer, H., 1998: WorldScan - A world model. Quarterly Review Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis 3, 37-40. Wigley, T.M.L., and S.C.B. Raper, 1993: Future changes in global mean temperature and sea level. In Climate and Sea Level Change - Observations, Projections and Implementation, R.A. Warwick, B.M. Barrow, and T.M.L. Wigley (eds.) Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. pp. 111-113. Wigley, T.M.L., 1994: Reservoir timescales for anthropogenic CO2 in the atmosphere. TELLUS, 46B, 378-389. Wigley, T.M.L., M. Solomon, and S.C.B. Raper, 1994: Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse-gas Induced Climate Change Version 1.2, Climate Research Unit, University of East Anglia, UK. V Database Description Data Description Database Description The SRES Emission Scenario Database (ESD) was developed to manage and access a large number of data sets and emissions scenarios documented in the literature. The SRES Terms of Reference call for the assessment of emissions scenarios in the literature (see Appendix I). The database was scenarios in the literature (see Appendix I). The database was developed for SRES by the National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES) of Japan and can be accessed via the ftp site www-cger.nies.go.jp/cger-e/db/ipcc.html. This section summarizes the database structure and the data collection for the database. Chapter 2 gives further detail about the quantitative assessment of the scenarios in the database. At the time of writing the database included 416 scenarios from 171 sources. V.1. Database Structure The main purpose behind the development of the new database is to make it easier to manage and utilize the vast amounts of data related to emission scenarios of greenhouse gases (GHGs), which include carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4), sulfur oxides (SOx), and related gases, (such as carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). The need for such a database is a function of both the increasing number of emission scenarios (because of increasing political and research interests in this topic) and the necessity to identify the strengths and weaknesses of current scenarios (to allow research to be focused on the most crucial or under-investigated areas). These emission scenarios have been quantified mainly using computer simulation models, which in turn utilize many assumptions on factors such as population growth, gross domestic product (GDP) growth, technology efficiency improvements, land-use changes, and the energy resource base. The assumptions used in incorporating these factors often differ between simulations, as do the actual factors represented in the simulations. As a result, the database was designed to organize and store the input assumptions behind the scenarios as well as GHG emissions and other output. Given the diversity of data types that must be accommodated, the database was designed with a relational database structure (using MS Access '97). The data represent large samples, and it is important that they be stored according to a structure that also allows the relationships between different data types to be represented and stored. A detailed description of the database structure is given in Morita and Lee (1998). Each individual data entry is stored in the DATAMOM. Using the relational structure, it is possible to call data from within any of four main fields (Source ID, Scenario ID, Region ID, or Variable) using a number of subcategories specific to the individual fields. For example, the Source ID data entry field has the following subcategories: • Source ID (an abbreviated model or organization name with multiple data sets distinguished by the year of publication). • Authors (individual name or organization name). • Reference (publication in which the data are found). • Model (main simulation models). • Category (of simulation model, such as bottom-up or top-down, dynamic optimization of general equilibrium, etc.). • Update date (of the most recent publication). • Notes (if any). Table V-1 briefly summarizes the subdivisions in the other key fields. The database has the primary function of acting as a data storage tool, and as an interface that will allow the user easy access to the data sets contained therein. Thus, it only provides data, and analyses are conducted using other tools such as spreadsheets. However, the relational structure of the database makes it possible to call up comparable data sets across the key fields, giving maximum flexibility in manipulation, extraction, and presentation of all the data in the database. Similarly, there is great flexibility in importing new data, or making a data set from the database using combinations of specific sources, specific scenarios (or categories), specific regions, and specific variables. The extraction screen in Figure V-1, for example, shows the settings used to extract all information on all scenarios that are generated with the AIM Japan source model and to examine global sea level rise. The writing team recommends that this database or a new revised one should also be maintained by some institution in the future to facilitate comparisons and assessments of emissions scenarios. However, this would require additional resources. V.2. Data Collection The main sources of data used in ESD were International Energy Workshop Polls (Manne and Schrattenholzer, 1995, 1996, 1997), Energy Modeling Forum (EMF-14 comparison studies) data, the previous database compiled for the IPCC Supplement Report, "Climate Change 1994" (Alcamo et al., 1995), which examined emission scenarios produced prior to 1994, and individual emission scenarios collected by the SRES writing team. The current database used in this report includes the results of a total of 416 scenarios from 171 sources. Most of these scenarios date after 1994. Most of the total of 416 scenarios focus on energy-related CO2 emissions (256). Only three models estimated land-use related emissions - the ASF model, the IMAGE 2 model, and the AIM model. Very few scenarios considered global SO2 emissions. Table V-2. List of Data Categories in the 416 Scenario Variable — No. of Scenarios CO2 emissions — 372 Total primary energy consumption — 243 GDP or GNP — 228 Electricity generation — 164 CO2 concentration — 161 Temperature change — 140 Coal consumption — 107 Oil consumption — 101 Control costs — 100 Natural gas consumption — 99 CH4 concentration — 97 Climate change costs — 97 Carbon tax — 96 Nuclear energy — 93 Coal production — 93 Oil production — 92 Renewables, electric — 90 Oil exports-imports — 88 Renewables, nonelectric — 87 Natural gas production — 86 Natural gas exports-imports — 79 Coal exports-imports — 78 Crude oil price, international — 77 Coal/shale consumption — 70 Total primary energy production — 66 Sea level rise — 63 Sulfur emissions — 61 Total fossil fuel consumption — 61 Population — 52 Carbon intensity — 33 Natural gas primary energy consumption — 32 Energy intensity — 31 Carbon permits — 29 CO2 emissions fossil fuel — 29 Incremental value of carbon permit/carbon tax — 29 Natural gas — 29 Oil — 29 Reduction in macro-economic consumption — 29 Oil primary energy consumption — 26 CH4 emissions — 25 Coal — 29 Nuclear energy primary energy consumption — 24 Biomass energy production — 21 Natural gas electricity generation — 20 Global mean temperature increase — 20 CO2 emissions from deforestation — 19 CO2 emissions in industrial sector — 19 N2O emissions — 19 CH4 emissions from animal wastes — 18 CH4 emissions from biomass burning — 18 CH4 emissions from domestic sewage — 18 CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation — 18 CH4 emissions from landfills — 18 Coal primary energy consumption — 18 N2O emissions from biomass burning — 18 N2O emissions from land clearing — 18 Total electricity generation — 16 Other electricity generation — 14 Final energy consumption in industry — 13 Final energy consumption in residential and commercial — 13 Final energy consumption in transport — 13 NOx emissions — 13 Autonomous Energy Efficiency Index — 13 Biomass commercial production — 13 Electricity generation primary energy consumption — 13 N2O concentration — 13 CH4 emissions from agricultural waste burning — 12 CH4 emissions from deforestation — 12 CH4 emissions from energy production — 12 CH4 emissions from energy/industry — 12 CH4 emissions from industry — 12 CH4 emissions from nature — 12 CH4 emissions from savanna burning — 12 CH4 emissions from wet rice field — 12 AIM/Japan SCENARIO • all scenarios ○ nonintervention ○ intervention ○ uncertainty REGION World VARIABLE CATEGORIES Sea level rise nonintervention Figure V-1: Example of an extraction screen, showing the settings used to extract all information on all scenarios that are generated with the AIM Japan source model and to examine global sea level rise. The variables considered while collating scenario data, and the frequency with which such they are found in the 416 scenarios (and thus stored in the SRES database), are listed in Table V-2. References: Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grübler, T. Morita, and A. Sugandhy, 1995: An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios. In: Climate Change 1994, Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 233-304. Manne, A., and L. Schrattenholzer, 1995: International Energy Workshop January 1995 Poll Edition. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Manne, A., and L. Schrattenholzer, 1996, Inter Poll Responses, Part II: Frequency Distributions, Part III: Individual Poll Responses, February, 1997, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. Morita, T., and H.-C. Lee, 1998: Appendix to Emissions Scenarios Database and Review of Scenarios. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), 121-131. Open Process Open Process Open Process The Terms of Reference of this Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) include a so-called "open process" to stimulate input from a community of experts much broader than the writing team (see Appendices I and II). IPCC documents should take into account as many scientific perspectives as possible. This is particularly important in the area of scenarios, for which views on the plausibility of various aspects of the described futures and their interactions can differ between regions, between different sectors of society, and between individual experts. The SRES web site (sres.ciesin.org) was created to facilitate the open process and to help gain input from a community of experts much broader than the writing team. The web site: • Includes a description of SRES activities and the scenario development process. • Provides detailed information on the four marker scenarios and their storylines. • Offers facilities to view and plot scenario driving forces and emissions. • Offers facilities to receive feedback from the open process. The open process lasted from June 1998 to January 1999. As a result of the interest in SRES scenarios, the web site is accessible to acquire updated information about SRES marker scenarios. For other reasons and the input received so far, the information on the web site has been improved and updated considerably. The writing team recommends that the web site also be maintained in the future so that it is available to access updated information on SRES scenarios. However, this will require additional resources. The four marker scenarios were posted on the IPCC web site (sres.ciesin.org) in June 1998. The submissions invited through the open process and web site fell into three categories: • Additional scenarios published in the reviewed literature that had not been included in the scenario database (see Appendix V). • New scenarios based on the SRES marker scenarios. • General suggestions to improve the work of the SRES writing team as posted on the web site (preferably based on referenced literature). The submissions were used to revise the marker scenarios and to develop additional alternatives within each of the four scenario families. The result is a more complete, refined set of new scenarios that reflects the broad spectrum of modeling approaches and regional perspectives. The preliminary scenarios posted on the web site were provided to climate modelers also, with the approval of the IPCC Bureau. Table VI-1: SRES web site access summary by month, from May 1998 to March 1999. Month Unique non-CIESIN hosts connected Total non-CIESIN www accesses July 1998 (20-31) 17 65 August 1998 143 2,214 September 1998 610 6,217 October 1998 425 4,083 November 1998 313 3,696 December 1998 455 5,170 January 1999 497 5,946 February 1999 468 5,764 March 1999 (1-5) 103 1,064 Total 3,031 34,219 Most of the submissions received fall into the first two categories above. Altogether, more than 34,000 accesses to the SRES web site were registered by April 1999 from some 3,000 unique hosts that were connected. Tables VI-1 and VI-2 and Figure VI-1 give more detail about the number of monthly accesses between July 1998 and March 1999 and about accesses from different countries and territories during the same period. Tables VI-3 and VI-4 give details of the preliminary marker scenarios. The web site is managed by the Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN) in the US, in collaboration with the Energy Research Foundation (ECN) in the Netherlands, the Technical Support Unit (TSU) of Working Group III on Mitigation of IPCC at the National Institute of Public Health and Environment (RIVM) in the Netherlands, and the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) in Austria. Open Process Table VI-2: SRES web site access summary by countries and territories, from July 1998 to March 1999. Accesses Internet domain Country/Territory Accesses Internet domain Country/Territory 36 ar Argentina 6 lb Lebanon 676 at Austria 8 lu Luxembourg 373 au Australia 3 my Malaysia 26 ba Bosnia and Herzegovina 17 mx Mexico 333 be Belgium 22 lk Sri Lanka 81 br Brazil 3,424 nl Netherlands 715 ca Canada 803 no Norway 301 ch Switzerland 154 nz New Zealand 14 cn China 206 pl Poland 10 cl Chile 94 pt Portugal 16 cr Costa Rica 47 ru Russian Federation 11 cz Czech Republic 3 sa Saudi Arabia 1,085 de Germany 155 se Sweden 203 dk Denmark 13 sg Singapore 3 ec Ecuador 10 si Slovenia 9 ee Estonia 49 za South Africa 204 es Spain 23 th Thailand 297 fi Finland 15 tw Taiwan, province of China 3 fj Fiji 4 tt Trinidad and Tobago 262 fr France 12 tz Tanzania 13 gb Great Britain (UK) 3 ua Ukraine 12 gr Greece 1,921 uk United Kingdom 7 hr Croatia 74 us United States 23 hk Hong Kong 3 uy Uruguay 36 hu Hungary 2,894 com US Commercial 20 id Indonesia 2,948 edu US Educational 11 ie Ireland 1,736 gov US Government 34 il Israel 9 int International 35 in India 78 mil US Military 6 is Iceland 1,723 net Network 320 it Italy 806 org Non-Profit Organization 1,991 jp Japan 8,613 unresolved IP addresses only 20 kr Republic of Korea (South) Figure VI-1: SRES web site access summary by countries and territories, from August 1998 to February 1999.  35.6 0 0 Solids 36 62 74.5 24.6 Liquids 110.7 196.9 301.8 386.5 Gas 50.5 134 295.1 431.7 Electricity 38.3 103.7 330.7 898.1 Others Total 285.3 532.2 1002 1741 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 85 144.5 140.3 41.1 Oil 125.8 200.5 181 107 Gas 67.6 186.5 400.3 490.4 Nuclear 6.5 30.4 122.7 77.9 Biomass 49.8 62.8 192.8 375.9 Other Renewables 10.3 23 167.1 986.9 Total 345 647.8 1204 2079 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.1 3.4 7.9 12.2 Oil 0.1 5 10.8 17.7 Gas 0.1 3.5 12.2 36.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 7.1 309.5 768.7 1517 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 1437 1553 1325 858 Grasslands 3290 3750 4065 3551 Energy Biomass 0 200 793 1208 Forest 4249 3811 3874 4326 Others 3966 3628 2885 2999 Total 12942 12942 12942 12942 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 6 12.1 16 13.1 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.2 1.9 0.2 -0.2 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 7.1 14 16.2 12.9 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 341.7 499.3 529.7 316.2 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 6.6 7.7 6.8 4.8 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 69.1 101.8 63.8 24.4 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 751.7 1328 1787 2268 VOCs in Mt NOx (as N) in Mt N 27.6 46.9 47.2 38.3 * at market exchange rate Open Process 358 Preliminary AIM Marker Scenario - OECD90 (Open process version, date of submission: 12/10/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 858.5 1002 1081 1110 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 16.4 31 54.1 121 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 6.1 0 0 0 Solids 10 8.5 6.1 1.4 Liquids 64.1 81.8 74.5 66.5 Gas 24.8 50.4 68.1 78.1 Electricity 21.8 39.5 69.7 175 Others Total 126.8 180 218 321 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 37.7 32.5 26 6.2 Oil 70 80.8 50.6 29.3 Gas 31.4 65.2 88.4 89.4 Nuclear 5.2 16.5 24.3 15 Biomass 6.1 4.1 29.1 56.8 Other Renewables 5.5 10.8 35.3 192 Total 155.9 210 254 389 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 1.2 2 2.7 Oil 0.1 2.5 4.5 6.3 Gas 0 1.5 3.9 8.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 2.9 103 207 344 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 410 381 300 198 Grasslands 787 788 815 730 Energy Biomass 0 15 95 179 Forest 1056 1105 1243 1370 Others 886 851 686 663 Total 3140 3140 3140 3140 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 2.9 3.6 3.5 2.3 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0 0 -0.2 0 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 2.9 3.6 3.2 2.3 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 81.1 78.9 61.7 47.5 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 2.7 2.8 2.3 1.5 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 22.0 6.1 5.8 4.6 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 173.5 225 247 261 VOCs in Mt NOx (as N) in Mt N 12.9 12.8 7.3 5.9 * at market exchange rate 360 Open Process Preliminary AIM Marker Scenario - REF (Open process version, date of submission: 12/10/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 413 430 423 339 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 1.1 2.9 12.4 34.2 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 2 0 0 0 Solids 9.4 5.5 4 1.2 Liquids 18.9 8.9 7 6.2 Gas 19.3 22.9 45.5 49.9 Electricity 8.1 12.7 27.7 55.4 Others Total 57.7 50 84.2 113 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 18.4 14.1 11 2.7 Oil 22.2 11.6 6.7 2.2 Gas 26.3 32.7 55.3 53.5 Nuclear 1.1 3.9 8.4 4.8 Biomass 2 1.1 7.6 14.8 Other Renewables 1.3 1.7 15 60.7 Total 71.3 65 104 139 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 0.4 0.8 1.1 Oil 0 0.4 0.7 0.9 Gas 0 0.8 2.1 4.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 1.2 30.3 62.6 102 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 279 299 287 180 Grasslands 346 454 566 478 Energy Biomass 0 0 31 49 Forest 960 970 973 1114 Others 720 582 447 485 Total 2305 2305 2305 2305 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.2 1 1.1 0.7 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0 0 0 -0.1 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.2 1 1.1 0.6 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 58.7 79.1 64.5 51.9 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.4 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 16.5 11.7 2.9 1.6 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 69.8 51.1 54.5 47.4 VOCs in Mt NOx (as N) in Mt N 4 3.1 2.1 1 * at market exchange rate Open Process 361 Preliminary AIM Marker Scenario - ASIA (Open process version, date of submission: 12/10/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 2798.2 3851 4220 2882 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 1.5 12.3 62.7 207 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 27.8 14.1 0 0 Solids 15.4 44 57.3 20.1 Liquids 10.8 48.3 86.9 112 Gas 2 17.3 70 160 Electricity 4.6 27.1 117 363 Others Total 60.6 151 331 655 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 25.8 80.4 77.5 25.1 Oil 13.1 48.3 40.4 20.9 Gas 3 26.9 108 184 Nuclear 0.1 5.7 45.3 31.8 Biomass 27.8 20.5 45.7 89 Other Renewables 1.3 4.2 57.6 400 Total 71.3 186 374 750 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 1.5 4 5.6 Oil 0 0.9 2.3 2.7 Gas 0 0.3 2.3 6.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 1.5 44 197 257 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 390 437 367 246 Grasslands 521 586 621 584 Energy Biomass 0 44 197 257 Forest 527 411 405 472 Others 576 536 424 456 Total 2014 2014 2014 2014 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.1 4 5.6 5.2 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.3 0.6 0.2 0.1 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.5 4.6 5.9 5.2 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 126.6 211 249 127 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 2.3 2.8 2.7 2 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 19.2 56.2 9.5 6.3 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 265.5 583 847 979 VOCs in Mt NOx (as N) in Mt N 1.5 16.4 18.6 12.3 * at market exchange rate 362 Open Process Preliminary AIM Marker Scenario - 197 405 424 2014 5.6 0.2 5.9 249 2.7 9.5 847 18.6 6.6 3.8 10.3 546 246 584 257 472 456 2014 5.2 0.1 5.2 127 2 6.3 979 12.3 * at market exchange rate 362 Open Process Preliminary A1 Marker Scenario - ALM (Open process version, date of submission: 12/10/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 1192.1 2211 2980 2727 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 1.9 10.3 52 166 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 13.9 21.5 0 0 Solids 1.2 4 7.1 1.9 Liquids 16.9 57.9 133 202 Gas 4.4 43.4 112 144 Electricity 3.8 24.4 117 304 Others - - - - Total 40.2 151 369 652 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 3.1 17.5 25.8 7.1 Oil 20.5 59.9 83.4 54.5 Gas 6.9 61.7 149 164 Nuclear 0 4.3 44.7 26.3 Biomass 13.9 37.1 110 215 Other Renewables 2.1 6.4 59.2 335 Total 46.5 187 472 802 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 0.3 0.9 1.7 Oil 0 1.1 3.3 6.7 Gas 0 0.9 4 12.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 1.6 88.7 246 525 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 357 436 371 234 Grasslands 1636 1921 2062 1759 Energy Biomass 0 141 470 724 Forest 1706 1326 1253 1371 Others 1784 1659 1328 1396 Total 5483 5483 5483 5483 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.8 3.5 5.8 4.9 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.8 1.3 0.2 -0.2 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.6 4.8 6 4.8 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 75.3 130 154 90.1 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 1 1.5 1.2 0.9 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 11.4 27.7 45.5 11.9 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 242.9 469 639 981 VOCs in Mt - - - - NOx (as N) in Mt N 4.6 14.6 19.3 19 * at market exchange rate Open Process 363 Table VI-4b: Standardized GHG emissions for the preliminary A2 marker (ASF) as posted on the CIESIN web page (sres.ciesin.org) during the open process. These data are not necessarily identical with the final marker scenario. Preliminary A2 Marker Scenario - WORLD (Open process version, date of submission: 12/14/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 5263 8191 11296 15068 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 20.9 40.5 81.6 242.8 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 55.6 64.7 54.9 66.5 Solids 123.1 245.9 333.5 635.0 Liquids 51.1 92.4 186.7 261.8 Gas 43.0 85.4 203.6 464.0 Electricity 272.8 291.0 778.7 1431.3 Other (e.g. H2) 9.6 19.9 41.6 86.0 Total 329.3 594.9 971.4 1717.1 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 96.6 129.3 293.8 903.7 Oil 140.8 291.0 227.7 0.5 Gas 74.0 125.8 274.9 331.2 Nuclear 8.3 16.8 61.8 234.2 Biomass 0.0 12.2 71.5 161.6 Other Renewables 9.6 19.9 41.6 86.0 Total 329.3 594.9 971.4 1717.1 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 3.2 9.2 38.6 Oil 0 6.2 13.8 16.1 Gas 0 2.7 8.4 24.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 291 738 1862 Land Use in Million ha Forests - - - - Grasslands - - - - Cropland - - - - Energy Biomass - - - - Other - - - - Total - - - - Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in MtC 6137 10498 15731 27823 Other CO2 (as C) in MtC 1584 2010 1802 1128 Total CO2 (as C) in MtC 7721 12508 17533 28950 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 307 437 611 902 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 7 10 13 17 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 77 102 106 57 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 428 565 716 1101 VOCs in Mt 118 166 212 330 NOx (as N) in Mt N 35 56 77 115 Total CO2 - Sinks, in MtC 7719 12438 17361 28745 * at market exchange rate 364 Open Process Preliminary A2 Marker Scenario - OECD90 (Open process version, date of submission: 12/14/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 848 1030 1151 1496 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 15.7 26.0 39.9 87.6 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial - - - - Solids 12.7 12.7 14.2 16.3 Liquids 68.6 99.0 92.1 146.0 Gas 27.7 32.9 45.6 59.6 Electricity 23.9 39.0 58.8 130.4 Other (e.g. H2) - - - - Total 132.9 183.6 210.7 352.3 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 32.2 37.0 92.0 217.7 Oil 77.4 116.4 49.4 0.0 Gas 34.9 43.3 69.3 77.0 Nuclear 6.9 10.8 20.2 72.0 Biomass 0.0 3.6 22.8 28.5 Other Renewables 5.5 8.4 12.0 22.6 Total 156.9 219.5 265.7 417.8 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 0.99 2.8 10.4 Oil 0 3.06 5.4 5.7 Gas 0 1.17 2.8 6.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 0 102 229 500 Land Use in Million ha Forests - - - - Grasslands - - - - Cropland - - - - Energy Biomass - - - - Other - - - - Total - - - - Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in MtC 2758 3721 4272 6659 Other CO2 (as C) in MtC 78.6 139 373 156 Total CO2 (as C) in MtC 2837 3860 4644 6815 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 73.9 84.4 106 166 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 2.67 3.2 3.24 4.13 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 29.2 14.5 13.4 11.8 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 78 98 83 127 VOCs in Mt 43 58 56 80 NOx (as N) in Mt N 12 17 18 23 * at market exchange rate Open Process 365 Preliminary A2 Marker Scenario - REF (Open process version, date of submission: 12/14/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 420 455 519 706 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 1.0 1.4 3.7 14.2 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 17.9 10.7 10.8 11.2 Solids 16.3 12.8 17.1 36.5 Liquids 15.8 17.1 32.0 46.3 Gas 8.3 11.2 18.6 42.5 Electricity 58.3 51.8 78.5 136.5 Other (e.g. H2) - - - - Total 58.3 51.8 78.5 136.5 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 23.4 16.5 22.7 59.1 Oil 18.3 15.3 20.7 0.2 Gas 26.5 29.4 40.4 52.3 Nuclear 1.0 1.6 5.9 21.6 Biomass 0.0 -0.1 0.4 15.0 Other Renewables 1.1 1.7 3.2 7.0 Total 70.3 64.4 93.4 155.1 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 0.46 1.0 2.8 Oil 0 0.42 1.0 1.3 Gas 0 0.71 1.8 4.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 31 69 160 Land Use in Million ha Forests - - - - Grasslands - - - - Cropland - - - - Energy Biomass - - - - Other - - - - Total - - - - Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in MtC 1325 1139 1560 2281 Other CO2 (as C) in MtC 32 -3.41 -120 45.6 Total CO2 (as C) in MtC 1357 1136 1440 2327 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 43.2 43.92 76.07 141 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 0.64 0.852 0.982 1.15 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 15.3 9.637 8.8 3.24 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 25 17 24 51 VOCs in Mt 11 15 27 34 NOx (as N) in Mt N 6 5 6 - * at market exchange rate 366 Open Process Preliminary A2 Marker Scenario - ASIA (Open process version, date of submission: 12/14/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 2779 4308 5764 7340 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 1.7 5.3 15.0 57.1 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 23.7 38.1 21.5 23.2 Solids 15.3 63.8 103.0 214.7 Liquids 2.6 18.8 45.2 60.2 Gas 6.2 20.2 86.3 180.6 Electricity 47.8 140.9 256.0 478.7 Other (e.g. H2) - - - - Total 47.8 140.9 256.0 478.7 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 36.3 62.2 134.0 355.0 Oil 19.1 76.9 57.1 0.0 Gas 4.0 23.8 78.6 84.2 Nuclear 0.4 3.1 26.5 90.3 Biomass 0.0 3.4 22.9 19.8 Other Renewables 1.3 4.9 15.6 31.9 Total 61.0 174.2 334.8 581.2 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 1.46 4.3 16.5 Oil 0 1.28 3.2 3.6 Gas 0 0.33 1.7 6.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 0 82 239 666 Land Use in Million ha Forests - - - - Grasslands - - - - Cropland - - - - Energy Biomass - - - - Other - - - - Total - - - - Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in MtC 1328 3340 5615 10238 Other CO2 (as C) in MtC 400 706 956 522.6 Total CO2 (as C) in MtC 1728 4045 6572 10761 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 115 170 233 314.3 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 2.31 4.44 5.81 7.67 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 19.4 51.6 49 20.51 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 97 155 224 389 VOCs in Mt 21 32 42 69 NOx (as N) in Mt N 9 18 28 42 * at market exchange rate Open Process 367 Preliminary A2 Marker Scenario - ALM (Open process version, date of submission: 12/14/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 1217 2398 3862 5526 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 2.6 7.8 23.0 83.8 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 1.3 3.2 8.4 15.8 Solids 22.9 70.3 121.3 237.8 Liquids 5.0 23.6 63.9 95.7 Gas 4.6 15.0 39.9 114.5 Electricity 33.8 112.1 233.5 463.8 Other (e.g. H2) - - - - Total 33.8 112.1 233.5 463.8 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 4.7 13.7 45.1 271.9 Oil 26.0 82.5 100.5 0.3 Gas 8.6 29.3 86.6 117.7 Nuclear 0.1 1.3 9.2 50.4 Biomass 0.0 5.3 25.4 98.3 Other Renewables 1.7 4.8 10.8 24.6 Total 41.1 136.8 277.6 563.0 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0 0.25 1.1 5.4 Oil 0 1.45 4.2 7.5 Gas 0 0.48 2.1 7.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC - Land Use in Million ha Forests - - - - Grasslands - - - - Cropland - - - - Energy Biomass - - - - Other - - - - Total - - - - Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in MtC Other CO2 (as C) in MtC Total CO2 (as C) in MtC 29.3 1.3 5.3 4.8 136.8 45.1 100.5 86.6 9.2 25.4 10.8 277.6 271.9 117.7 50.4 98.3 24.6 563.0 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal Oil Gas 0 0 0 0.25 1.45 0.48 1.1 4.2 2.1 5.4 7.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC Land Use in Million ha Forests Grasslands Cropland Energy Biomass Other Total Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in MtC Other CO2 (as C) in MtC Total CO2 (as C) in MtC CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N SO2 total (as S) in MtS CO (as CO) in Mt CO VOCs in Mt NOx (as N) in MtN 76 200 536 725 1074 1799 74.9 0.97 13.2 229 43 2299 1169 3467 139 1.85 25.8 294 61 16 4284 593 4877 195 2.73 34.4 384 87 26 8644 403 9048 280 4.37 21.8 534 147 42 * at market exchange rate Open Process Table VI-4c: Standardized GHG emissions for the preliminary B1 marker (IMAGE) as posted on the CIESIN web page (sres.ciesin.org) during the open process. These data are not necessarily identical with the final marker scenarios. Preliminary B1 Marker Scenario - WORLD (Open process version, date of submission: 10/7/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 5297 7767 8933 7239 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 21 48.21 113.94 338.29 GNP/GDP (US$/cap) 3965 6208 12755 46729 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 49.34 34.04 15.74 9.65 Solids 35.76 24.07 24.7 35.2 Liquids 96.8 124.14 149.2 106.1 Gas 45.06 76.35 123.7 174.5 Electricity 39.76 106.28 233.2 425.6 Others Total 266.7 364.9 546.5 751.1 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 93.71 68.26 87 62.1 Oil (excluding feedstocks) 115.9 157.1 187.1 62.2 Gas (excluding feedstocks) 70.27 145.06 157.4 127 Non-Fossil Electricity (Nuclear/Solar) 8.56 43.85 144 413.4 Biomass 1.98 13.62 76.3 118.2 Other Renewables (Hydro/Fuelwood) 57.26 46.75 37.3 44.3 Total 347.7 474.6 689.1 827.2 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 5.55 7.83 10.06 14.94 Oil 2.8 6.75 11.85 18.27 Gas 1.65 4.73 9.25 16.45 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 100 296 537 947 Carbon Sequestration in GtC 2.0 3.7 3.3 2.9 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 1436.3 1268.5 1362.4 1119.1 Grasslands 3435.6 3934.8 3428.1 1914.8 Energy Biomass 6.4 32.8 201.9 373.4 Forest 4277.0 4095.0 4207.7 5075.5 Others 3915.7 3739.9 3870.8 4588.2 Total 13071.0 13071.0 13071.0 13071.0 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 6.1 7.5 9 5.7 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.9 1.9 0.9 1.4 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 7.0 9.4 9.9 7.1 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 429 495 543 478 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 10.5 12.4 13.2 12.3 SO2 total (as S) in MtS 70.6 42.7 41.8 25.6 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 865 1098 1055 1063 VOCs in Mt 77 94 93 97 NOx (as N) in MtN 27.5 32.9 42.5 27.2 * at market exchange rate Open Process Preliminary B1 Marker Scenario - OECD90 (Open process version, date of submission: 10/7/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 801 950 1023 1055 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 16.51 32.22 52.32 78.19 GNP/GDP (US$/cap) 20613 33917 51144 74114 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 5.3 3 1.2 0.8 Solids 8.2 5.7 5.5 8.4 Liquids 49.7 57.9 53.5 39 Gas 28.6 38.3 47.3 69.4 Electricity 24.1 53.1 63.6 72.3 Others Total 115.9 158 171.1 189.9 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 36.9 15 9.8 11.6 Oil (excluding feedstocks) 53.2 64.2 52.9 23.4 Gas (excluding feedstocks) 39.9 68.4 55.7 65.1 Non-Fossil Electricity (Nuclear/Solar) 6.7 30.4 51.9 63.9 Biomass 1.5 4.4 13.5 22.4 Other Renewables (Hydro/Fuelwood) 9.4 8.8 7.9 8.1 Total 147.6 191.2 183.8 186.4 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 2.42 3.17 3.66 4.69 Oil 0.95 1.8 2.56 3.33 Gas 0.94 2.38 3.94 6.78 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 49 139 215 325 Carbon Sequestration in GtC 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.8 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 379.3 415.4 501.8 437.7 Grasslands 785.7 687.0 513.2 439.1 Energy Biomass 2.0 3.1 22.9 73.0 Forest 1114.8 1160.2 1198.7 1199.8 Others 956.4 972.5 1001.7 1088.6 Total 3238 3238 3238 3238 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 2.7 2.9 2.4 2.1 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 2.9 3.1 2.7 2.5 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 102 114 115 117 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.2 SO2 total (as S) in MtS 25.0 6.1 4.5 4.4 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 158 137 146 141 VOCs in Mt 27 30 29 28 NOx (as N) in MtN 9.8 7.4 6.7 6.5 * at market exchange rate Open Process Preliminary B1 Marker Scenario - REF (Open process version, date of submission: 10/7/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 413 442 437 352 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 0.97 1.78 5.12 15.4 GNP/GDP (US$/cap) 2353 4029 11727 43750 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 2.1 0.7 0.2 0.1 Solids 9.5 2.3 1.3 1.5 Liquids 19.1 10.6 9.7 5.6 Gas 11.8 5.8 6.3 8.6 Electricity 8.5 9.6 17.3 21.2 Others Total 50.9 29 34.8 37 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 27.1 7.2 5.6 4 Oil (excluding feedstocks) 28.4 16.6 15.3 5.8 Gas (excluding feedstocks) 23.2 13.4 11.1 8.3 Non-Fossil Electricity (Nuclear/Solar) 1.4 3.1 10.6 17.1 Biomass 0.2 0.7 2.7 6.8 Other Renewables (Hydro/Fuelwood) 3.1 2.1 2.3 2.7 Total 83.4 43.1 47.6 44.7 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 1.83 2.2 2.46 2.97 Oil 0.55 0.99 1.33 2.25 Gas 0.45 0.87 1.3 2.17 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 28 54 74 107 Carbon Sequestration in GtC 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.2 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 278.3 147.1 98.7 62.4 Grasslands 391.2 306.1 198.7 122.6 Energy Biomass 0.1 1.0 15.6 65.2 Forest 1147.0 1326.2 1414.9 1450.9 Others 461.1 497.3 549.8 576.6 Total 2278 2278 2278 2278 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.7 0.8 0.7 0.5 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.8 0.9 0.9 0.8 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 99 68 64 59 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 SO2 total (as S) in MtS 22.8 1.9 1.6 0.8 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 109 69 73 65 VOCs in Mt 11 6 5 4 NOx (as N) in MtN 8.2 4.1 3.9 2.5 * at market exchange rate Open Process Preliminary B1 Marker Scenario - ASIA (Open process version, date of submission: 10/7/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 2790 3924 4209 2875 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 1.42 6.57 29.92 119.6 GNP/GDP (US$/cap) 508 1675 7108 41615 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 28.4 21.3 6.1 2.7 Solids 16.4 12.9 12.9 11.9 Liquids 13.9 28.9 41.3 23.3 Gas 2 20.5 42.9 45 Electricity 4.6 29.5 82.1 157.4 Others Total 65.3 113.1 185.3 240.3 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 26.1 36.7 46.6 18.3 Oil (excluding feedstocks) 17 39.3 48.8 13 Gas (excluding feedstocks) 3.9 45.4 56.8 26 Non-Fossil Electricity (Nuclear/Solar) 0.4 5.6 40.3 157.4 Biomass 0.1 6 41.1 37.5 Other Renewables (Hydro/Fuelwood) 29.4 23.6 10 7.5 Total 76.9 156.5 243.6 259.7 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 1.09 2.01 3.01 4.56 Oil 0.2 0.84 1.58 2.03 Gas 0.07 0.86 2.38 3.82 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 13 66 151 273 Carbon Sequestration in GtC 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 382.3 316.8 336.7 237.0 Grasslands 560.5 777.7 768.3 366.2 Energy Biomass 1.0 11.9 104.7 134.8 Forest 487.7 375.6 318.5 571.6 Others 544.5 493.8 447.7 666.3 Total 1976 1976 1976 1976 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.1 2.5 3.1 1.3 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.4 2.6 3.4 1.6 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 122 149 179 137 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 2.6 3.2 3.7 2.9 SO2 total (as S) in MtS 15.3 20.9 16.5 5.2 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 204 260 365 264 VOCs in Mt 14 18 24 18 NOx (as N) in MtN 5.4 12.3 16.6 7.0 * at market exchange rate Open Process Preliminary B1 Marker Scenario - ALM (Open process version, date of submission: 10/7/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 1293 2450 3265 2958 GNP/GDP in Trillion US$90* 2.1 7.64 26.58 125.1 GNP/GDP (US$/cap) 1625 3118 8142 42286 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 13.6 9 8.2 6.1 Solids 1.7 3.2 5 13.4 Liquids 14.1 26.8 44.7 38.2 Gas 2.7 11.7 27.2 51.5 Electricity 2.6 14.1 70.2 174.7 Others Total 34.7 64.7 155.3 283.9 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 3.6 9.3 25 28.2 Oil (excluding feedstocks) 17.3 37 70.1 20 Gas (excluding feedstocks) 3.2 17.9 33.8 27.6 Non-Fossil Electricity (Nuclear/Solar) 0.1 4.8 41.2 175 Biomass 0.2 2.6 19 51.5 Other Renewables (Hydro/Fuelwood) 15.4 12.3 11.5 11.7 Total 39.8 83.9 200.6 314 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.21 0.45 0.93 2.72 Oil 1.1 3.12 6.38 10.66 Gas 0.19 0.62 1.63 3.68 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 10 37 97 242 Carbon Sequestration in GtC 1.1 2.2 1.0 0.7 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 396.4 389.3 425.3 382.0 Grasslands 1698.2 2163.9 1947.9 987.0 Energy Biomass 3.2 16.8 58.7 100.4 Forest 1527.6 1232.9 1275.6 15.4 12.3 11.5 11.7 Total 39.8 83.9 200.6 314 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.21 0.45 0.93 2.72 Oil 1.1 3.12 6.38 10.66 Gas 0.19 0.62 1.63 3.68 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 10 37 97 242 Carbon Sequestration in GtC 1.1 2.2 1.0 0.7 Land Use in Million ha Cropland 396.4 389.3 425.3 382.0 Grasslands 1698.2 2163.9 1947.9 987.0 Energy Biomass 3.2 16.8 58.7 100.4 Forest 1527.6 1232.9 1275.6 1853.2 Others 1953.7 1776.3 1871.6 2256.7 Total 5579 5579 5579 5579 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.5 1.4 2.8 1.8 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.3 1.4 0.1 0.2 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.9 2.8 2.9 2.1 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 105 164 184 166 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 5.2 6.3 6.5 6.5 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 7.5 13.8 19.2 15.2 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 394 631 470 593 VOCs in Mt 25 40 35 47 NOx (as N) in Mt N 4.1 9.1 15.3 11.1 * at market exchange rate Open Process Table VI-4d: Standardized GHG emissions for the preliminary B2 marker (MESSAGE) as posted on the CIESIN web page (sres.ciesin.org) during the open process. These data are not necessarily identical with the final marker scenarios. Preliminary B2 Marker Scenario - WORLD (Open process version, date of submission: 11/2/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 5262 7672 9367 10414 GNP/GDP (mer) in Trillion US$90 * 20.9 50.7 109.5 234.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) in Trillion (1990 prices) ^ 25.7 60.2 113.9 231.8 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 38.4 23.9 10.7 6.8 Solids 42.2 35.8 19.4 7.0 Liquids 110.9 200.1 267.9 294.0 Gas 40.9 58.7 104.9 111.2 Electricity 34.7 85.1 188.2 409.0 Other (e.g. H2) 7.8 25.4 63.2 123.2 Total 274.9 429.0 654.3 951.2 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 91.1 98.3 85.6 300.2 Oil 128.3 214.3 227.1 51.9 Gas 70.5 150.3 297.4 336.6 Nuclear 7.3 15.6 47.6 142.0 Biomass 46.0 52.6 104.7 316.0 Other Renewables 8.1 34.4 107.2 211.8 Total 351.3 565.5 869.6 1358.5 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.0 2.8 5.7 12.6 Oil 0.0 5.1 12.0 19.5 Gas 0.0 2.7 8.6 26.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC ^ 0.0 215.1 519.6 1129.2 Land Use in Million ha Forests 4249.5 3775.9 3906.7 4121.7 Grasslands 3289.8 3766.0 4014.4 3988.9 Cropland 1436.6 1583.4 1403.5 1113.2 Energy Biomass 0.0 15.5 497.9 717.7 Other 3966.4 3801.4 3119.7 3000.7 Total 12942.2 12942.2 12942.2 12942.2 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized)'' CO2 (as C)b in GtC 6.5 9.4 11.6 14.2 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.0 1.4 -0.4 -0.2 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 7.5 10.7 11.2 14.0 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 318.3 447.6 538.1 508.6 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 6.3 6.8 5.6 4.7 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 69.0 59.0 51.9 43.0 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 974.4 1216.8 1356.0 2072.2 VOCs in Mt 177.5 233.9 259.1 212.4 NOx (as N) in Mt N 31.0 46.3 56.6 63.4 * mer = market exchange rate; ppp = purchasing power parity '' CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). ^ Land-use data taken from AIM B2 emulation run. Other non-energy emissions categories were calculated based on AIM B2 land-use change estimates and/or AIM B2 non-energy emissions. " CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM B2 emulation run) Note: Subtotals may not add due to independent rounding. Open Process Preliminary B2 Marker Scenario - OECD90 (Open process version, date of submission: 11/2/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 859 982 976 928 GNP/GDP (mer) in Trillion US$90 16.4 30.3 38.3 56.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) in Trillion (1990 prices) ^ 14.1 26.3 33.5 50.4 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Solids 13.1 3.2 0.2 0.0 Liquids 65.9 86.4 76.0 57.5 Gas 22.4 24.8 35.4 17.3 Electricity 21.5 43.7 60.5 89.1 Other (e.g. H2) 0.7 3.7 10.3 17.9 Total 123.6 161.8 182.4 181.8 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 38.0 38.9 18.9 46.8 Oil 72.1 90.4 65.0 16.7 Gas 32.9 60.6 92.7 127.9 Nuclear 5.9 10.8 16.5 29.3 Biomass 5.6 7.2 10.3 43.3 Other Renewables 4.2 11.2 24.7 40.8 Synfuel Trade 0 0 8.2 -30.7 Total 158.7 219.1 236.3 274.1 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.0 1.1 2.0 3.3 Oil 0.0 2.6 5.2 7.3 Gas 0.0 1.3 3.4 9.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC (c) ^ 0.0 98.6 209.4 371.2 Land Use in Million ha Forests 1056.3 1107.3 1181.0 1290.3 Grasslands 787.2 775.9 793.0 753.4 Cropland 410.2 377.3 324.0 238.3 Energy Biomass 0.0 0.0 100.0 150.3 Other 886.2 879.5 742.0 707.6 Total 3140.0 3140.0 3140.0 3140.0 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized)'' CO2 (as C) in GtC 3.1 3.8 3.3 3.2 Other CO2 (as C)^ in GtC 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 3.0 3.7 3.3 3.1 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 68.9 62.7 59.0 62.0 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 2.5 2.2 1.9 1.3 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 26.2 9.3 5.7 3.5 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 192.1 211.6 221.4 231.7 VOCs in Mt 46.6 49.6 52.5 39.5 NOx (as N) in Mt N 13.2 16.5 16.1 12.0 * mer = market exchange rate; ppp = purchasing power parity ^ CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). ' Land-use data taken from AIM B2 emulation run. <• Other non-energy emissions categories were calculated based on AIM B2 land-use change estimates and/or AIM B2 non-energy emissions. '= CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM B2 emulation run) Note: Subtotals may not add due to independent rounding. Open Process Preliminary B2 Marker Scenario - REF (Open process version, date of submission: 11/2/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 413 418 406 379 GNP/GDP (mer) in Trillion US$90 ^ 1.1 1.8 6.6 14.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) in Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 3.3 7.2 16.2 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Solids 9.3 2.2 0.1 0.0 Liquids 15.4 17.2 19.2 21.6 Gas 13.5 15.4 19.2 9.5 Electricity 5.7 6.8 17.9 32.1 Other (e.g. H2) 6.5 7.2 11.5 15.4 Total 50.4 48.8 67.9 78.6 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 18.6 7.3 12.4 32.4 Oil 20.4 18.9 19.6 0.1 Gas 26.7 31.4 54.8 44.8 Nuclear 1.0 0.7 2.4 9.3 Biomass 1.8 0.8 4.8 36.2 Other Renewables 1.1 2.6 8.2 21.2 Synfuel Trade 0 0 -5 -19.4 Total 69.6 61.7 97.2 124.6 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.5 Oil 0.0 0.6 1.1 1.6 Gas 0.0 0.8 2.0 5.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 0.0 34.6 70.7 144.4 Land Use in Million ha Forests 960.0 940.3 967.2 1004.4 Grasslands 345.7 453.4 531.4 561.3 Cropland 279.1 300.2 283.4 238.1 Energy Biomass 0.0 0.0 43.4 35.0 Other 719.9 610.7 479.3 465.9 Total 2304.7 2304.7 2304.7 2304.7 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized)'' CO2 (as C)'' in GtC 1.4 1.1 1.5 1.4 Other CO2 (as C)'' in GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.4 1.0 1.5 1.4 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 46.5 48.3 59.8 58.2 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 SOx total (as S) in Mt S 16.8 6.1 4.5 3.6 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 82.0 86.9 114.3 114.8 VOCs in Mt 20.2 23.3 38.4 32.2 NOx (as N) in Mt N 4.1 3.8 5.5 3.9 * mer = market exchange rate; ppp = purchasing power parity ^ CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). ' Land-use data taken from AIM B2 emulation run. Other non-energy emissions categories were calculated based on AIM B2 land-use change estimates and/or AIM B2 non-energy ( CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM B2 emulation run) Note: Subtotals may not add due to independent rounding. Open Process Preliminary B2 Marker Scenario - ASIA (Open process version, date of submission: 11/2/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 2798 4008 4696 4968 GNP/GDP (mer) in Trillion US$90 " 1.5 13.2 41.8 97.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) in Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 22.4 49.3 100.4 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 24.2 13.2 6.7 4.1 Solids 18.5 27.8 16.7 2.4 Liquids 12.6 59.8 112.0 121.6 Gas 1.5 8.7 22.0 32.9 Electricity 4.1 24.1 69.8 168.6 Other (e.g. H2) 0.6 10.2 24.8 55.4 Total 61.5 143.8 252.0 385.0 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 29.8 47.4 47.7 178.1 Oil 15.3 62.6 92.8 21.4 Gas 2.8 30.9 55.4 38.1 Nuclear 0.3 3.7 20.9 64.7 Biomass 24.3 28.0 46.1 84.7 Other Renewables 1.1 12.3 42.6 87.7 Synfuel Trade 0 0 13.5 46.6 Total 73.6 184.9 319.0 521.3 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.0 1.2 2.7 6.7 Oil 0.0 1.0 3.3 6.3 Gas 0.0 0.3 1.5 4.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 0.0 53.6 158.5 378.0 Land Use in Million ha Forests 527.1 411.7 439.5 482.7 Grasslands 521.2 578.2 614.2 606.0 Cropland 389.9 457.5 401.4 325.7 Energy Biomass 0.0 0.5 96.0 153.6 Other 576.1 566.6 463.3 446.3 Total 2014.4 2014.4 2014.4 2014.4 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.2 3.1 4.2 5.8 Other CO2 1.2 2.7 6.7 Oil 0.0 1.0 3.3 6.3 Gas 0.0 0.3 1.5 4.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 0.0 53.6 158.5 378.0 Land Use in Million ha Forests 527.1 411.7 439.5 482.7 Grasslands 521.2 578.2 614.2 606.0 Cropland 389.9 457.5 401.4 325.7 Energy Biomass 0.0 0.5 96.0 153.6 Other 576.1 566.6 463.3 446.3 Total 2014.4 2014.4 2014.4 2014.4 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized) CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.2 3.1 4.2 5.8 Other CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.3 0.3 -0.1 -0.1 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.5 3.4 4.1 5.8 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 127.1 222.6 265.9 234.9 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 2.3 2.7 2.4 2.1 SO2 total (as S) in Mt S 17.3 31.3 24.4 19.0 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 276.5 422.3 550.9 706.0 VOCs in Mt 47.8 75.3 92.2 80.3 NOx (as N) in Mt N 6.2 15.6 23.0 31.2 * mex = market exchange rate; ppp = purchasing power parity CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). Land-use data taken from AIM B2 emulation run. Other non-energy emissions categories were calculated based on AIM B2 land-use change estimates and/or AIM B2 non-energy emissions. ** CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM B2 emulation run) Note: Subtotals may not add due to independent rounding. Open Process Preliminary B2 Marker Scenario - ALM (Open process version, date of submission: 11/2/98) 1990 2020 2050 2100 Population in Million 1192 2263 3289 4139 GNP/GDP (mex) in Trillion US$90 * 1.9 5.5 22.8 66.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) in Trillion (1990 prices) * 3.8 8.2 23.9 64.9 Final Energy by Fuel in EJ Non-commercial 14.2 10.7 4.0 2.7 Solids 1.3 2.6 2.4 4.6 Liquids 17.0 36.7 60.7 93.3 Gas 3.5 9.8 28.3 51.5 Electricity 3.4 10.5 40.0 119.2 Other (e.g. H2) 0.0 4.3 16.6 34.5 Total 39.4 74.6 152.0 305.8 Primary Energy by Fuel Coal 4.7 4.7 6.6 42.9 Oil 20.5 42.4 49.7 13.7 Gas 8.1 27.4 94.5 125.8 Nuclear 0.1 0.4 7.8 38.7 Biomass 14.3 16.6 43.5 151.8 Other Renewables 1.7 8.3 31.7 62.1 Synfuel Trade 0 0 0 -17.1 2.4 Total 49.4 99.8 216.7 437.4 Cumulative Resource Use in ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.1 Oil 0.0 1.0 2.4 4.2 Gas 0.0 0.4 1.7 8.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions in GtC 0.0 28.3 81.0 235.6 Land Use in Million ha Forests 1706.0 1316.6 1319.0 1344.3 Grasslands 1635.6 1958.5 2075.9 2068.2 Cropland 357.4 448.4 394.8 311.1 Energy Biomass 0.0 15.0 258.5 378.7 Other 1784.2 1744.7 1435.0 1380.9 Total 5483.2 5483.2 5483.2 5483.2 Anthropogenic Emissions (not standardized)** CO2 (as C) in GtC 0.8 1.5 2.5 3.7 Other CO2 (as C)** in GtC 0.8 1.2 -0.2 -0.1 Total CO2 (as C) in GtC 1.6 2.6 2.3 3.7 CH4 total (as CH4) in Mt CH4 75.9 114.1 153.4 153.6 N2O total (as N) in Mt N2O-N 1.0 1.3 0.8 0.8 SO2 total (as S) in Mt S 8.7 12.3 17.4 16.8 CO (as CO) in Mt CO 423.7 495.9 472.5 1019.7 VOCs in Mt 62.8 85.7 76.0 60.4 NOx (as N) in Mt N 7.4 10.3 12.0 16.3 VII Statistical tables Statistical Table Table VII.1: Overview tables of the 40 SRES scenarios. Main driving forces and emissions are given in the same format for all scenarios developed by the six modeling teams for the World and the four SRES regions OECD90, REF, ASIA, and ALM in 10-year time steps. (Except for the A2G-IMAGE and B2-IMAGE scenarios, for which emissions are in 10-year time steps, and the driving forces are presented for the years 1990, 2020, 2050, and 2100). It should be noted that: • Subtotals may not add due to independent rounding. • The emissions are all standardized to common 1990 and 2000 values (see Box 5-1). The chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are only available for the World as total. At the regional level only hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) emissions were estimated. At the World level the row CFC/HFC/HCFC represents an aggregation of all CFCs, HCFCs, and HFCs (using SAR GWPs). • Table footnotes give additional explanations for various scenarios. During the approval process of the Summary for Policymakers at the 5th Session of Working Group III of the IPCC from 8-11 March 2000 in Katmandu, Nepal, it was decided to combine the A1C and A1G groups into one "fossil intensive" group A1FI in contrast to the non-fossil group A1T, and select two illustrative scenarios from these two A1 groups to facilitate use by modellers and policymakers. Together with the scenario groups A1B, A2, B1, B2, this leads to six scenario groups that c based on preliminary model experiments carried out in March 1998. As a consequence of limited resources it has not been possible to rerun these experiments. Hence, the IMAGE team is not able to provide background data and details for these scenario calculations and the population and economic growth assumptions are not fully harmonized, as they have been for the IMAGE A1 and B1 scenarios. Statistical Table 3.81 Marker Scenario A1B-AIM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6117 6805 7493 8182 8439 8704 8538 8375 8030 7528 7056 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.7 37.9 56.5 89.1 127.1 181.3 235.1 304.7 377.4 446.6 528.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 446.6 528.5 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 50 38 36 26 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 36 38 50 62 75 75 75 60 49 39 31 25 Liquids 111 124 155 197 231 264 302 334 369 388 387 387 Gas 51 53 89 134 194 239 295 335 380 410 421 432 Electricity 38 49 73 104 143 218 331 438 581 709 798 898 Others Total 285 314 405 532 669 819 1002 1180 1388 1550 1643 1741 Primary Energy EJ Coal 93 99 134 163 179 182 186 165 148 126 103 84 Oil 143 167 209 238 239 226 214 188 166 149 136 125 Gas 73 91 147 196 298 372 465 519 578 604 590 576 Nuclear 6 8 16 30 53 81 123 125 127 116 95 78 Biomass 50 48 38 61 85 128 193 247 315 360 368 376 Other Renewables 10 12 15 23 40 82 167 278 464 662 808 987 Total 376 424 559 711 895 1098 1347 1574 1840 2034 2128 2226 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.2 3.7 5.4 7.0 9.1 10.5 12.2 13.6 14.7 15.9 Oil 0.1 1.7 3.6 5.8 8.2 10.2 12.7 14.4 16.3 18.0 19.4 20.8 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.1 3.8 6.3 9.3 13.9 18.2 23.9 29.8 35.5 42.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 176.7 294.3 429.8 579.0 737.7 899.6 1058.2 1212.8 1360.2 1499.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1459 1466 1462 1457 1454 1448 1442 1436 1429 1424 1422 1420 Grasslands 3389 3404 3429 3446 3458 3478 3498 3525 3552 3568 3572 3576 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 74 158 257 418 484 560 580 536 495 Forest 4296 4237 4173 4164 4164 4177 4190 4194 4199 4202 4203 4204 Others 3805 3842 3886 3807 3715 3554 3400 3299 3201 3173 3213 3253 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 9.68 12.12 14.01 14.95 16.01 15.70 15.43 14.83 13.94 13.10 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.20 0.52 0.47 0.40 0.37 0.30 0.30 0.35 0.36 0.39 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 10.88 12.64 14.48 15.35 16.38 16.00 15.73 15.18 14.30 13.49 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 373 421 466 458 452 410 373 341 314 289 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.0 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.4 7.3 7.2 7.1 7.1 7.0 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 87.1 100.2 91.0 68.9 64.1 46.9 35.7 30.7 29.1 27.6 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 1002 1032 1109 1160 1214 1245 1276 1357 1499 1663 NMVOC Mt 139 141 178 222 266 272 279 284 289 269 228 193 NOx MtN 31 32 39 46 50 49 48 46 44 43 41 40 Table VII.1: Overview tables of the 40 SRES scenarios. Main driving forces and emissions are given in the same format for all scenarios developed by the six modeling teams for the World and the four SRES regions OECD90, REF, ASIA, and ALM in 10-year time steps. (Except for the A2G-IMAGE and B2-IMAGE scenarios, for which emissions are in 10-year time steps, and the driving forces are presented for the years 1990, 2020, 2050, and 2100). It should be noted that: • Subtotals may not add due to independent rounding. 382 Statistical Table Marker Scenario A1B-AIM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 919 960 1002 1043 1062 1081 1086 1091 1097 1103 1110 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.5 25.3 31.0 38.0 45.4 54.1 64.1 75.9 89.2 103.9 121.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 75.9 103.9 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 6 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 9 9 9 8 7 6 5 3 3 2 1 Liquids 64 74 77 82 80 77 75 74 73 71 69 67 Gas 25 30 40 50 63 66 68 72 76 78 78 78 Electricity 22 27 33 40 48 58 70 87 108 129 151 175 Others 108 151 175 Total 127 142 158 180 199 209 218 239 261 282 301 321 Primary Energy EJ Coal 41 41 41 35 30 29 28 22 17 12 9 7 Oil 76 90 92 89 78 65 54 46 39 34 32 30 Gas 34 47 58 70 83 89 95 99 102 102 99 96 Nuclear 5 6 10 16 23 24 24 23 23 20 18 15 Biomass 6 1 0 4 9 17 29 37 48 54 56 57 Other Renewables 6 6 8 11 16 24 35 55 86 120 152 192 Total 167 191 209 226 239 253 267 293 321 348 372 397 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.2 1.6 1.8 2.1 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 Oil 0.1 0.9 1.8 2.7 3.6 4.2 4.9 5.3 5.8 6.2 6.5 6.8 Gas 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.6 2.4 3.1 4.2 5.0 6.0 7.1 8.0 9.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.2 101.2 136.4 171.0 204.8 236.9 266.4 294.0 319.7 343.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 381 380 377 376 375 372 368 364 359 356 356 355 Grasslands 760 763 771 774 776 787 797 818 839 849 847 846 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 11 24 39 63 73 85 88 81 75 Forest 1048 1050 1053 1052 1053 1056 1062 1068 1061 1054 1050 1049 Others 838 833 828 814 798 765 733 711 690 685 695 705 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 828 814 798 765 733 711 690 685 695 705 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.41 3.45 3.51 3.54 3.48 3.50 3.42 3.42 3.36 3.35 3.06 3.06 2.78 2.84 2.56 2.67 2.40 2.48 2.24 2.31 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.03 0.03 0.02 0.02 0.00 0.00 -0.01 -0.01 0.01 0.01 0.06 0.11 0.11 0.09 0.09 0.07 0.07 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.45 3.48 3.54 3.56 3.50 3.50 3.42 3.41 3.35 3.36 3.06 3.07 2.84 2.95 2.67 2.76 2.48 2.55 2.31 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 69 66 58 52 49 47 46 42 39 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 9.9 6.9 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.0 5.7 5.3 5.0 4.6 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 9 9 8 7 7 6 6 5 5 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 13 9 7 6 5 5 5 5 5 CO MtCO 179 161 190 205 227 234 241 242 243 247 254 262 NMVOC Mt 42 36 39 38 38 33 28 24 19 17 16 15 NOx MtN 13 12 12 12 9 7 6 5 5 5 5 5 Statistical Table 383 Marker Scenario A1B-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 424 430 435 429 423 406 391 374 356 339 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.5 2.9 5.3 8.1 12.4 15.6 19.6 24.0 28.6 34.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 24.0 28.6 34.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 Solids 9 5 5 6 5 5 4 3 2 2 0 1 Liquids 19 10 9 9 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 Gas 19 11 18 23 31 38 46 47 49 50 50 50 Electricity 8 8 10 13 15 20 28 33 40 46 50 55 Others 50 55 Total 58 38 43 50 59 70 84 91 99 105 109 113 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 12 14 14 13 12 11 9 7 5 4 3 Oil 22 14 12 10 7 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 Gas 26 18 26 33 41 48 55 56 56 56 55 54 Nuclear 1 1 2 4 6 7 8 8 8 7 6 5 Biomass 2 4 0 1 2 4 8 10 12 14 14 15 Other Renewables 1 1 1 2 3 6 15 22 32 42 51 61 Total 71 51 56 64 72 86 103 112 122 129 134 139 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 2.1 2.6 3.2 3.7 4.3 4.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 23.1 35.0 46.4 57.6 68.4 78.5 87.8 96.5 104.6 112.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 268 266 265 265 265 264 263 262 262 261 260 260 Grasslands 341 361 364 366 367 368 370 371 371 372 373 374 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 6 10 16 19 22 23 21 20 Forest 966 950 918 904 894 899 905 909 912 916 922 927 Others 701 698 728 738 745 733 722 715 708 703 700 696 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.05 1.11 1.13 1.16 1.18 1.08 0.99 0.91 0.84 0.78 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.20 0.03 0.01 -0.06 -0.13 -0.11 -0.09 -0.07 -0.05 -0.03 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.24 1.14 1.14 1.10 1.05 0.97 0.90 0.84 0.79 0.75 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 58 61 60 51 42 41 39 38 36 34 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 12.2 10.8 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 41 41 42 42 43 42 42 42 43 44 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 14 15 15 16 17 17 17 18 18 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 Statistical Table 384 Marker Scenario A1B-AIM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3556 3851 4147 4183 4220 4016 3822 3541 3194 2882 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.8 12.3 26.2 40.5 62.7 85.4 116.2 147.6 174.9 207.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 25 18 14 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 15 22 34 44 56 56 57 47 39 31 25 20 Liquids 11 17 30 48 65 75 87 99 112 118 115 112 Gas 2 3 8 17 37 51 70 90 115 136 147 160 Electricity 5 8 15 27 44 72 117 161 223 280 319 363 Others Total 61 75 105 151 205 261 331 404 495 567 610 655 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 39 64 87 108 106 104 94 86 73 59 48 Oil 17 27 45 62 68 59 51 44 38 33 30 27 Gas 4 8 17 35 66 95 137 167 203 228 235 243 Nuclear 0 0 2 4 10 24 58 101 177 261 323 399 Biomass 28 24 19 20 19 29 46 58 75 85 87 89 Other Renewables 1 2 2 4 10 24 58 101 177 261 323 399 Total 80 100 149 214 285 354 440 533 646 734 784 838 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.6 2.6 3.5 4.7 5.6 6.5 7.4 8.0 8.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.6 1.1 1.8 2.3 3.0 3.4 3.8 4.2 4.5 4.8 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.7 3.0 4.3 6.2 8.4 10.6 13.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 45.8 82.8 130.2 185.0 243.1 303.1 363.7 424.2 482.7 538.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 435 434 433 432 431 431 430 429 428 428 428 Grasslands 608 606 609 611 613 615 617 618 619 621 622 624 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 17 37 61 99 115 133 137 127 117 Forest 535 522 512 524 535 535 535 544 552 556 555 555 Others 583 601 609 579 547 514 483 455 429 421 431 441 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 0.37 1.53 1.78 2.03 2.92 3.25 4.11 4.16 5.21 5.32 5.46 5.64 5.73 5.98 5.86 6.02 5.99 5.99 5.89 5.99 5.57 5.71 5.27 5.46 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.26 0.33 0.05 0.12 0.17 0.25 0.33 0.05 0.12 0.17 0.25 0.33 0.16 0.11 0.10 0.14 0.19 Total CO2 GtC 1.15 0.37 1.53 2.03 2.36 3.25 3.42 4.16 4.41 5.32 5.49 5.64 5.89 5.98 6.31 5.97 6.12 6.09 5.89 5.71 5.46 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 145 171 207 210 214 183 156 138 127 117 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 42.1 54.2 45.6 19.8 8.4 7.9 7.5 7.1 6.7 6.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 235 270 358 360 430 460 492 506 520 555 614 678 NMVOC Mt 33 37 49 70 94 99 105 112 119 111 90 73 NOx MtN 7 9 13 16 19 19 19 17 16 15 14 13 Statistical Table 385 Marker Scenario A1B-AIM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1865 2211 2557 2761 2980 3024 3067 3013 2866 2727 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 5.3 10.3 19.5 31.9 52.0 69.4 92.5 116.6 139.1 165.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 20 20 22 22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 2 2 4 6 7 7 6 5 4 3 2 Liquids 17 22 38 58 78 102 133 153 176 191 196 202 Gas 4 9 25 43 64 84 112 125 139 147 145 144 Electricity 4 6 15 24 36 65 117 156 210 254 278 304 Others Total 40 59 100 151 205 275 369 443 532 596 623 652 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 7 16 26 29 35 42 40 38 35 30 26 Oil 27 36 60 77 86 94 104 94 85 78 71 65 Gas 9 18 46 58 108 139 178 196 215 217 200 184 Nuclear 0 0 1 4 9 20 45 45 46 42 33 26 Biomass 14 18 19 36 55 78 110 141 181 206 211 215 Other Renewables 2 3 4 6 12 26 59 100 168 238 282 335 Total 57 81 146 208 299 401 538 635 750 822 837 852 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.4 1.7 2.1 2.5 2.8 3.1 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.3 3.1 4.2 5.0 6.0 6.9 7.6 8.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.5 1.0 1.8 2.9 4.7 6.3 8.4 10.6 12.5 14.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 41.6 75.3 116.8 165.4 221.4 281.1 340.3 398.2 453.2 504.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC 81 146 208 299 401 538 635 750 822 837 852 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.4 1.7 2.1 2.5 2.8 1.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.3 3.1 4.2 5.0 6.0 6.9 7.6 6.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.5 1.0 1.8 2.9 4.7 6.3 8.4 10.6 12.5 12.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 41.6 75.3 116.8 165.4 221.4 281.1 340.3 398.2 453.2 504.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 384 383 382 381 381 380 379 379 378 378 Grasslands 1680 1673 1685 1695 1702 1708 1714 1718 1722 1726 1730 1733 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 42 90 147 240 277 321 332 307 284 Forest 1745 1711 1690 1683 1680 1681 1682 1681 1680 1678 1676 1674 Others 1684 1710 1720 1676 1625 1542 1463 1417 1373 1363 1387 1400 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 2.30 3.40 4.20 4.91 5.73 5.70 5.67 5.47 5.13 4.81 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.63 0.40 0.32 0.29 0.26 0.25 0.23 0.21 0.19 0.16 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.93 3.80 4.52 5.20 5.99 5.94 5.90 5.68 5.32 4.97 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 99 120 134 139 144 137 130 120 107 95 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 20.0 25.3 28.4 35.5 44.1 28.0 17.8 13.7 12.8 12.1 HFC MtC eq. 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 413 427 410 424 439 455 472 513 588 679 NMVOC Mt 48 55 75 99 119 124 129 131 134 124 105 88 NOx MtN 7 8 11 15 19 20 21 21 21 21 21 21 Statistical Table Scenario A1B-ASF World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5264 6117 6827 7537 8039 8526 8704 8527 8444 8022 7282 7056 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.9 28.9 41.3 60.7 87.9 146.0 174.3 225.7 257.3 367.8 484.9 531.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 56 68 87 105 89 74 59 53 48 43 39 35 Liquids 123 177 243 349 398 447 496 494 492 486 476 465 Gas 51 63 93 154 196 237 278 268 257 229 183 137 Electricity 43 57 84 122 225 327 429 533 637 711 755 798 Others Total 273 365 507 730 907 1085 1262 1348 1434 1469 1452 1436 Primary Energy EJ Coal 97 118 154 212 368 523 679 673 667 669 680 691 Oil 141 202 283 381 302 223 143 87 31 3 2 1 Gas 74 87 126 206 278 349 421 391 361 286 166 47 Nuclear 8 14 18 26 72 117 163 191 218 252 292 332 Biomass 0 0 2 27 57 88 119 145 171 198 224 250 Other Renewables 6 9 16 23 44 65 86 173 259 312 329 346 Total 326 430 600 875 1121 1366 1611 1660 1708 1719 1693 1667 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.2 2.5 4.4 7.3 11.8 17.8 24.6 31.3 37.9 44.7 51.5 Oil 0.0 1.8 4.3 7.6 11.0 13.5 15.3 16.4 16.9 17.0 17.0 17.0 Gas 0.0 0.9 1.9 3.6 6.0 9.2 13.1 17.1 20.8 24.0 26.2 27.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 177.9 313.1 495.8 716.8 967.6 1223.9 1461.9 1682.0 1885.3 2072.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC -1.8 -1.8 -1.7 -1.7 -1.7 -1.7 -1.6 -1.6 -1.5 -1.5 -1.4 -1.4 Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 10.01 14.67 19.49 22.60 25.72 24.14 22.55 20.97 19.37 17.78 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.12 1.24 1.13 0.98 0.84 0.58 0.32 0.18 0.16 0.14 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 11.13 15.91 20.62 23.59 26.56 24.72 22.87 21.15 19.53 17.92 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 377 444 518 577 636 616 596 571 540 510 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.1 9.6 10.7 11.2 11.8 11.5 11.2 10.8 10.2 9.7 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 84.7 116.5 110.0 84.7 59.5 54.0 48.6 46.1 46.6 47.0 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 1068 1248 1567 1698 1830 1837 1845 1832 1798 1763 NMVOC Mt 139 141 165 207 248 274 301 346 392 442 497 552 NOx MtN 31 32 45 66 83 91 100 94 88 84 80 77 Statistical Table 3.8.6 Scenario A1B-ASF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 OECD90 Population Million 849 919 961 1003 1035 1069 1085 1088 1096 1106 1110 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 15.7 20.1 25.2 31.0 37.8 50.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 13 13 14 15 13 12 Liquids 69 88 95 95 87 80 Gas 28 33 36 40 41 41 Electricity 24 29 35 42 52 62 Others Total 133 163 179 192 193 195 Primary Energy EJ Coal 32 29 32 39 61 83 Oil 77 97 107 102 72 43 Gas 35 40 44 52 55 59 Nuclear 7 11 12 13 18 24 Biomass 0 0 1 8 12 17 Other Renewables 5 7 9 11 13 15 Total 157 184 205 224 233 241 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.2 Oil 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 3.9 4.4 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 33.0 66.6 103.4 143.0 183.5 223.3 260.2 292.1 320.1 346.6 372.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.53 3.82 4.09 4.02 3.94 3.44 2.93 2.66 2.63 2.60 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.53 3.82 4.09 4.02 3.94 3.44 2.93 2.66 2.63 2.60 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 77 83 92 100 108 114 121 125 126 128 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.7 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.5 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 7.9 8.5 8.2 7.4 6.7 6.6 6.4 6.8 7.5 8.3 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 169 164 152 124 97 90 83 81 86 90 NMVOC Mt 42 36 41 45 45 42 38 41 43 48 55 62 NOx MtN 13 12 14 15 15 14 13 11 10 9 9 9 Statistical Table Scenario A1B-ASF REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 417 419 425 431 432 425 423 406 398 374 347 339 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.0 1.0 1.4 2.2 3.6 5.9 7.0 9.1 10.3 14.8 20.1 22.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 18 12 12 12 10 9 8 6 5 3 3 2 Liquids 16 12 13 15 16 16 17 16 15 15 15 15 Gas 16 13 18 24 26 29 31 28 26 22 17 12 Electricity 8 8 10 14 17 21 24 27 30 32 32 32 Others Total 58 44 53 65 70 74 79 77 76 72 67 61 Primary Energy EJ Coal 23 13 15 18 18 19 19 17 14 13 12 12 Oil 18 13 15 17 18 19 19 12 5 1 0 0 Gas 27 22 29 38 38 39 39 34 30 23 15 6 Nuclear 1 1 2 2 5 7 9 10 11 11 12 13 Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 7 14 18 21 23 Other Renewables 5 5 6 6 7 8 9 13 16 18 18 18 Total 74 56 66 82 87 92 97 93 89 84 78 73 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.9 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.4 2.7 3.0 3.1 3.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.3 34.1 47.2 60.1 72.2 83.0 92.0 99.5 105.4 110.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use 89 84 78 73 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.9 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.4 2.7 3.0 3.1 3.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.3 34.1 47.2 60.1 72.2 83.0 92.0 99.5 105.4 110.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.07 1.29 1.34 1.25 1.16 0.99 0.82 0.67 0.53 0.39 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.07 1.29 1.34 1.25 1.16 0.99 0.82 0.67 0.53 0.39 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 45 59 81 102 124 121 118 108 91 73 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.5 10.1 8.8 6.9 5.0 4.0 3.0 2.2 1.7 1.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 42 41 47 48 49 48 47 47 48 49 NMVOC Mt 16 13 17 25 29 28 28 28 28 31 35 40 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 5 5 4 4 3 2 2 2 Statistical Table 389 Scenario A1B-ASF ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1278 1526 1782 2038 2284 2493 2660 2780 2861 2902 2907 2882 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.7 3.5 7.2 14.1 24.2 47.5 59.5 79.6 92.2 134.9 175.7 191.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 42 59 73 57 42 26 23 20 17 15 13 Solids 15 37 72 133 161 190 218 219 220 217 210 202 Liquids 3 8 21 53 72 92 111 106 101 88 69 50 Gas 6 13 25 43 110 177 243 290 337 363 368 374 Electricity 48 100 177 301 400 500 599 638 677 685 662 638 Others 36 67 92 129 211 293 375 365 356 348 342 336 Total 132 267 446 732 1021 1294 1572 1641 1711 1718 1667 1613 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 46 89 144 110 77 43 26 9 0 0 0 Oil 41 28 68 107 145 184 168 152 118 66 13 0 Gas 1 4 9 38 67 96 108 120 133 147 161 0 Nuclear 0 0 0 11 21 31 41 44 47 53 63 73 Biomass 5 5 8 11 24 38 51 95 139 161 162 163 Other Renewables 64 130 221 371 511 650 789 806 823 814 780 746 Total 130 213 396 682 878 1077 1200 1243 1277 1241 1082 982 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.6 1.4 2.5 4.2 6.7 10.1 13.8 17.4 20.9 24.3 27.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 1.0 2.2 3.4 4.3 4.9 5.2 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.4 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.6 2.9 4.5 6.3 7.9 9.2 10.1 10.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 48.9 102.4 185.2 292.1 417.3 547.7 669.8 783.7 889.5 987.0 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 3.55 6.41 9.43 11.34 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.34 0.39 0.33 0.26 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.89 6.80 9.76 11.60 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 146 167 190 206 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 3.2 4.1 4.7 5.0 SOx total MtS 17.7 20.0 25.3 47.2 67.9 58.5 38.4 17.7 0 HFC MtC eq. 5 18 45 92 153 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 CO MtCO 235 333 270 374 471 629 711 NMVOC Mt 235 333 370 374 471 629 711 NOx MtN 7 9 16 27 36 42 13.26 12.50 11.73 10.95 10.15 9.35 0.19 0.13 0.07 0.03 0.01 0.00 13.45 12.62 11.80 10.98 10.16 9.34 222 208 193 183 179 174 5.4 5.2 5.0 4.7 4.4 4.0 18.3 15.6 12.9 11.7 12.0 12.3 224 292 292 285 275 262 35 39 43 46 48 46 50 55 48 35 33 37 792 802 811 804 778 753 84 95 105 115 123 132 47 44 40 37 35 32 Statistical Table 390 Scenario A1B-ASF ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1218 1519 1869 2218 2500 2851 2980 3023 3044 3013 2795 2727 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 2.6 4.3 7.4 13.3 22.3 42.5 52.8 71.8 83.8 126.6 171.2 189.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 1 2 3 5 8 11 14 15 15 15 15 14 Solids 23 40 63 106 134 161 189 191 193 192 186 180 Liquids 5 9 18 37 56 76 95 95 94 87 71 55 Gas 5 8 14 24 46 68 90 130 170 202 225 249 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others Total 34 58 98 172 244 316 388 430 473 495 497 499 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 9 15 26 77 128 179 198 217 230 238 246 Oil 26 45 72 118 101 85 68 42 15 2 1 1 Gas 9 14 25 48 78 107 136 132 128 106 65 24 Nuclear 0 0 1 2 11 19 28 38 48 61 75 90 Biomass 0 0 1 8 24 40 56 68 81 91 100 110 Other Renewables 5 5 7 8 13 17 22 49 77 96 108 120 Total 44 74 121 211 304 396 489 528 566 586 588 590 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.9 3.5 5.4 7.5 9.7 12.1 14.5 Oil 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.9 3.0 3.9 4.7 5.2 5.4 5.5 5.5 5.5 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.3 2.2 3.5 4.8 6.1 7.3 8.1 8.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 40.1 73.3 120.4 181.1 254.7 333.0 407.9 478.7 543.9 602.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.86 3.15 4.63 5.99 7.36 7.21 7.07 6.68 6.06 5.44 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.78 0.85 0.80 0.72 0.65 0.45 0.25 0.15 0.14 0.14 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.63 4.00 5.42 6.71 8.00 7.66 7.32 6.83 6.21 5.58 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 109 135 155 168 182 173 164 155 145 135 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.3 2.5 2.8 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.8 2.7 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 16.1 27.1 31.5 29.0 26.4 24.9 23.3 22.5 22.4 22.3 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 483 572 738 815 892 898 904 900 886 872 NMVOC Mt 48 55 64 82 107 129 151 183 216 249 283 317 NOx MtN 7 8 12 19 27 31 36 36 35 35 34 33 Statistical Table 391 Scenario A1B-IMAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5280 6122 6892 7618 8196 8547 8708 8671 8484 8142 7663 7047 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 21.0 26.7 37.9 55.9 81.2 116.2 163.5 219.4 283.2 365.2 446.4 518.8 1990 US$/cap 971.0 4357.0 5503.0 7342.0 9907.0 13598.0 18772.0 25300.0 33383.0 44853.0 58248.0 73621.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 54 59 65 63 59 50 40 38 35 32 29 25 Solids 43 44 45 52 59 66 69 65 59 52 47 40 Liquids 106 119 146 177 198 213 209 204 200 190 175 161 Gas 46 55 73 84 90 100 119 134 145 154 157 156 Electricity 39 55 88 147 220 307 373 410 427 428 408 376 Others 2 4 11 29 50 68 85 93 93 92 91 85 Total 289 336 429 551 677 804 895 944 959 950 907 843 Primary Energy EJ Coal 105 111 129 170 245 298 301 271 237 198 163 129 Oil 129 143 187 242 285 300 348 352 340 320 280 237 Gas 62 73 117 163 188 222 259 278 283 278 264 244 Non-Fossil Electric 8 14 23 39 61 91 128 162 193 218 230 230 Biomass 3 4 12 35 69 102 129 141 138 133 128 116 Other Renewables 61 69 77 76 74 68 59 58 56 54 51 48 Total 368 416 544 725 923 1080 1224 1262 1246 1201 1116 1002 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.1 2.3 3.7 5.8 8.5 11.6 14.5 17.0 19.2 21.0 22.4 Oil 0.0 1.3 3.0 5.1 7.8 10.7 14.0 17.5 21.0 24.3 27.3 29.9 Gas 0.0 0.6 1.6 3.0 4.8 6.8 9.2 11.9 14.7 17.5 20.3 22.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 168.6 275.5 411.1 574.2 755.8 941.6 1123.9 1298.8 1458.9 1601.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 2.1 1.7 2.7 4.0 5.3 5.8 5.9 5.7 5.2 5.2 5.2 4.6 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1435 1382 1450 1524 1573 1571 1530 1490 1439 1355 1295 1208 Grasslands 3435 3295 3313 3362 3381 3271 3064 2849 2705 2597 2505 2347 Energy Biomass 8 10 26 82 177 274 374 404 391 384 367 334 Forest 4277 4266 4224 4251 4147 4132 4173 4256 4362 4490 4564 4700 Others 3916 4119 4058 3853 3793 3824 755.8 941.6 1123.9 1298.8 1458.9 1601.2 GtC 2.1 1.7 2.7 4.0 5.3 5.8 5.9 5.7 5.2 5.2 5.2 4.6 Million ha 1435 1382 1450 1524 1573 1571 1530 1490 1439 1355 1295 1208 3435 3295 3313 3362 3381 3271 3064 2849 2705 2597 2505 2347 8 10 26 82 177 274 374 404 391 384 367 334 4277 4266 4224 4251 4147 4132 4173 4256 4362 4490 4564 4700 3916 4119 4058 3853 3793 3824 3931 4072 4174 4246 4340 4483 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.50 11.10 14.30 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 0.77 1.01 0.71 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.27 12.11 15.00 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 360 423 475 N2O total MtN20-N 6.7 7.0 7.5 8.6 9.3 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 77.5 90.9 108.5 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 CO MtCO 879 877 832 978 1054 NMVOC Mt 139 141 144 157 163 NOx MtN 31 32 38 48 57 17.60 0.02 17.61 499 9.9 121.0 482 77 99 913 159 63 18.70 18.40 0.02 0.05 18.71 512 10.3 18.45 523 10.3 119.5 114.8 566 654 89 97 127 1012 154 63 119 949 158 63 17.80 0.22 18.02 525 10.2 106.8 659 106 113 1089 152 61 16.40 0.56 16.96 513 9.8 95.5 654 114 88 1141 149 57 14.60 0.47 15.07 488 9.7 83.0 639 119 84 1110 142 51 12.90 0.50 13.39 452 9.1 71.2 614 115 95 1080 133 45 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production. c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species. e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species". f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. Statistical Table Scenario A1B-IMAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 799 849 890 932 965 990 1001 1005 1009 1020 1029 1032 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.5 20.2 26.9 35.6 44.3 53.0 62.4 71.3 77.9 88.7 101.2 114.6 1990 US$/cap 20648.9 23840.3 30131.7 38187.4 45863.7 53609.2 62283.6 70840.8 77152.1 87018.1 98251.1 111071.1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4 Solids 8 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 Liquids 57 62 68 71 67 61 53 49 47 46 44 42 Gas 24 27 30 31 32 35 40 43 45 49 52 55 Electricity 24 36 52 66 74 76 76 76 75 76 77 78 Others 2 3 5 10 16 22 26 27 27 26 26 26 Total 120 141 168 191 203 207 208 207 207 209 212 214 Primary Energy EJ Coal 37 47 51 51 51 48 46 42 37 35 32 30 Oil 67 76 84 88 84 67 65 60 57 56 54 50 Gas 28 36 46 52 51 51 53 55 56 58 61 64 Non-Fossil Electric 7 12 19 29 36 40 42 45 46 48 51 54 Biomass 9 3 5 10 16 23 25 28 28 27 28 24 Other Renewables 10 10 10 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 Total 151 183 216 240 248 240 242 240 236 235 237 233 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.6 3.4 4.1 4.8 5.5 6.1 6.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.3 3.1 4.3 5.5 6.7 7.9 9.1 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.1 1.6 2.1 2.5 3.0 3.6 4.1 4.6 5.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.5 98.2 130.4 162.3 194.4 226.5 258.8 291.4 324.2 357.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.3 Land Use Million ha Cropland d 379 379 378 385 382 383 391 394 395 395 399 394 Grasslands e 786 676 584 516 487 479 472 467 462 458 459 453 Energy Biomass 3 1 3 9 20 32 43 51 55 52 52 43 Forest 1115 1167 1215 1259 1273 1272 1263 1256 1250 1252 1245 1262 Others 955 1016 1059 1070 1076 1073 1070 1071 1076 1081 1083 1087 Total 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 3.20 Other CO2 f GtC 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.06 -0.03 0.02 0.00 0.03 0.04 0.07 0.10 0.13 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.30 3.26 3.17 3.22 3.20 3.22 3.24 3.27 3.30 3.33 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 78 81 83 85 88 89 89 91 91 86 N2O total MtN20-N 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9 2.9 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 13.4 12.5 10.9 10.1 9.4 9.1 8.8 8.9 9.0 8.9 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 177 182 180 180 173 172 169 173 179 177 NMVOC Mt 42 36 37 37 34 33 30 27 26 25 25 23 NOx MtN 13 12 13 13 12 10 9 9 8 9 9 8 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production. c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species. e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species". f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. Statistical Table Scenario A1B-IMAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 REF Population Million 412 429 437 443 445 443 432 419 401 384 365 347 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.0 0.7 1.0 2.0 3.5 5.9 9.2 13.0 17.2 22.7 28.4 34.3 1990 US$/cap 2307.2 1657.3 2378.6 4378.7 7868.6 13380.5 21343.7 30936.4 42882.5 59159.7 77741.4 98993.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 Solids 14 10 7 6 5 6 5 5 5 4 4 Liquids 21 12 12 15 16 16 15 15 14 13 12 11 Gas 15 11 10 12 12 11 11 10 10 10 9 Electricity 9 5 7 15 22 30 34 34 32 31 29 Others 0 1 1 1 2 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 Total 62 41 40 50 59 68 71 70 67 63 59 56 Primary Energy EJ Coal 36 19 15 16 20 27 28 25 22 18 15 11 Oil 28 14 16 20 23 26 30 29 27 25 23 20 Gas 25 15 16 23 27 28 25 22 20 17 17 13 Non-Fossil Electric 3 1 1 3 6 9 11 11 12 12 12 12 Biomass 1 1 1 2 3 6 6 6 6 7 7 9 Other Renewables 4 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 Total 95 52 52 67 82 99 103 98 90 84 77 70 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.3 2.7 3.0 3.3 3.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.3 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 1.1 1.7 2.4 3.0 3.6 4.3 4.9 5.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.4 31.0 41.3 53.0 66.7 80.8 94.3 107.7 120.7 133.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.4 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.3 Land Use Million ha Cropland 278 223 229 227 224 218 207 199 189 179 169 164 Grasslands e 392 307 329 339 333 310 279 258 238 234 226 221 Energy Biomass 1 0 1 6 19 46 84 87 92 83 83 92 Forest 1146 1174 1167 1250 1242 1238 1238 1233 1227 1226 1218 1200 Others 461 574 551 455 460 466 471 501 532 556 582 600 Total 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.91 1.01 1.21 1.31 1.61 1.61 1.41 1.31 1.21 1.01 0.91 Other CO2 f GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.01 -0.09 -0.27 -0.30 -0.18 -0.03 0.02 0.15 0.24 0.35 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.90 1.02 1.04 1.31 1.43 1.38 1.33 1.36 1.25 1.26 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 41 51 57 58 52 52 51 47 43 40 N2O total MtN20-N 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 9.4 9.7 9.6 10.6 10.6 9.9 8.9 7.8 6.8 5.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 9 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 CO MtCO 8 69 41 34 38 45 52 55 56 56 56 54 52 NMVOC Mt 16 13 12 12 12 13 12 12 12 12 11 11 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production. c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species. e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species". f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. 4 3 3 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production. c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species. e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species". f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. 394 Statistical Table Scenario A1B-IMAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ASIA Population Million 2781 3246 3609 3929 4142 4235 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.4 2.7 4.7 8.7 16.1 28.8 1990 US$/cap 337.2 531.9 873.7 1553.2 2837.7 5139.5 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 29 33 33 30 26 20 20 24 26 29 32 35 Solids 12 21 29 38 49 59 Liquids 2 8 17 23 27 30 Gas 4 9 20 42 75 119 Electricity 0 1 3 12 23 33 Others 68 96 127 174 232 295 Total 28 42 53 71 99 126 Primary Energy EJ Coal 16 27 40 59 77 76 Oil 4 12 29 52 76 87 Gas 0 1 2 6 14 32 Non-Fossil Electric 0 1 4 14 31 52 Biomass 30 34 36 33 29 24 Other Renewables 79 116 163 235 326 397 Total 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.7 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.5 Oil 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.5 Gas 19.3 43.6 77.7 125.1 185.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.6 0.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC 382 386 396 413 428 430 Land Use Million ha Cropland 561 664 692 747 770 778 Grasslands 1 1 3 15 53 95 Energy Biomass 488 397 369 331 286 252 Forest 545 527 515 470 439 421 Others 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 Total 1.15 1.78 2.58 3.68 5.08 6.38 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.24 0.32 0.40 0.29 Other CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.82 4.00 5.48 6.66 Total CO2 GtC 113 125 136 157 181 198 CH4 total MtCH4 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.4 3.8 4.1 N2O total MtN20-N 17.7 25.3 29.9 33.6 39.5 42.9 SOx total MtS 0 5 18 45 92 153 HFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 PFC MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 SF6 MtC eq. 235 270 294 332 406 378 CO MtCO 33 37 40 45 50 51 NMVOC Mt 7 9 12 16 21 24 NOx MtN 4220 4088 3871 3594 3262 2886 48.2 73.2 103.0 139.3 173.5 200.7 8819.4 13804.2 19837.3 27431.3 35626.4 44069.4 14 13 11 10 8 7 33 30 27 23 19 15 58 57 55 51 46 42 39 45 47 49 47 43 150 166 173 171 159 139 40 42 40 38 35 31 334 352 352 341 314 277 125 108 91 70 50 36 96 98 92 84 71 57 94 110 98 88 86 65 55 75 91 104 107 102 61 62 55 53 46 36 18 17 15 14 13 12 449 468 442 413 373 308 3.6 4.5 5.1 5.7 6.1 6.4 1.8 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.0 3.2 1.5 2.1 2.5 3.0 3.5 3.8 253.3 319.3 380.0 434.2 479.9 517.1 0.5 0.3 0.1 0.4 0.7 0.5 409 394 372 327 306 267 697 626 601 560 539 473 142 141 117 129 126 97 244 273 335 403 438 515 484 543 551 557 566 624 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 6.58 6.18 5.68 4.88 3.98 3.28 0.27 0.16 0.14 0.15 0.14 0.06 6.85 6.33 5.82 5.02 4.12 3.33 206 206 202 191 183 166 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.6 3.5 3.1 39.4 35.8 32.2 27.3 21.9 17.6 224 292 292 285 275 262 35 39 43 46 48 46 50 55 48 35 33 37 403 418 426 421 420 385 51 49 47 44 42 39 23 22 21 18 16 13 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production. c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species. e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species". f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. Statistical Table 395 Scenario A1B-IMAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1287 1597 1954 2315 2643 2879 3055 3159 3202 3145 3006 2783 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 2.1 3.0 5.4 9.8 17.3 28.5 43.7 62.0 85.2 114.4 143.3 169.2 1990 US$/cap 1653.4 1901.8 2738.2 4210.1 6556.0 9905.2 14317.2 19627.9 26606.2 36388.5 47686.9 60795.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 16 20 25 26 26 24 20 19 18 17 15 13 Solids 1 3 5 9 13 17 22 22 20 17 16 14 Liquids 15 23 37 53 67 77 82 84 85 81 73 65 Gas 4 9 17 18 19 23 30 36 43 47 48 49 Electricity 2 4 9 24 50 81 112 133 147 151 144 132 Others 0 0 1 5 9 11 15 20 22 24 26 24 Total 39 58 94 135 184 233 281 315 334 336 322 296 Primary Energy EJ Coal 3 4 10 32 75 97 102 97 87 75 66 52 Oil 17 27 47 75 101 131 157 165 165 155 132 109 Gas 6 10 26 37 34 56 88 91 109 115 100 102 Non-Fossil Electric 0 0 1 2 5 11 20 31 43 54 60 62 Biomass 0 0 2 9 20 21 36 45 49 45 47 46 Other Renewables 18 22 28 29 30 29 26 26 25 24 23 21 Total 43 64 114 183 266 344 429 456 478 469 428 391 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.8 2.7 3.6 4.3 5.0 5.5 5.9 Oil 0.0 0.6 1.6 2.8 4.4 6.3 8.1 9.8 11.5 13.0 14.3 15.4 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.8 1.3 2.0 2.8 3.8 4.9 6.2 7.3 8.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 38.2 68.6 114.4 173.0 241.3 315.0 390.8 465.5 534.1 593.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1.2 1.0 1.6 2.1 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.3 1.9 1.8 1.6 1.3 Land Use Million ha Cropland 397 394 447 499 540 540 523 503 483 455 421 384 Grasslands 1697 1648 1708 1760 1790 1704 1617 1499 1403 1345 1281 1201 Energy Biomass 2 8 19 53 85 101 105 125 127 120 106 102 Forest 1529 1529 1472 1410 1346 1370 1429 1494 1552 1608 1662 1722 Others 1955 2001 1933 1857 1818 1864 1906 1958 2014 2051 2109 2171 Total 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.81 3.11 4.71 6.41 7.31 7.61 7.61 7.11 6.41 5.51 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.44 0.73 0.60 0.01 -0.08 -0.10 0.02 0.20 -0.01 -0.03 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.25 3.84 5.31 6.42 7.24 7.51 7.63 7.31 6.41 5.48 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 105 134 154 158 166 176 183 184 171 160 N2O total MtN20-N 1.2 1.3 1.5 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.8 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.8 2.6 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 21.8 32.0 45.5 54.4 57.2 57.0 53.9 48.5 42.4 35.9 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 326 425 422 302 317 365 437 490 456 465 NMVOC Mt 48 55 55 63 67 62 65 66 67 68 64 60 NOx MtN 7 8 10 15 21 24 26 28 28 26 24 21 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production. c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species. e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species". f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. 396 Statistical Table Scenario A1B-MARIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 World Population Million 5262 6117 6888 7617 8048 8207 8704 8536 8372 8028 7527 7056 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 19.4 25.8 35.7 51.9 75.4 114.4 179.7 230.1 287.9 355.9 430.8 535.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 48 37 38 27 19 13 Solids 138 165 200 252 293 350 Liquids 56 66 98 139 189 243 Gas 35 52 63 79 90 116 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 278 321 399 496 591 723 Total 90 69 61 45 33 24 Primary Energy EJ Coal 123 144 168 201 220 250 Oil 71 105 142 188 246 305 Gas 22 29 40 61 99 162 Nuclear 28 39 56 88 103 121 Biomass 9 8 7 7 6 21 Other Renewables 343 393 475 589 706 882 Total 0.0 0.9 1.6 2.2 2.6 3.0 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.2 2.7 4.4 6.4 8.6 Oil 0.0 0.7 1.8 3.2 5.1 7.5 Gas 7.1 82.4 166.3 258.4 358.7 468.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1451 1451 1605 2000 2174 2222 Land Use Million ha Cropland 3395 3395 3245 2850 2676 2604 Grasslands 0 0 0 0 0 39 Energy Biomass 4138 4142 4158 4186 4217 4267 Forest 4061 4057 4038 4010 3978 3914 Others 13045 13045 6 21 343 393 475 589 706 882 0.0 0.9 1.6 2.2 2.6 3.0 0.0 1.2 2.7 4.4 6.4 8.6 0.0 0.7 1.8 3.2 5.1 7.5 7.1 82.4 166.3 258.4 358.7 468.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1451 1451 1605 2000 2174 2222 3395 3395 3245 2850 2676 2604 0 0 0 0 0 39 4138 4142 4158 4186 4217 4267 4061 4057 4038 4010 3978 3914 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 5.99 6.90 7.77 8.69 9.65 10.93 LU 1.07 1.03 0.93 0.79 0.58 7.10 7.97 8.80 9.61 10.44 11.51 1672 883 791 337 369 482 32 25 31 43 61 77 38 40 43 48 66 99 26 48 84 140 207 145 403 402 486 481 583 651 303 345 287 303 213 273 157 187 218 256 301 363 0 0 0 0 0 0 889 984 1075 1180 1303 1432 34 54 87 142 209 146 285 229 263 208 208 226 354 399 344 363 279 345 240 321 402 505 625 797 132 184 230 278 380 429 68 71 73 73 71 67 1113 1258 1400 1570 1770 2011 3.2 3.5 4.1 5.0 6.4 8.5 U.L 13.9 16.2 18.8 20.9 23.0 10.6 14.1 18.1 21.5 25.2 28.0 591.1 720.5 852.4 990.3 1139.9 1301.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2355 2080 1810 1539 1278 1162 2601 2593 2597 2597 2597 2597 43 326 592 872 1572 1932 4312 4366 4366 4358 3918 3673 3734 3681 3681 3681 3681 3681 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 12.66 12.74 13.45 14.07 14.48 14.24 0.36 0.13 0.05 0.00 1.38 2.20 13.01 12.87 13.50 14.07 15.86 16.44 566 654 659 654 639 614 89 97 106 114 119 115 119 127 113 88 84 95 Statistical Table 397 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Scenario A1B-MARIA OECD90 Population Million 859 919 965 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 15.6 18.9 22.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 22.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 12 8 6 Liquids 71 76 71 Gas 28 32 52 Electricity 21 28 31 Others 0 0 0 Total 132 145 160 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 28 21 Oil 71 77 71 Gas 34 55 80 Nuclear 18 15 18 Biomass 6 4 3 Other Renewables 5 5 4 Total 171 182 198 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 Oil 0.0 0.7 1.5 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 378 378 378 Grasslands 756 756 756 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 Forest 756 756 756 Others 794 794 794 Total 2684 2684 2684 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.31 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.33 CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 1007 1035 1046 1081 1085 1091 1096 1103 1110 27.0 32.0 38.2 46.0 57.7 71.3 88.4 105.8 123.9 4 3 2 7 15 28 49 65 46 68 65 64 59 51 80 73 92 89 70 82 92 99 111 80 80 56 88 36 39 42 47 52 59 67 77 87 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 177 188 199 212 230 248 269 290 309 16 13 10 12 19 31 51 67 47 68 65 64 59 51 80 73 92 87 105 121 135 133 147 120 124 106 143 23 28 35 43 54 68 85 105 131 2 1 1 1 0 1 1 2 3 4 3 3 19 23 24 24 23 21 217 232 247 267 294 323 357 395 431 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.9 2.4 3.1 2.2 2.9 3.5 4.2 4.8 5.3 6.1 6.8 7.7 1.7 2.7 3.9 5.3 6.6 8.1 9.3 10.5 11.6 100.0 136.0 172.5 208.1 243.2 281.5 324.4 372.2 422.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 378 378 378 378 378 378 357 295 237 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 0 0 0 0 0 0 21 82 141 756 756 778 816 834 834 834 834 834 794 794 772 734 716 716 716 716 716 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 3.49 3.60 3.71 3.64 3.86 4.34 4.77 5.30 5.25 0.05 0.05 -0.04 -0.19 -0.28 -0.27 -0.26 -0.23 -0.20 3.55 3.65 3.67 3.44 3.58 4.07 4.51 5.07 5.05 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 3 9 8 Statistical Table Scenario A1B-MARIA REF Population Million GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 413 419 427 433 432 430 423 406 391 374 356 339 0.9 1.3 1.8 2.6 4.6 8.1 13.7 18.1 22.4 27.1 32.9 40.4 13 9 6 4 3 2 3 6 10 17 27 19 17 14 12 11 12 13 12 8 14 16 26 23 21 24 27 30 41 53 65 70 61 54 38 53 7 8 7 7 9 11 13 14 15 16 17 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 58 55 52 53 65 78 93 98 100 102 107 113 Coal 19 13 9 6 4 3 4 6 10 17 27 19 Oil 19 14 13 12 12 13 12 8 14 16 26 23 Gas 27 33 34 38 52 66 80 86 77 69 53 69 Nuclear 3 2 3 4 4 5 7 9 11 13 17 21 Biomass 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 4 4 4 4 4 4 Total 69 64 60 61 74 89 106 113 116 120 128 136 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.2 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.6 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.8 2.5 3.3 4.2 4.9 5.6 6.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 20.9 28.8 37.2 47.3 59.2 71.8 84.6 97.6 111.6 126.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 217 217 217 217 217 217 217 174 139 111 89 71 Grasslands 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43 78 106 128 146 Forest 815 815 815 815 815 815 827 862 862 862 862 862 Others 722 722 722 722 722 722 710 675 675 675 675 675 Total 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 1.30 0.00 1.30 0.91 0.00 0.91 0.79 0.02 0.81 0.75 0.01 0.76 0.93 1.14 -0.01 -0.03 0.92 1.11 1.34 1.43 -0.07 -0.17 1.27 1.26 1.50 1.59 -0.21 -0.27 1.29 1.32 1.82 -0.34 1.47 1.78 -0.33 1.45 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 Statistical Table 399 Scenario A1B-MARIA ASIA Population Million 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 2642 3080 3425 3728 3861 3895 4008 3814 3632 3368 3040 2744 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.2 2.6 5.8 12.5 21.1 36.5 62.9 81.9 104.9 132.1 164.8 210.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 20 18 24 17 12 8 15 25 41 68 104 73 Liquids 26 42 65 96 121 154 181 183 203 199 211 252 Gas 2 3 4 10 17 27 40 53 44 49 35 57 Electricity 4 9 12 17 18 27 40 51 64 79 97 119 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 52 71 105 140 168 216 276 312 352 395 446 501 Primary Energy EJ Coal 28 24 28 20 14 10 16 26 42 68 104 73 Oil 14 23 36 48 62 87 111 98 98 70 55 59 Gas 3 5 8 14 22 30 42 54 45 50 35 58 Nuclear 1 12 19 35 34 64 78 104 132 169 214 269 Biomass 13 21 31 51 65 71 73 88 106 130 157 193 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 20 20 20 20 20 20 Total 61 86 124 168 197 263 340 389 443 507 585 671 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.6 2.1 2.7 3.8 Oil 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.7 3.8 4.8 5.8 6.5 7.0 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.8 2.2 2.7 3.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 41.5 65.8 91.5 31 51 65 71 73 88 106 130 157 193 1 1 1 1 1 1 20 20 20 20 20 20 61 86 124 168 197 263 340 389 443 507 585 671 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.6 2.1 2.7 3.8 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.7 3.8 4.8 5.8 6.5 7.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.8 2.2 2.7 3.1 1.5 19.3 41.5 65.8 91.5 120.9 156.9 197.6 240.3 285.2 332.8 380.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 366 366 380 380 380 380 380 379 374 335 305 266 431 431 421 421 421 382 379 371 375 375 375 375 0 0 0 0 0 39 43 52 54 92 122 162 365 367 381 390 399 406 406 406 406 406 406 406 458 456 440 430 421 414 412 412 412 412 412 412 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1.15 1.78 2.20 2.31 2.55 3.08 3.91 4.08 4.36 4.56 4.96 4.58 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.16 0.13 0.11 0.09 0.06 0.03 0.01 -0.01 -0.03 1.53 2.03 2.40 2.46 2.68 3.19 4.00 4.14 4.40 4.57 4.95 4.55 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 400 Statistical Table Scenario A1B - MARIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1348 1699 2071 2449 2720 2836 3192 3231 3259 3190 3029 2864 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.7 3.0 5.4 9.8 17.6 31.7 57.1 72.4 89.3 108.4 127.4 160.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 2 4 7 11 8 Solids 24 34 51 77 95 119 151 160 190 193 253 288 Liquids 5 6 15 29 49 72 99 112 101 120 84 75 Gas 3 8 12 19 25 37 57 69 81 95 111 139 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 35 50 81 126 170 229 308 344 376 414 459 510 Total Primary Energy EJ Coal 6 4 3 2 1 1 2 2 4 7 11 8 Oil 18 30 48 73 80 86 103 72 72 50 35 57 Gas 7 12 19 32 51 74 100 113 102 120 84 75 Nuclear 0 0 0 0 33 58 112 154 192 238 289 377 Biomass 8 13 21 35 36 49 59 96 123 147 221 232 Other Renewables 2 2 1 1 1 15 25 25 24 24 24 23 Total 41 60 93 143 204 282 399 461 517 586 664 772 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.5 3.4 4.4 5.1 5.8 6.3 6.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.2 2.0 2.9 4.1 5.1 6.3 7.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 38.3 63.8 94.0 127.7 166.9 207.9 246.0 283.1 323.3 372.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 490 490 630 1025 1199 1247 1380 1150 920 736 589 589 Grasslands 2095 2095 1955 1560 1386 1352 1352 1352 1352 1352 1352 1352 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 231 460 653 1240 1484 Forest 2202 2204 2207 2226 2248 2268 2263 2263 2263 2255 1815 1571 Others 2086 2084 2081 2063 2040 2006 1878 1878 1878 1878 1878 1878 Total 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.47 2.13 2.57 3.01 3.76 3.37 3.24 3.16 2.41 2.63 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.79 0.71 0.62 0.54 0.54 0.52 0.50 0.51 1.96 2.77 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.26 2.84 3.19 3.54 4.30 3.89 3.74 3.67 4.37 5.40 CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. 0 2 5 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 401 Scenario A1B - MESSAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6117 6888 7617 8182 8531 8704 8667 8463 8125 7658 7056 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.7 37.9 56.5 89.1 135.2 181.3 247.6 313.8 383.3 455.9 528.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 25.7 33.3 47.1 66.6 96.6 138.9 181.0 240.7 304.2 372.2 443.0 513.9 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 38 28 22 16 10 7 5 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 42 58 59 67 73 70 48 35 29 26 24 15 Liquids 111 125 160 204 254 303 357 396 403 365 308 254 Gas 41 48 67 85 104 135 164 199 210 202 158 96 Electricity 35 47 70 107 164 232 311 414 536 647 745 859 Others 8 10 20 38 58 84 122 169 234 320 422 525 Total 275 316 398 517 662 830 1005 1213 1413 1560 1657 1749 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 105 120 157 194 227 210 182 192 213 200 192 Oil 128 155 172 198 225 250 281 333 326 253 184 138 Gas 71 85 128 178 250 320 378 445 482 456 398 350 Nuclear 7 9 12 19 34 55 84 126 185 247 306 358 Biomass 46 47 63 87 120 155 204 251 315 394 438 475 Other Renewables 8 13 29 52 78 134 240 371 534 730 945 1172 Total 352 415 524 689 901 1141 1397 1707 2035 2292 2472 2683 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 2.0 3.2 4.8 6.7 9.0 11.1 12.9 14.8 17.0 19.0 Oil 0.0 1.4 3.0 4.7 6.7 8.9 11.4 14.2 17.6 20.8 23.4 25.2 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.6 2.9 4.7 7.1 10.3 14.1 18.6 23.4 28.0 31.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 169.1 269.9 390.7 535.1 695.1 866.4 1049.0 1231.7 1398.0 1544.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1459 1466 1462 1457 1454 1448 1442 1436 1429 1424 1422 1420 Land Use Million ha Cropland 3389 3404 3429 3446 3458 3478 3498 3525 3552 3568 3572 3576 Grasslands 0 0 0 74 158 288 418 492 566 581 538 495 Energy Biomass 4296 4237 4173 4164 4164 4177 4190 4194 4199 4202 4203 4204 Forest 3805 3842 3886 3807 3715 3558 3400 3301 3203 3173 3213 3253 Others 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.31 10.56 13.21 15.51 16.47 17.84 18.73 17.86 15.46 13.83 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.04 0.26 0.12 0.05 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 -0.01 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.36 10.81 13.33 15.56 16.45 17.81 18.70 17.83 15.44 13.83 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 362 418 486 517 531 502 477 451 400 347 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.1 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.1 6.0 5.9 5.8 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 65.8 62.2 61.8 59.6 49.4 45.4 43.2 40.4 35.9 31.4 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 1022 1218 1412 1659 1925 2173 2380 2548 2568 2532 NMVOC Mt 139 141 164 194 211 235 259 282 276 234 188 137 NOx MtN 31 32 39 50 60 71 80 90 95 90 81 74 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-A1 marker land-use data, a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data), c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run), d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. 402 Statistical Table Scenario A1B - MESSAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 919 965 1007 1043 1069 1081 1084 1089 1098 1108 1110 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.5 25.3 31.0 38.0 46.1 54.1 65.5 76.9 90.3 105.7 121.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 17.7 21.8 26.9 33.0 40.1 47.2 57.2 67.3 79.2 92.9 106.6 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 13 7 3 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 68 73 78 77 75 70 67 55 45 36 27 Gas 22 28 35 40 44 44 43 41 40 36 24 12 Electricity 22 28 38 50 62 70 81 97 117 132 150 172 Others 1 1 4 9 12 17 24 34 50 70 93 109 Total 124 138 157 180 197 207 218 240 262 282 303 320 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 36 39 42 44 32 20 11 6 5 3 2 Oil 72 82 79 80 75 67 58 55 43 35 28 25 Gas 33 45 60 76 87 96 97 107 118 118 108 113 Nuclear 6 7 9 10 14 20 27 38 48 56 60 12 17 24 34 50 70 93 109 Total 124 138 157 180 197 207 218 240 262 282 303 320 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 36 39 42 44 32 20 11 6 5 3 2 Oil 72 82 79 80 75 67 58 55 43 35 28 25 Gas 33 45 60 76 87 96 97 107 118 118 108 113 Nuclear 6 7 9 10 14 20 27 38 48 56 60 59 Biomass 6 9 14 20 27 34 42 44 44 40 41 52 Other Renewables 4 6 12 16 22 35 59 81 114 156 211 246 Total 159 184 210 243 269 283 303 335 372 409 450 497 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.5 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.7 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.4 3.2 3.9 4.6 5.2 5.7 6.2 6.5 6.8 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.2 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.2 8.4 9.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.3 102.5 140.5 176.8 208.3 236.9 264.6 290.9 314.5 336.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 381 380 377 376 375 372 368 364 359 356 356 355 Grasslands 760 763 771 774 776 787 797 818 839 849 847 846 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 11 24 44 63 74 86 88 81 75 Forest 1050 1053 1052 1053 1056 1062 1068 1061 1054 1050 1049 1048 Others 838 833 828 814 798 765 733 712 691 685 695 705 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.43 3.76 3.84 3.44 2.94 2.82 2.66 2.49 2.15 2.14 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.02 0.00 -0.02 -0.04 0.00 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.46 3.78 3.83 3.41 2.89 2.83 2.71 2.55 2.18 2.15 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 71 71 68 65 63 63 63 62 63 N2O total = MIN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 9.7 3.7 2.3 1.5 1.1 2.2 2.0 2.7 3.1 4.4 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 194 218 217 217 214 206 200 186 149 151 NMVOC Mt 42 36 39 41 37 33 28 27 25 21 14 9 NOx MtN 13 12 14 16 16 15 14 13 13 12 11 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. Statistical Table 403 Scenario A1B-MESSAGE REF Population Million 413 419 427 433 435 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.5 2.9 5.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 2.2 3.1 4.3 6.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 5 4 3 2 Liquids 15 10 10 10 11 Gas 14 11 15 17 20 Electricity 6 6 7 10 14 Others 7 6 7 10 12 Total 50 38 42 50 59 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 15 12 14 17 Oil 20 15 13 12 12 Gas 27 22 30 32 38 Nuclear 1 1 1 1 1 Biomass 2 1 1 0 3 Other Renewables 1 1 2 4 6 Total 70 54 58 64 77 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.3 32.7 43.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 268 266 265 265 265 Grasslands 341 361 364 366 367 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 6 Forest 966 950 918 904 894 Others 701 698 728 738 745 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.91 0.96 1.14 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.01 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.09 0.97 1.14 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 44 48 55 N2O total = MIN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.5 4.7 3.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 CO MtCO 69 41 53 61 79 NMVOC Mt 16 13 16 20 25 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 5 433 0 1 10 26 20 15 72 30 12 42 2 5 9 99 0.7 0.7 1.5 264 368 11 899 733 2276 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.50 Other CO2 GtC -0.08 Total CO2 GtC 1.42 CH4 total MtCH4 58 N2O total = MIN2O-N 0.6 SOx total MtS 3.9 HFC MtC eq. 31 PFC MtC eq. 20 SF6 MtC eq. 18 CO MtCO 112 NMVOC Mt 33 NOx MtN 7 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 423 409 392 374 357 339 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 12.4 16.2 20.0 24.4 29.3 34.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 12.4 16.2 20.0 24.4 29.3 34.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 11 10 10 11 15 21 Liquids 29 33 32 25 16 7 Gas 27 32 38 45 51 56 Electricity 17 17 19 23 26 28 Others 85 92 99 103 108 112 Primary Energy EJ Coal 32 12 50 3 8 26 Oil 13 67 4 10 13 13 Gas 13 81 5 14 9 79 Nuclear 6 21 17 7 63 7 Biomass 32 263 370 16 905 722 Other Renewables 2276 1.67 -0.15 1.52 58 0.6 3.9 32 21 21 151 41 262 371 19 909 715 2276 1.79 -0.12 1.67 62 0.6 3.2 33 22 19 157 47 9 262 371 22 912 709 2276 1.65 -0.09 1.56 60 0.6 2.6 33 23 15 152 10 261 372 23 916 703 2276 1.49 -0.07 1.42 53 0.6 2.7 34 24 14 128 42 9 260 373 21 922 700 2276 1.41 -0.06 1.35 46 0.6 2.7 33 25 10 97 34 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. 19 5 53 8 47 16 19 26 37 49 55 121 138 151 160 173 187 1.0 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.1 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.9 2.4 3.1 3.9 4.7 5.3 56.0 70.8 86.7 102.9 117.8 131.6 144.6 260 374 20 927 696 2276 1.31 -0.05 1.25 40 0.6 1.8 31 24 11 65 23 404 Statistical Table Scenario A1B-MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3620 3937 4147 4238 4220 4085 3867 3589 3258 2882 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.8 12.3 26.2 44.5 62.7 91.9 121.0 150.0 178.6 207.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 8.2 13.5 21.6 35.2 51.8 67.5 93.3 121.0 150.0 178.6 207.3 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 17 13 8 4 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 36 41 51 59 54 33 26 27 24 22 14 Liquids 13 20 27 47 69 95 122 140 143 134 114 106 Gas 2 3 7 10 14 22 39 64 73 75 62 37 Electricity 4 7 12 24 42 67 97 136 186 231 271 318 Others 1 2 4 10 16 25 37 54 77 107 144 182 Total 62 85 105 150 204 266 330 420 505 570 613 655 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 48 57 79 99 120 114 104 120 126 105 87 Oil 15 24 28 40 57 71 80 93 77 56 43 41 Gas 3 5 12 22 37 54 81 109 116 112 96 74 Nuclear 0 1 1 4 8 15 26 44 71 102 138 173 Biomass 24 22 27 35 48 64 82 106 133 156 158 163 Other Renewables 1 3 6 14 23 42 75 122 179 239 308 391 Total 74 102 131 193 272 366 459 578 697 791 849 928 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.4 2.2 3.2 4.4 5.5 6.5 7.7 9.0 10.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.1 4.9 5.4 5.9 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.3 2.2 3.2 4.4 5.5 6.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 41.7 69.4 106.2 154.8 211.8 273.4 338.5 405.0 466.0 518.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 438 435 434 433 432 431 431 430 429 428 428 428 Grasslands 608 606 609 611 613 615 617 618 619 621 622 624 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 17 37 68 99 117 134 138 127 117 Forest 535 522 512 524 535 535 535 544 552 556 555 555 Others 583 601 609 579 547 515 483 456 429 421 431 441 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.22 3.23 4.39 5.49 5.93 6.38 6.78 6.70 5.63 4.85 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.22 -0.13 -0.12 -0.04 0.03 -0.03 -0.09 -0.10 -0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 556 555 555 Others 583 601 609 579 547 515 483 456 429 421 431 441 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.22 3.23 4.39 5.49 5.93 6.38 6.78 6.70 5.63 4.85 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.22 -0.13 -0.12 -0.04 0.03 -0.03 -0.09 -0.10 -0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.44 3.10 4.27 5.44 5.96 6.35 6.69 6.61 5.59 4.86 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 148 180 220 230 237 213 194 179 161 143 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 27.2 29.7 31.4 30.2 20.9 16.8 15.4 14.3 12.9 11.9 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 235 270 316 413 544 660 776 906 960 1001 968 910 NMVOC Mt 33 37 40 51 59 66 73 85 79 73 62 42 NOx MtN 7 9 11 15 19 24 28 32 34 33 30 26 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. Statistical Table 405 Scenario A1B-MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1875 2241 2557 2791 2980 3089 3115 3064 2934 2727 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 5.3 10.3 19.5 35.8 52.0 73.9 95.8 118.6 142.3 165.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 3.8 5.1 8.6 13.8 22.4 38.1 53.9 73.9 95.8 118.6 142.3 165.9 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 11 9 8 5 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 5 7 10 11 14 14 9 3 2 2 2 Liquids 17 27 50 68 98 122 153 180 196 175 144 100 Gas 4 6 11 18 25 43 53 61 66 67 56 40 Electricity 3 6 12 24 47 75 106 150 195 239 274 314 Others 0 1 4 9 17 27 45 63 89 121 159 206 Total 39 55 93 138 203 285 373 463 548 604 634 662 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 7 14 22 35 46 44 41 53 74 76 83 Oil 21 35 53 67 81 100 131 172 194 154 106 67 Gas 8 14 26 49 88 128 150 163 168 148 131 110 Nuclear 0 0 1 4 10 18 28 40 61 83 101 118 Biomass 14 15 22 30 41 53 72 91 124 176 207 213 Other Renewables 2 3 10 18 27 48 90 148 215 298 377 480 Total 49 74 125 190 283 394 514 656 815 932 999 1071 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.6 3.3 4.0 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.8 2.6 3.6 4.9 6.7 8.6 10.1 11.2 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.9 3.1 4.6 6.3 7.9 9.4 10.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 38.8 65.4 100.6 147.5 204.2 269.4 343.0 417.9 485.9 545.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 384 383 382 381 381 380 379 379 378 378 Grasslands 1680 1673 1685 1695 1702 1708 1714 1718 1722 1726 1730 1733 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 42 90 165 240 282 324 333 308 284 Forest 1745 1711 1690 1683 1680 1681 1682 1681 1680 1678 1676 1674 Others 1684 1710 1720 1676 1625 1544 1463 1419 1374 1364 1387 1411 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.76 2.61 3.84 5.09 5.93 6.86 7.63 7.18 6.27 5.53 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.60 0.36 0.25 0.19 0.14 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.03 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.36 2.96 4.09 5.28 6.07 6.98 7.73 7.26 6.32 5.56 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 99 119 141 162 171 165 160 155 131 100 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 18.5 21.1 22.2 21.0 20.6 20.1 20.2 17.7 14.2 10.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 459 526 572 670 785 904 1069 1233 1353 1405 NMVOC Mt 48 55 68 82 90 102 117 124 124 98 78 63 NOx MtN 7 8 11 15 20 25 30 36 38 36 33 30 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. Statistical Table 406 Scenario A1B-MiniCAM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5293 6100 6874 7618 8122 8484 8703 8623 8430 8126 7621 7137 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 38.1 52.8 80.2 117.3 164.4 226.8 294.5 367.3 445.1 530.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 57 71 86 98 103 99 73 54 45 46 47 Liquids 121 126 134 145 144 161 197 238 279 318 364 411 Gas 52 63 72 80 81 81 79 90 101 111 73 36 Electricity 35 53 82 123 199 289 392 511 628 745 856 968 Others 0 0 20 59 99 156 231 272 308 341 280 220 Total 253 300 379 493 622 790 998 1184 1371 1559 1620 1682 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 116 145 174 224 255 265 216 179 156 190 225 Oil 131 136 144 155 141 154 194 244 291 333 387 440 Gas 70 85 137 226 336 437 527 611 678 728 476 224 Nuclear 24 25 33 45 60 73 89 100 112 125 218 311 Biomass 0 5 14 26 55 87 124 148 159 156 187 219 Other Renewables 24 25 28 35 48 97 181 311 448 589 687 785 Total 336 392 500 661 865 1104 1380 1630 1866 2087 2145 2204 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.2 2.5 4.0 6.2 8.6 11.1 13.4 15.4 17.1 18.9 20.8 Oil 0.1 1.5 2.9 4.4 5.8 7.4 9.0 11.4 14.0 17.1 20.8 24.6 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.1 3.8 6.9 10.8 15.4 21.4 27.8 34.7 40.0 45.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 170.3 280.0 417.3 579.7 762.4 956.6 1156.0 1362.1 1559.1 1731.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1472 1467 1472 1489 1472 1429 1361 1210 1054 891 769 646 Grasslands 3209 3349 3604 3974 4359 4663 4885 4731 4480 4134 3872 3609 Energy Biomass 0 6 13 35 103 178 261 296 294 255 313 372 Forest 4173 4215 4141 3952 3606 3309 3060 3318 3704 4217 4435 4654 Others 4310 4133 3935 3715 3625 3585 3596 3608 3632 3667 3775 3884 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.51 10.74 13.45 15.88 18.18 19.11 20.07 21.05 19.45 17.93 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.10 1.59 1.68 1.48 1.01 0.53 0.17 -0.07 -1.02 -1.97 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.60 12.33 15.13 17.35 19.19 19.64 20.24 20.98 18.43 15.96 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 356 406 467 528 573 592 604 608 572 535 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.2 10.6 12.3 13.8 14.4 14.8 15.0 15.3 15.6 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 78.8 80.7 77.3 66.1 47.1 32.2 23.9 22.3 25.7 29.2 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 84 95 NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 407 Scenario A1B-MiniCAM OECD90 Population Million GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. 1105 1112 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 25.6 31.5 34.4 44.7 53.6 63.3 74.4 86.7 102.1 118.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 13 12 9 9 7 5 4 3 3 4 5 Liquids 72 73 70 61 51 30 28 30 32 35 43 51 Gas 27 36 41 40 38 30 25 27 30 33 24 14 Electricity 22 28 33 36 37 40 42 51 63 76 102 128 Others 0 0 16 47 59 98 129 140 151 164 141 117 Total 130 151 172 195 195 205 229 252 279 311 313 315 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 47 45 35 37 42 45 43 38 30 42 54 Oil 76 78 74 64 52 26 22 22 26 35 44 53 Gas 34 47 73 113 120 141 154 169 184 201 143 84 Nuclear 20 16 13 12 11 9 8 9 10 12 26 39 Biomass 0 2 5 10 13 24 33 36 37 37 51 66 Other Renewables 12 11 11 11 11 15 21 32 46 62 82 103 Total 182 201 222 245 245 258 283 310 342 376 388 400 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.4 1.5 2.1 2.6 3.0 3.4 3.8 4.2 4.6 Oil 0.1 0.9 1.6 2.3 2.5 3.1 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.1 4.5 4.9 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.1 2.0 2.6 4.6 6.0 7.7 9.5 11.4 12.9 14.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 67.1 104.7 143.5 181.7 220.0 259.2 299.4 340.7 380.2 415.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 411 410 408 402 378 352 309 268 229 196 163 Grasslands 796 821 866 931 963 1044 1076 1048 1007 953 898 843 Energy Biomass 0 1 9 24 34 67 92 95 93 86 120 154 Forest 921 931 922 894 867 794 760 825 904 996 1028 1059 Others 998 959 916 866 857 840 843 846 851 859 882 904 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.48 3.64 3.58 3.57 3.77 3.95 4.14 4.34 4.00 3.67 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.14 0.27 0.28 0.22 0.11 0.02 -0.07 -0.16 -0.28 -0.40 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.62 3.90 3.86 3.79 3.87 3.97 4.07 4.18 3.72 3.28 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 83 93 98 117 133 150 160 161 167 173 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.5 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 13.1 2.2 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.9 1.5 2.2 3.3 4.5 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 4 0 8 Statistical Table 408 Scenario A1B-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 426 433 434 431 423 408 392 374 357 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.30 0.91 0.94 1.23 1.56 1.77 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.13 0.13 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 9 9 8 8 8 6 4 4 4 4 Liquids 18 12 9 11 12 14 16 19 21 23 23 24 Gas 19 15 13 15 15 15 15 16 17 18 11 5 Electricity 6 8 13 21 33 44 56 68 79 89 94 98 Others 0 0 0 1 1 2 3 4 4 4 3 1 Total 56 44 45 57 70 84 98 112 125 137 134 132 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 19 22 30 34 34 24 18 17 19 22 Oil 20 13 11 13 10 9 12 18 22 24 25 27 Gas 26 20 22 34 47 53 54 58 60 60 36 12 Nuclear 3 4 6 10 11 12 13 13 14 15 23 31 Biomass 0 1 2 3 7 10 12 14 13 12 12 12 Other Renewables 3 3 4 5 7 14 26 41 56 70 75 80 Total 70 58 64 87 111 132 151 169 184 197 191 184 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.5 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.6 1.8 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.2 2.8 3.4 4.0 4.4 4.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.7 33.1 48.1 66.0 85.3 104.4 122.9 141.1 157.0 168.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 294 304 317 322 321 312 273 230 183 158 134 Grasslands 395 410 454 527 609 676 729 684 616 526 488 451 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 4 17 26 31 32 28 20 18 16 Forest 1007 1016 996 945 861 792 738 818 928 1066 1109 1151 Others 691 657 622 584 569 563 567 570 575 582 604 626 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.94 1.23 1.56 1.77 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.13 0.13 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.97 1.31 1.69 1.90 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 49 68 82 96 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.4 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.1 10.1 10.7 9.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 CO MtCO 1.85 1.77 1.73 1.73 1.51 1.31 NMVOC Mt 0.10 0.10 0.09 0.08 -0.13 -0.34 NOx MtN 1.94 1.87 1.83 1.81 1.38 0.97 Statistical Table 409 Scenario A1B-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 790 822 860 893 911 910 899 862 812 749 675 599 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.5 11.7 23.9 40.4 61.3 86.4 112.3 139.1 166.0 195.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 31 45 62 73 78 76 54 40 32 31 31 Liquids 14 19 27 36 47 61 78 93 106 118 130 143 Gas 2 5 8 11 14 16 17 20 23 25 16 7 Electricity 4 11 25 47 90 141 200 254 305 352 382 412 Others 0 0 2 7 14 26 45 55 62 67 52 36 Total 40 67 108 163 238 322 416 476 535 594 611 629 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 45 71 104 133 147 147 110 86 73 81 90 Oil 16 21 29 40 47 61 81 101 116 126 140 154 Gas 3 9 24 49 102 149 192 219 235 241 149 57 Nuclear 1 4 9 17 27 37 47 51 55 60 97 135 Biomass 0 2 5 10 22 35 48 58 61 59 64 70 Other Renewables 3 4 5 8 14 40 85 149 212 275 304 332 Total 49 85 144 227 344 468 600 687 765 833 835 838 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.1 1.9 3.1 4.5 6.0 7.2 8.1 9.0 9.8 10.6 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.8 2.5 3.4 4.5 5.7 7.1 8.5 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.6 1.5 2.8 4.4 6.5 8.8 11.1 12.8 14.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.4 81.5 134.0 201.2 279.3 360.4 439.2 516.5 588.5 651.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 400 410 420 416 405 387 350 312 273 235 198 Grasslands 508 524 555 603 646 681 708 704 691 670 641 612 Energy Biomass 0 0 2 6 28 51 75 85 83 67 73 79 Forest 1168 1144 1102 1041 980 932 896 925 978 1053 1116 1179 Others 664 633 600 565 551 545 547 550 555 562 581 600 Total 2729 2700 2668 2635 2620 2613 2614 2614 2618 2626 2647 2667 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.79 4.16 5.78 7.07 8.03 7.86 7.75 7.70 6.88 6.10 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.27 0.31 0.29 0.22 0.11 0.03 -0.01 -0.16 -0.30 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.99 4.43 6.08 7.36 8.26 7.97 7.78 7.69 6.72 5.80 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 134 146 160 172 180 172 166 163 159 154 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 3.7 4.1 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.9 4.9 5.0 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 37.9 50.0 47.4 38.3 22.7 14.3 9.5 8.2 9.4 10.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 4 1 0 NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 4 6 9 10 11 9 7 7 7 8 Liquids 17 22 29 37 43 56 75 98 120 142 167 193 Gas 5 7 10 13 17 20 22 27 31 35 23 10 Electricity 3 6 11 18 38 64 94 137 182 228 279 330 Others 0 0 1 4 13 30 54 74 91 107 86 65 Total 27 38 55 78 120 179 256 344 432 518 562 606 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 9 13 23 31 39 38 38 37 48 59 Oil 20 23 29 38 44 58 80 104 127 149 177 206 Gas 7 10 17 29 61 93 127 165 198 226 148 71 Nuclear 0 2 4 7 11 16 21 27 32 38 72 105 Biomass 0 1 2 3 10 19 31 41 47 49 60 72 Other Renewables 5 6 8 12 16 28 49 89 134 183 226 269 Total 35 48 71 102 165 246 346 464 576 681 731 781 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.1 1.5 1.8 2.2 2.7 3.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.8 2.5 3.4 4.6 5.9 7.7 9.4 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.8 2.8 4.4 6.2 8.3 9.9 11.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.1 60.7 91.7 130.8 177.9 232.6 294.6 363.9 433.4 496.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 391 363 348 344 338 326 310 278 244 206 179 152 Grasslands 1510 1594 1728 1913 2109 2262 2372 2295 2166 1985 1845 1704 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 1 13 34 64 84 90 82 102 123 Forest 3641 3591 3478 3301 3098 2932 2801 2883 3039 3270 3423 3575 Others 1957 1884 1798 1699 1657 1637 1639 1642 1651 1663 1709 1754 Total 7499 7432 7352 7259 7216 7192 7186 7183 7190 7207 7257 7308 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.30 1.72 2.54 3.47 4.53 5.53 6.45 7.27 7.05 6.84 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.73 0.97 0.97 0.84 0.58 0.30 0.11 0.03 -0.45 -0.93 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.03 2.69 3.51 4.31 5.11 5.83 6.56 7.30 6.60 5.91 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 90 100 125 143 152 163 170 171 147 122 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.7 3.3 3.9 4.2 4.5 4.6 4.8 5.0 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.7 15.4 15.3 15.0 14.5 10.6 8.2 7.4 8.1 8.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 113 125 134 146 160 172 180 172 166 163 159 154 NMVOC Mt 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 3.7 4.1 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.9 4.9 5.0 NOx MtN 17.7 25.3 37.9 50.0 47.4 38.3 22.7 14.3 9.5 8.2 9.4 10.6 Statistical Table 411 Scenario A1C-AIM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6117 6805 7493 8182 8439 8704 8538 8375 8030 7528 7056 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.7 37.9 56.4 89.1 127.2 181.5 235.2 304.7 377.7 447.8 531.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 48 38 34 24 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 36 42 69 113 164 187 209 192 175 160 146 133 Liquids 111 118 149 187 230 274 319 356 393 430 467 505 Gas 51 51 74 87 103 122 141 156 172 189 207 224 Electricity 38 49 74 104 150 229 307 429 551 651 731 810 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 285 309 404 525 670 823 976 1134 1291 1430 1551 1671 Primary Energy EJ Coal 93 112 195 308 474 593 750 820 898 976 1051 1134 Oil 142 155 193 227 244 232 226 193 165 140 118 99 Gas 72 82 112 124 139 161 191 208 230 252 272 294 Nuclear 6 9 15 23 36 52 83 98 118 135 145 155 Biomass 50 48 38 42 55 78 115 147 187 217 228 240 Other Renewables 10 11 13 17 26 44 78 138 249 372 450 546 Total 374 418 565 742 973 1161 1442 1605 1848 2092 2264 2468 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.6 5.1 9.1 13.9 21.3 28.0 36.9 46.7 56.5 68.3 Oil 0.1 1.6 3.4 5.5 7.8 9.9 12.5 14.2 16.2 17.8 19.1 20.4 Gas 0.1 0.8 1.8 3.0 4.3 5.7 7.6 9.4 11.6 14.1 16.7 19.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 181.3 320.8 501.7 716.5 965.4 1242.5 1536.3 1848.7 2181.9 2537.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1437 1487 1546 1579 1534 1454 1378 1276 1182 1079 971 873 Grasslands 3290 3287 3477 3874 4235 4271 4307 4231 4157 4056 3930 3808 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 10 227 320 451 535 635 728 807 894 Forest 4249 4120 3975 3808 3742 3778 3813 3896 3981 4071 4166 4264 Others 3966 4048 3944 3671 3205 3097 2994 2984 2974 2995 3048 3102 Total 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 10.32 14.34 19.28 22.65 26.79 28.47 30.29 32.30 34.48 36.84 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.47 1.78 0.78 0.23 0.12 0.04 -0.03 -0.07 -0.08 -0.09 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 11.79 16.12 20.06 22.88 26.91 28.51 30.26 32.23 34.41 36.75 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 395 479 564 566 568 517 474 442 416 392 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.5 8.2 8.2 8.0 7.8 7.3 6.8 6.5 6.3 6.1 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 99.1 134.2 156.4 133.1 139.0 103.5 82.0 76.3 79.6 83.3 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 1101 1320 1402 1506 1619 1710 1806 1937 2110 2298 NMVOC Mt 139 141 179 220 254 254 256 247 239 221 192 167 NOx MtN 31 32 41 51 59 61 63 61 59 59 61 63 Statistical Table 412 Scenario A1C-AIM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 919 960 1002 1043 1062 1081 1086 1091 1097 1103 1110 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.5 25.3 31.0 38.0 45.3 54.1 64.0 75.7 89.0 103.9 121.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 89.0 103.9 121.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 6 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 10 14 23 31 31 30 26 23 21 19 17 Liquids 64 74 80 87 92 94 96 97 97 102 111 121 Gas 25 31 39 39 37 37 36 36 36 37 39 41 Electricity 22 27 35 42 49 59 68 85 103 118 133 148 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 127 143 168 192 210 220 231 245 259 279 303 327 Primary Energy EJ Coal 41 42 60 79 102 118 137 148 161 176 196 218 Oil 76 79 94 97 87 70 56 44 35 30 27 24 Gas 34 45 54 50 46 45 44 42 41 41 43 46 Nuclear 5 8 11 15 18 20 21 22 23 24 26 28 Biomass 6 6 6 11 22 28 36 42 44 46 46 46 Other Renewables 7 9 12 17 24 38 58 78 91 105 118 133 Total 167 191 237 281 304 323 354 391 426 466 500 539 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.4 1.0 1.7 2.6 3.6 5.0 6.2 7.8 9.6 11.4 Oil 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.8 2.8 3.7 4.4 5.1 5.5 6.0 6.4 6.6 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.9 1.4 1.9 2.3 2.8 3.2 3.6 4.1 4.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 17.8 37.8 108.7 155.0 205.1 258.4 312.9 366.6 420.6 477.3 538.0 595.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 410 404 389 373 389 751 0 1102 897 3140 3140 3140 Grasslands 787 758 751 751 751 751 751 751 751 751 751 751 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 1056 1065 1065 1065 1065 1065 1065 1065 1065 1065 1065 1065 Others 886 912 912 912 912 912 912 912 912 912 912 912 Total 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.89 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.12 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.78 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.5 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 11.5 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 CO MtCO 179 161 186 NMVOC Mt 42 36 39 NOx MtN 13 12 12 91 105 226 251 271 281 304 323 354 391 426 466 1.0 1 0 1.7 2.6 3.6 5.0 6.2 7.8 9.6 11.4 13.6 1.8 0.9 2.8 3.7 4.4 5.1 5.5 6.0 6.4 6.6 6.9 1.8 0.9 1.4 1.9 2.3 2.8 3.2 3.6 4.1 4.5 4.9 7.8 108.7 155.0 205.1 258.4 312.9 366.6 420.6 477.3 538.0 389 751 0 1102 897 3140 3.89 -0.12 3.78 71 2.5 11.5 110 13 14 186 39 12 373 785 0 1131 851 3140 4.44 -0.04 4.40 73 2.7 9.0 108 11 5 213 40 13 345 817 47 1168 762 3140 4.94 -0.09 4.85 76 2.6 10.0 115 9 6 241 39 12 329 825 69 1174 737 3140 5.19 -0.02 5.16 73 2.5 10.9 118 8 7 256 33 10 314 834 100 1179 713 3140 285 812 112 1217 710 3140 5.45 5.42 0.05 -0.01 5.50 5.41 69 68 2.4 12.0 122 9 9 271 29 2.2 12.5 123 10 11 277 21 259 791 124 1257 706 3140 5.39 -0.06 5.33 66 2.0 13.1 123 12 13 284 14 9 227 757 137 1304 709 3140 5.58 -0.10 5.47 65 1.8 13.9 124 13 16 300 11 192 711 149 1360 719 3140 6.00 -0.13 5.86 62 1.7 15.0 125 14 18 329 11 10 163 668 162 1418 729 3140 6.44 -0.16 6.28 60 1.7 16.1 125 16 20 359 10 1 Statistical Table 413 Scenario A1C-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 424 430 435 429 423 406 391 374 356 339 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.5 2.8 5.3 8.1 12.3 15.5 19.4 23.8 28.5 34.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 7 10 14 18 18 19 17 14 12 11 10 Liquids 19 9 8 8 8 10 12 13 14 15 17 18 Gas 19 11 14 14 14 15 16 17 18 19 21 23 Electricity 8 9 11 12 15 22 29 36 43 49 53 57 Others 0 0 0 0 Total 58 40 43 48 55 65 76 82 89 95 102 109 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 16 22 27 39 57 84 98 115 131 145 160 Oil 22 12 10 8 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 0 Gas 26 17 18 17 15 15 15 14 14 14 14 15 Nuclear 1 1 2 3 5 7 9 10 10 10 11 11 Biomass 2 4 0 0 1 3 5 7 8 10 10 11 Other Renewables 1 1 1 2 2 4 10 15 24 32 36 40 Total 70 52 54 57 68 90 125 146 173 198 216 237 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.4 2.2 3.0 4.1 5.3 6.7 8.3 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.5 34.2 47.8 64.4 85.6 110.8 139.2 171.2 207.3 248.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 279 284 297 299 305 293 282 267 253 233 210 189 Grasslands 346 357 401 468 556 571 586 585 584 571 548 525 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 6 11 22 25 29 38 55 80 Forest 960 961 950 950 944 950 955 966 978 993 1010 1028 Others 720 703 658 588 494 477 460 460 460 464 474 483 Total 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.09 1.22 1.45 1.86 2.39 2.69 3.03 3.42 3.88 4.39 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.01 0.02 -0.01 -0.01 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.04 -0.05 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.12 1.23 1.48 1.86 2.38 2.67 3.00 3.39 3.84 4.34 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 50 62 77 80 84 91 99 103 105 106 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 14.7 15.6 16.1 12.7 10.0 9.9 9.7 10.6 12.6 14.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 40 42 46 50 54 57 59 63 68 75 NMVOC Mt 16 13 14 11 11 9 8 7 6 5 5 5 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 414 Statistical Table Scenario A1C-AIM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ASIA Population Million 2798 3261 3556 3851 4147 4183 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.8 12.3 26.3 40.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 24 19 14 4 0 Solids 15 23 40 62 90 103 Liquids 11 15 26 40 55 69 Gas 2 3 6 9 18 25 Electricity 5 7 16 29 54 83 Others 0 0 Total 61 72 106 154 220 283 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 44 85 144 234 275 Oil 17 21 34 46 56 51 Gas 4 6 11 13 23 31 Nuclear 0 0 1 3 7 12 Biomass 28 24 19 16 11 17 Other Renewables 1 2 2 2 3 6 Total 80 98 151 224 334 393 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 2.2 4.1 6.3 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.4 1.8 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 47.3 92.2 158.9 243.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 390 407 433 458 447 422 Grasslands 521 524 547 595 644 650 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 42 61 Forest 527 490 451 416 404 415 Others 576 593 583 546 478 461 Total 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 3.15 4.99 7.65 8.78 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.40 0.46 0.24 0.15 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.55 5.45 7.89 8.93 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 165 211 262 262 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.1 3.2 3.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 47.2 72.2 80.0 39.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 CO MtCO 235 270 389 509 599 663 NMVOC Mt 33 37 54 77 93 97 NOx MtN 7 9 13 19 25 26 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 4220 4016 3822 3541 3194 2882 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 63.1 85.8 116.7 148.3 176.1 209.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 116 107 97 89 81 73 Liquids 84 102 119 135 148 161 Gas 32 41 50 59 67 75 Electricity 113 167 220 264 298 333 Others 0 0 Total 345 416 487 546 594 642 Primary Energy EJ Coal 324 350 379 407 435 465 Oil 47 40 33 28 22 18 Gas 42 54 68 81 91 101 Nuclear 22 31 43 54 58 64 Biomass 27 34 43 50 52 55 Other Renewables 13 30 69 120 159 210 Total 475 538 636 740 818 913 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 9.6 12.6 16.3 20.4 24.5 29.4 Oil 2.4 2.8 3.2 3.5 3.7 4.0 Gas 1.1 1.5 2.2 2.9 3.7 4.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 338.5 443.9 556.7 677.4 806.0 942.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 398 368 340 313 288 265 Grasslands 656 645 633 622 611 600 Energy Biomass 89 108 130 149 163 179 Forest 427 446 466 482 493 505 Others 444 443 442 446 455 465 Total 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 10.08 10.83 11.62 12.41 13.17 13.97 Other CO2 GtC 0.09 0.07 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.09 Total CO2 GtC 10.17 10.89 11.68 12.47 13.24 14.06 CH4 total MtCH4 261 220 184 162 149 137 N2O total MtN2O-N 3.1 2.9 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.5 SOx total MtS 19.2 19.7 20.2 21.1 22.4 23.8 HFC MtC eq. 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 734 777 822 881 956 1036 NMVOC Mt 102 104 105 98 84 71 NOx MtN 26 25 23 23 23 23 Statistical Table 415 Scenario A1C-AIM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1865 2211 2557 2761 2980 3024 3067 3013 2866 2727 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 5.3 10.2 19.5 31.9 52.0 69.3 92.4 116.6 139.4 166.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 18 19 20 20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 2 6 14 25 35 45 43 41 38 35 32 Liquids 7 21 35 52 75 101 127 145 163 179 191 204 Gas 4 7 15 25 34 45 57 62 68 74 80 85 Electricity 4 6 12 21 32 64 97 141 185 220 246 273 Others 0 0 0 0 Total 40 53 87 132 185 255 325 391 457 510 552 594 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 11 28 58 99 143 205 223 243 261 275 291 Oil 27 33 55 75 95 107 120 107 95 82 69 57 Gas 9 14 29 44 55 71 90 98 107 115 124 132 Nuclear 0 0 1 3 6 14 31 36 42 47 50 53 Biomass 14 18 19 25 36 47 61 78 100 116 122 128 Other Renewables 2 2 3 5 8 16 31 55 98 142 164 191 Total 57 78 135 209 300 397 538 598 686 762 803 852 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.5 2.6 4.5 6.3 8.7 11.4 13.9 17.1 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.4 2.3 3.2 4.4 5.3 6.4 7.4 8.1 8.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.7 3.5 4.5 5.7 6.8 7.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 43.7 85.6 140.1 204.0 282.9 374.9 473.7 579.5 691.3 809.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 357 391 803 852 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.5 2.6 4.5 6.3 8.7 11.4 13.9 17.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.4 2.3 3.2 4.4 5.3 6.4 7.4 8.1 8.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.7 3.5 4.5 5.7 6.8 12.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 43.7 85.6 140.1 204.0 282.9 374.9 473.7 579.5 691.3 809.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 357 391 427 449 437 410 384 356 330 305 280 257 Grasslands 1636 1648 1778 2027 2217 2224 2231 2190 2149 2106 2060 2015 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 10 132 178 240 290 351 402 436 473 Forest 1706 1604 1472 1311 1226 1239 1253 1266 1279 1292 1303 1314 Others 1784 1840 1806 1687 1471 1423 1376 1371 1366 1376 1400 1425 Total 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 2.20 3.69 5.24 6.82 8.87 9.53 10.24 10.89 11.44 12.03 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 1.15 1.36 0.61 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.04 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 3.34 5.05 5.85 6.93 8.86 9.53 10.25 10.90 11.47 12.06 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 108 132 148 151 154 139 125 112 99 88 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 22.7 34.4 47.2 67.1 94.8 58.4 36.1 27.7 26.6 25.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 486 556 516 537 560 599 641 693 757 827 NMVOC Mt 48 55 73 92 111 114 117 115 113 106 93 82 NOx MtN 7 8 11 16 19 21 24 24 24 25 26 27 416 Statistical Table Scenario A1C-MESSAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6117 6888 7617 8182 8531 8704 8667 8463 8125 7658 7056 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.8 36.8 57.0 91.3 135.4 187.1 254.1 322.9 393.2 469.6 550.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 25.7 33.4 45.7 67.2 98.7 139.0 186.4 246.8 313.2 382.0 456.6 535.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 38 27 19 16 10 7 5 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 42 56 72 82 89 79 72 68 60 55 44 26 Liquids 111 126 158 200 265 353 461 569 641 672 704 685 Gas 41 47 61 76 95 106 110 118 116 119 104 93 Electricity 35 46 62 93 145 209 292 395 493 588 668 726 Others 8 11 20 34 53 70 89 118 143 164 187 213 Total 275 313 393 501 656 824 1031 1268 1453 1599 1706 1743 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 112 146 194 261 353 463 601 750 872 985 1062 Oil 128 155 172 190 210 209 209 202 170 112 78 56 Gas 71 80 107 149 207 247 283 297 254 207 144 118 Nuclear 7 8 11 21 41 79 127 191 265 348 415 432 Biomass 46 44 52 68 95 133 178 228 287 330 359 376 Other Renewables 8 13 23 37 57 82 117 166 205 234 258 281 Total 352 411 511 659 870 1102 1377 1685 1931 2103 2239 2325 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.0 2.1 3.5 5.5 8.1 11.6 16.2 22.3 29.8 38.5 48.4 Oil 0.0 1.4 3.0 4.7 6.6 8.7 10.8 12.9 14.9 16.6 17.7 18.5 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.5 2.6 4.1 6.2 8.6 11.5 14.4 17.0 19.0 20.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 170.5 274.9 401.9 558.5 747.4 972.8 1231.9 1513.7 1812.7 2127.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1459 1466 1462 1457 1454 1448 1442 1436 1429 1424 1422 1420 Grasslands 3389 3404 3429 3446 3458 3478 3498 3525 3552 3568 3572 3576 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 74 158 288 418 492 566 581 538 495 Forest 4296 4237 4173 4164 4164 4177 4190 4194 4199 4202 4203 4204 Others 3805 3842 3886 3807 3715 3558 3400 3301 3203 3173 3213 3253 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.61 10.97 14.04 17.11 20.64 24.50 27.37 29.05 30.79 32.07 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.04 0.26 0.12 0.05 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 -0.01 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.65 11.23 14.17 17.16 20.62 24.47 27.33 29.03 30.78 32.07 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 365 427 505 552 606 628 639 652 662 672 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.1 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.2 6.2 6.2 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 77.3 102.4 121.0 126.0 120.2 106.2 97.9 79.6 67.0 49.8 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 62 77 94 111 124 134 142 151 CO MtCO 879 877 1005 1165 1415 1805 2277 2758 3217 3547 3772 3766 NMVOC Mt 139 141 166 194 221 259 310 359 393 408 405 373 NOx MtN 31 32 39 48 62 77 94 111 124 134 142 151 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data, a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data), c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run), d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. 32.07 0.00 32.07 672 6.2 49.8 614 115 95 3766 373 151 Statistical Table 417 Scenario A1C-MESSAGE OECD90 Population Million GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 859 919 965 1007 1043 1069 1081 1084 1089 1098 1108 1111 16.4 20.6 25.6 31.6 38.7 46.8 55.7 65.7 77.2 90.8 106.6 124.3 14.1 17.8 22.1 27.4 33.7 40.8 48.6 57.4 67.6 79.7 93.6 109.4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 13 11 7 3 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 66 70 74 74 75 80 87 93 100 98 102 102 109 128 134 135 139 137 134 129 130 127 121 115 99 129 136 144 153 161 175 190 206 224 241 258 11 14 18 24 31 37 43 47 50 55 60 65 124 138 155 164 181 197 220 242 269 285 306 322 38 46 57 69 80 91 97 102 125 144 183 223 72 83 81 72 60 46 39 34 29 20 15 12 33 41 50 60 70 69 75 75 83 75 59 37 6 7 8 10 13 27 41 56 59 64 65 60 6 7 6 7 10 14 20 25 28 33 39 44 4 5 9 12 15 19 26 37 44 48 54 58 159 188 211 228 249 267 299 329 368 383 414 435 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.4 2.1 2.9 3.8 4.9 6.2 7.8 9.6 11.9 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.4 3.1 3.7 4.2 4.6 4.9 5.2 5.4 5.6 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.6 3.3 4.0 4.8 5.6 6.4 7.0 2.8 33.0 67.0 104.2 143.6 184.0 225.0 267.9 315.8 368.8 427.3 493.4 381 380 377 376 375 372 368 364 359 356 356 356 847 841 760 763 771 774 776 787 797 818 839 849 0 0 0 0 0 11 24 44 63 74 86 88 356 847 841 1050 1053 1052 1053 1056 1062 1068 1061 1054 695 695 695 695 695 695 695 695 695 695 695 695 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.57 3.82 4.05 4.04 4.22 4.41 5.10 5.39 6.23 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.02 0.00 -0.02 -0.04 0.00 0.05 0.06 0.04 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.61 3.83 4.05 4.02 4.18 4.41 5.15 5.45 6.27 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 74 76 80 85 92 101 114 126 147 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 14.9 22.7 25.3 20.2 14.0 7.0 8.2 2.1 3.9 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 88 122 123 123 124 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 7 10 11 13 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 6 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 173 167 195 188 222 241 266 267 271 NMVOC Mt 42 36 38 36 33 34 35 38 44 43 39 NOx MtN 13 12 14 15 15 15 16 18 20 22 25 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data a: Land-use 0.05 5.15 14 2.4 8.2 123 12 13 266 44 20 5.39 0.06 5.45 126 2.4 2.1 124 13 16 267 43 22 6.23 0.04 6.27 147 2.4 3.9 125 14 18 279 39 25 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. 355 846 75 1048 705 3029 6.94 0.01 6.95 164 2.4 5.6 125 16 20 281 35 28 418 Statistical Table Scenario A1C-MESSAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 427 433 435 433 423 409 392 374 357 339 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 2.6 4.9 9.4 12.6 16.2 20.0 24.4 29.2 34.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 9 5 3 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 15 10 11 15 19 23 25 25 27 32 34 32 Liquids 14 10 12 16 19 19 18 20 16 10 4 4 Gas 6 5 6 8 14 19 23 27 32 37 42 45 Electricity 7 6 6 8 11 11 13 15 16 15 18 18 Others 98 50 36 38 48 65 73 80 87 91 95 98 Total 18 98 19 13 13 15 21 26 31 37 49 70 104 146 Primary Energy EJ Coal 20 14 13 15 17 19 19 12 9 6 5 4 Oil 27 21 22 30 41 45 47 62 61 48 19 12 Gas 8 1 1 1 1 1 2 5 6 7 7 8 Nuclear 12 8 2 1 1 1 3 4 6 7 10 14 Biomass 15 19 1 1 2 3 5 6 8 10 13 15 17 19 Other Renewables 70 51 51 65 87 101 115 134 149 161 168 208 Total 23 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.9 2.6 3.6 4.9 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.9 2.6 3.6 4.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.9 2.3 3.0 3.6 4.1 4.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.3 33.3 46.3 61.8 78.8 98.0 120.6 146.8 177.1 215.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 268 266 265 265 265 264 263 262 262 261 260 260 Grasslands 341 361 364 366 367 368 370 371 371 372 373 374 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 6 11 16 19 22 23 21 20 Forest 966 950 918 904 894 899 905 909 912 916 922 927 Others 701 698 728 738 745 733 722 715 709 703 700 696 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.90 1.12 1.48 1.70 1.90 2.21 2.52 2.88 3.33 4.44 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.01 0.00 -0.08 -0.15 -0.12 -0.09 -0.07 -0.06 -0.05 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.08 1.13 1.47 1.63 1.75 2.10 2.43 2.81 3.27 4.38 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 43 51 61 61 62 70 74 81 93 121 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 11.3 12.8 14.0 14.3 14.4 12.9 16.9 22.5 20.8 12.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 45 59 82 108 129 150 144 136 134 143 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 19 25 31 36 43 45 44 37 32 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 6 8 9 10 11 12 12 13 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. Statistical Table 419 Scenario A1C-MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3620 3937 4147 4238 4220 4085 3867 3589 3258 2882 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.8 13.5 27.2 44.9 65.3 95.8 126.9 155.5 186.5 218.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 8.3 13.5 22.8 36.2 52.2 70.0 96.8 126.9 155.5 186.5 218.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 16 12 8 5 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 36 53 69 75 62 48 42 39 34 29 19 Liquids 13 23 39 59 93 143 199 259 281 292 295 262 Gas 2 3 6 10 12 18 26 31 34 34 29 23 Electricity 4 7 13 25 47 74 104 145 187 223 249 262 Others 1 3 6 11 18 23 28 37 47 58 67 85 Total 62 88 128 182 249 323 407 513 588 641 668 651 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 48 68 98 135 191 250 315 377 408 425 386 Oil 15 26 40 54 72 81 80 86 62 40 25 17 Gas 3 5 12 20 30 37 41 40 30 21 15 15 Nuclear 0 1 3 8 20 34 54 83 125 159 175 174 Biomass 24 22 27 34 44 58 77 97 116 134 143 142 Other Renewables 1 3 6 10 18 27 37 54 69 80 89 101 Total 74 105 156 226 319 427 538 676 778 842 871 834 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0 0 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.5 3.8 5.7 8.2 11.3 15.3 19.7 24.1 Oil 0 0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.4 2.1 2.9 3.7 4.6 5.2 5.6 5.8 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.2 2.4 2.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.3 78.6 125.2 188.5 269.1 367.5 481.4 604.1 729.9 849.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 438 435 434 433 432 431 431 430 429 428 428 428 Grasslands 608 606 609 611 613 615 617 618 619 621 622 624 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 17 37 68 99 117 134 138 127 117 Forest 535 522 512 524 535 535 535 544 552 556 555 555 Others 583 601 609 579 547 515 483 456 429 421 431 441 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.74 4.03 5.54 7.28 8.87 10.80 12.13 12.59 12.70 11.28 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.22 -0.13 -0.12 -0.04 0.03 -0.03 -0.09 -0.10 -0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.96 3.90 5.42 7.23 8.90 10.76 12.03 12.50 12.66 11.30 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 152 186 231 252 275 274 283 278 277 260 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 33.9 47.1 60.9 69.5 66.1 60.7 49.5 33.7 22.4 14.9 HFC MtC eq 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 235 270 348 463 621 855 1131 1414 1647 1821 1930 1778 NMVOC Mt 33 37 49 66 80 101 128 157 180 193 197 168 NOx MtN 7 9 12 17 24 32 40 48 52 56 60 58 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. 420 Statistical Table Scenario A1C-MESSAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ALM 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1875 2241 2557 2791 2980 3089 3115 3064 2934 2727 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 4.4 9.8 20.0 34.3 53.5 76.5 98.7 122.5 147.2 173.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) 2791 2980 3089 3115 3064 2934 2727 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 19 27 44 98 200 343 535 765 987 1225 1472 1731 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 38 51 75 133 228 367 553 765 987 1225 1472 1731 Final Energy EJ Non commercial 14 10 7 8 5 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 15 19 27 41 60 84 102 121 105 100 75 37 Liquids 17 23 34 53 78 107 150 193 233 251 274 289 Gas 4 6 10 15 24 31 32 38 37 48 50 51 Electricity 3 5 8 16 31 56 90 133 168 204 236 262 Others 0 2 4 8 12 18 26 36 47 55 60 64 Total 39 51 72 106 161 231 325 426 505 578 634 672 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 7 12 24 46 86 147 199 249 273 307 321 Oil 21 31 39 50 60 63 71 70 71 47 34 23 Gas 8 10 13 23 39 66 97 120 121 81 63 52 Nuclear 0 0 0 2 7 15 27 46 73 118 166 191 Biomass 14 14 18 26 38 56 75 99 133 150 162 171 Other Renewables 2 4 7 12 19 30 46 65 79 92 99 102 Total 49 67 94 141 214 307 425 547 636 718 786 849 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 3 5 10 17 28 Oil 4 1 5 7 10 15 21 27 34 41 48 53 Gas 0 0 0 1 2 5 8 15 25 36 48 56 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 14 17 8 37 0 58 8 86 7 124 2 174 5 239 4 314 1 394 1 478 4 568 6 Carbon Sequestration GtC 371 385 384 383 382 381 381 380 379 379 378 378 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1680 1673 1685 1695 1702 1708 1714 1718 1722 1726 1730 1733 Grasslands 0 0 0 42 90 165 240 282 324 333 308 284 Energy Biomass 1745 1711 1690 1683 1680 1681 1682 1681 1680 1678 1676 1674 Forest 1684 1710 1720 1676 1625 1544 1463 1419 1374 1364 1387 1411 Others 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Total 945 126 07 139 196 30 26 1564 138 52 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0 72 1 01 1 40 2 01 2 97 3 22 4 09 4 28 5 65 7 20 7 72 8 28 Other CO2 GtC 0 73 0 82 0 60 0 36 0 25 0 19 0 14 0 12 0 10 0 08 0 06 0 03 Total CO2 GtC 1 45 1 83 2 00 2 37 3 22 4 28 5 78 7 20 7 82 8 28 8 59 9 42 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 97 114 134 155 178 184 167 145 139 126 N2O total MtN2O-N 1 2 1 3 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 0 7 SOx total MtS 10 5 12 8 14 1 16 7 19 1 19 1 18 2 16 8 15 5 13 9 12 6 HFC MtC eq 0 2 1 5 3 9 7 9 14 19 19 22 22 23 24 PFC MtC eq 4 4 5 9 8 1 9 4 11 1 13 9 16 8 19 6 21 0 22 6 23 8 SF6 MtC eq 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 54 65 74 81 88 CO MtCO 396 404 438 476 550 654 798 953 1160 1323 1437 1564 NMVOC Mt 48 55 65 73 83 94 111 120 124 128 132 138 NOx MtN 7 8 10 12 14 16 19 22 25 28 32 37 Emissions correlated to land use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data a Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run b CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data) c CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run) d Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run e Non energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run 9 42 0 03 945 126 07 139 196 30 26 1564 138 52 Statistical Table 421 Scenario A1C-MiniCAM World Population Million 5293 6100 6874 7618 8122 8484 8703 8623 8430 8126 7621 7137 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 38.1 52.7 79.7 116.4 162.8 224.0 290.2 361.5 437.8 521.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 57 73 94 118 140 162 129 105 89 80 72 Liquids 121 126 137 157 170 205 260 301 338 370 388 405 Gas 52 63 77 96 92 85 76 76 77 80 68 57 Electricity 35 54 86 134 209 299 402 509 608 698 763 829 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 298 374 480 589 729 899 1015 1127 1236 1300 1363 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 116 152 199 353 543 769 805 821 818 888 958 Oil 131 135 146 163 125 94 68 75 83 93 63 34 Gas 70 85 125 190 216 231 238 251 263 274 215 157 Nuclear 24 25 34 49 82 110 133 154 175 196 204 212 Biomass 0 6 12 19 35 54 78 123 159 186 209 232 Other Renewables 24 24 27 32 44 66 99 160 220 281 338 395 Total 336 391 496 653 854 1098 1384 1567 1721 1847 1918 1988 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.2 2.6 4.2 7.5 12.1 18.2 26.2 34.3 42.5 51.2 60.0 Oil 0.1 1.5 2.9 4.4 5.7 6.8 7.7 8.4 9.2 10.1 10.8 11.5 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.0 3.5 5.6 7.8 10.1 12.6 15.2 17.8 20.1 22.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 170.6 281.6 425.0 608.1 837.3 1095.5 1360.0 1625.5 1888.2 2148.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1472 1466 1473 1494 1477 1432 1359 1194 1038 891 776 661 Land Use Million ha Cropland 3209 3348 3601 3968 4357 4657 4869 4662 4402 4090 3855 3619 Grasslands 0 4 10 20 58 115 190 340 445 505 575 646 Energy Biomass 4173 4214 4140 3951 3623 3348 3126 3385 3693 4049 4192 4336 Forest 4310 4132 3939 3732 3650 3613 3620 3583 3586 3630 3767 3903 Others 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.58 10.99 14.54 19.10 24.45 25.66 26.42 26.72 27.13 27.70 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.08 1.55 1.60 1.38 0.92 0.61 0.22 -0.27 -1.04 -1.81 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.66 12.54 16.14 20.48 25.37 26.27 26.64 26.46 26.09 25.89 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 359 414 482 563 636 651 663 672 682 693 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.3 10.9 12.7 14.4 14.8 15.1 15.3 15.8 16.2 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 81.1 87.8 97.5 92.3 72.1 48.1 33.7 28.9 27.9 26.9 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 422 Statistical Table Scenario A1C-MiniCAM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 838 908 965 1007 1024 1066 1081 1084 1090 1098 1105 1112 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 25.5 31.5 34.3 44.4 53.1 62.6 73.3 85.3 100.4 116.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 14 14 15 17 19 16 13 12 12 12 Liquids 72 73 74 74 69 62 68 70 74 78 82 86 Gas 27 36 45 54 50 40 33 31 31 32 28 24 Electricity 22 28 37 48 54 71 85 95 106 118 130 141 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 150 170 189 187 190 205 212 224 239 251 263 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 47 49 47 59 98 130 163 203 248 344 441 Oil 76 78 77 75 61 25 11 5 3 2 2 1 Gas 34 47 67 94 92 83 76 73 72 72 51 31 Nuclear 20 16 14 16 17 19 19 21 23 27 30 32 Biomass 0 2 4 5 6 10 14 20 26 30 35 40 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 11 13 16 23 31 39 50 61 Total 182 200 222 247 244 249 266 306 357 417 512 607 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.8 3.0 4.1 5.6 7.5 9.6 12.9 16.1 Oil 0.1 Nuclear 20 16 14 16 17 19 19 21 23 27 30 32 Biomass 0 2 4 5 6 10 14 20 26 30 35 40 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 11 13 16 23 31 39 50 61 Total 182 200 222 247 244 249 266 306 357 417 512 607 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.8 3.0 4.1 5.6 7.5 9.6 12.9 16.1 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.6 2.4 2.6 3.3 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.6 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.1 1.8 2.3 3.6 4.4 5.1 5.8 6.6 7.1 7.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 67.4 106.3 147.8 191.6 239.7 292.3 348.9 410.3 480.1 562.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 410 412 414 408 383 Grasslands 796 820 866 934 967 1050 Energy Biomass 0 4 7 10 16 37 Forest 921 931 921 894 869 806 Others 998 959 917 872 863 847 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.55 3.86 3.93 4.39 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.13 0.25 0.25 0.18 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.69 4.11 4.18 4.57 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 84 97 104 126 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.7 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 14.0 4.8 4.0 3.9 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 357 310 269 233 203 174 1084 1043 996 945 901 857 53 83 105 119 138 157 779 845 910 972 995 1018 850 842 843 854 885 917 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 4.99 5.39 5.93 6.60 7.88 9.29 0.08 0.05 -0.04 -0.20 -0.31 -0.43 5.07 5.44 5.88 6.39 7.57 8.86 145 159 178 201 236 270 4.0 4.0 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.2 4.1 4.3 4.8 5.3 5.8 122 123 123 124 125 125 9 10 12 13 14 16 9 11 13 16 18 20 Statistical Table 423 Scenario A1C-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 426 433 434 431 423 408 392 374 357 340 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.1 3.5 5.0 6.9 9.9 13.4 17.4 21.4 25.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 9 9 10 11 11 9 7 6 5 5 Liquids 18 12 9 10 11 13 14 16 17 18 18 18 Gas 19 15 13 15 15 13 11 11 10 10 8 6 Electricity 6 8 13 21 30 39 48 57 64 71 73 76 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 44 44 55 65 75 85 92 99 105 105 104 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 20 25 68 127 201 175 196 264 228 192 Oil 20 13 11 12 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Gas 26 20 21 30 33 32 28 29 28 27 21 14 Nuclear 3 4 6 10 14 16 17 18 19 20 19 19 Biomass 0 1 1 2 5 7 10 16 20 23 25 27 Other Renewables 3 3 3 4 6 8 11 17 23 29 33 38 Total 70 58 63 84 129 190 267 254 286 362 326 290 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 1.2 2.2 3.7 5.5 7.5 9.7 12.0 14.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.7 2.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.7 33.1 50.1 75.8 111.6 151.1 190.0 234.3 279.1 316.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 294 304 316 320 315 303 263 224 186 162 138 Grasslands 395 410 453 525 604 666 710 655 593 524 491 458 Energy Biomass 0 0 2 5 16 29 44 70 86 91 97 102 Forest 1007 1016 996 945 864 800 752 827 912 1005 1031 1057 Others 691 657 622 586 573 567 569 562 563 571 597 622 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.94 1.23 1.97 2.91 4.05 3.67 3.93 4.84 4.20 3.60 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.12 0.12 0.09 0.09 0.07 0.02 -0.12 -0.26 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.97 1.31 2.09 3.03 4.14 3.76 4.01 4.87 4.08 3.34 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 49 69 94 123 154 141 149 178 160 143 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.6 1.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.4 10.9 14.4 14.6 11.4 6.0 2.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 Statistical Table 425 Scenario A1C-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3226 3608 3937 4115 4210 4219 4062 3852 3589 3245 2919 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.5 11.7 23.7 40.0 60.5 85.0 110.3 136.4 162.6 191.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 31 46 64 81 97 110 86 68 56 49 42 Liquids 14 19 27 37 49 66 88 102 113 122 124 127 Gas 2 5 9 13 13 14 14 15 15 16 13 11 Electricity 4 11 25 47 82 123 170 215 255 288 308 328 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 66 107 160 226 300 381 418 451 482 495 509 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 45 73 111 177 252 336 362 313 191 193 195 Oil 16 21 29 39 33 27 21 24 28 35 18 2 Gas 3 9 21 40 55 67 78 82 87 92 74 55 Nuclear 1 4 9 17 32 47 62 70 78 84 85 86 Biomass 0 2 5 9 17 26 35 51 64 73 80 86 Other Renewables 3 4 5 6 11 22 37 64 90 115 136 157 Total 49 85 142 223 327 442 568 653 661 590 586 581 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.1 1.9 3.6 5.8 8.5 12.1 15.3 18.0 20.0 21.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.7 2.9 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 1.0 1.6 2.4 3.2 4.0 4.9 5.7 6.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.5 81.8 136.0 209.6 303.9 410.9 516.5 609.1 690.1 766.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 400 410 420 418 409 392 346 303 263 229 195 Grasslands 508 524 555 602 648 685 714 704 687 662 632 603 Energy Biomass 0 0 2 5 18 32 49 79 99 109 126 143 Forest 1168 1144 1102 1043 986 942 910 936 976 1032 1079 1127 Others 664 632 600 568 555 550 553 547 548 556 579 601 Total 2729 2699 2669 2637 2625 2618 2618 2612 2613 2622 2645 2668 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.80 4.20 6.06 8.09 10.29 10.80 10.15 8.36 8.01 7.68 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.27 0.29 0.27 0.20 0.12 0.04 -0.03 -0.15 -0.27 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.00 4.47 6.36 8.36 10.49 10.92 10.19 8.33 7.87 7.41 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 135 148 164 183 206 217 197 145 147 149 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 3.8 4.3 4.8 4.8 4.9 4.9 5.0 5.1 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 38.8 52.8 57.3 50.9 33.6 21.4 14.0 11.3 10.4 9.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 Statistical Table 425 Scenario A1C-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1541 1876 2241 2531 2778 2980 3068 3096 3064 2913 2766 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.6 7.4 15.4 27.0 42.3 66.5 93.2 122.4 153.4 188.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 5 7 11 16 21 18 16 15 14 13 Liquids 17 22 28 36 46 64 90 113 134 153 164 175 Gas 5 7 10 14 17 19 18 19 20 22 19 16 Electricity 3 6 11 18 38 65 99 141 182 221 252 283 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 38 54 75 113 164 228 293 353 410 449 487 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 10 15 37 66 102 105 109 116 123 129 Oil 20 23 29 37 41 41 37 46 52 57 43 30 Gas 18 19 20 22 19 16 Electricity 3 6 11 18 38 65 99 141 182 221 252 283 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 38 54 75 113 164 228 293 353 410 449 487 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 10 15 37 66 102 105 109 116 123 129 Oil 20 23 29 37 41 41 37 46 52 57 43 30 Gas 7 10 16 26 39 49 57 67 76 84 70 56 Nuclear 0 2 5 7 17 26 35 45 55 65 70 76 Biomass 0 1 1 3 6 11 19 35 49 60 70 79 Other Renewables 5 6 8 11 16 23 34 55 76 98 119 140 Total 35 48 69 99 156 218 284 353 418 479 510 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.9 3.0 4.0 5.1 6.4 7.6 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.4 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.4 3.1 3.9 4.6 5.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.0 60.3 91.1 131.2 182.1 241.2 304.7 371.8 439.0 503.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 391 363 348 344 337 324 307 275 243 209 182 154 Grasslands 1510 1594 1727 1907 2105 2256 2361 2260 2126 1960 1830 1701 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 2 16 44 108 155 185 215 244 Forest 3641 3591 3480 3307 3114 2957 2834 2900 3020 3192 3321 3450 Others 1957 1883 1800 1707 1668 1649 1649 1631 1631 1649 1706 1762 Total 7499 7432 7354 7265 7226 7202 7195 7175 7175 7195 7254 7312 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.29 1.70 2.57 3.71 5.11 5.80 6.40 6.92 7.03 7.14 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.72 0.95 0.93 0.80 0.55 0.35 0.15 -0.06 -0.46 -0.86 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.01 2.65 3.51 4.51 5.67 6.15 6.55 6.87 6.57 6.28 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 90 101 121 131 132 134 139 147 139 130 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.7 3.4 4.0 4.3 4.6 4.7 5.0 5.2 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.9 16.2 18.8 19.9 19.8 13.6 9.6 7.9 7.2 6.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 Statistical Table 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 5262 6117 6805 7493 8182 8439 8704 8538 8375 8030 7528 7056 20.9 26.6 37.9 56.6 89.7 128.2 183.4 237.8 308.4 382.3 453.3 537.3 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 48 37 35 26 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 36 34 47 65 83 88 93 83 74 66 57 48 Liquids 111 124 159 206 273 342 412 477 543 589 616 643 Gas 51 60 86 115 150 204 258 303 348 379 396 413 Electricity 38 50 71 98 142 220 299 381 464 523 560 596 Others 0 0 0 0 285 315 400 519 674 868 1061 1245 Total 1429 1556 1628 1700 Scenario A1G-AIM World Population Million 5262 6117 6805 7493 8182 8439 8704 8538 8375 8030 7528 7056 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.6 37.9 56.6 89.7 128.2 183.4 237.8 308.4 382.3 453.3 537.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 93 101 140 179 218 212 143 167 221 290 385 472 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 48 37 35 26 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 36 34 47 65 83 88 93 83 74 66 57 48 Liquids 111 124 159 206 273 342 412 477 543 589 616 643 Gas 51 60 86 115 150 204 258 303 348 379 396 413 Electricity 38 50 71 98 142 220 299 381 464 523 560 596 Others 0 0 0 0 285 315 400 519 674 868 1061 1245 Total 376 435 573 752 993 1237 1429 1556 1628 1700 Primary Energy EJ Coal 73 99 146 206 285 397 376 435 573 752 993 1237 Oil 6 10 15 26 45 69 93 101 140 179 218 212 Gas 50 48 38 34 35 50 73 99 146 206 285 397 Nuclear 10 11 13 16 24 37 50 48 38 34 35 50 Biomass 10 11 13 16 24 37 93 101 140 179 218 212 Other Renewables 376 435 573 752 993 1237 Total 376 435 573 752 993 1237 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.0 2.3 3.8 5.8 7.7 Oil 0.1 1.7 3.6 6.2 9.6 13.5 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.2 3.9 6.4 9.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 177.9 307.7 472.1 669.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1437 1487 1546 1580 1554 1469 Land Use Million ha Cropland 3290 3287 3474 3874 4315 4328 Grasslands 0 0 0 2 68 154 Energy Biomass 4249 4120 3979 3816 3767 3812 Forest 3966 4048 3944 3671 3238 3120 Others 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 Total 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 9.67 13.09 17.49 21.11 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.45 1.78 0.52 0.33 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 11.11 14.87 18.01 21.44 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 393 470 541 525 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.4 7.9 7.8 7.6 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 87.4 100.9 91.4 69.3 HFC/PFC/HFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 CO MtCO 879 877 1226 1552 1747 2008 NMVOC Mt 139 141 181 230 269 273 NOx MtN 31 32 40 49 52 50 Statistical Table 4.2.7 Scenario A1G-AIM OECD90 Population Million 859 919 960 1002 1043 1062 1081 1086 1091 1097 1103 1110 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.4 25.2 31.1 38.3 45.7 54.7 64.7 76.7 90.1 105.2 122.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 6 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 10 9 9 9 10 9 9 8 7 6 6 5 Solids 64 75 79 85 91 97 104 107 111 115 120 125 Liquids 25 34 39 43 47 53 59 65 71 76 80 83 Gas 22 28 32 36 42 49 57 67 77 86 96 105 Electricity 0 0 0 0 127 147 159 173 189 209 229 248 Others 266 284 301 318 41 42 43 39 33 34 35 32 29 28 27 27 Primary Energy EJ Coal 76 92 98 106 112 121 131 127 124 125 130 136 Oil 34 51 60 68 75 90 108 120 134 147 158 170 Gas 5 7 10 14 19 20 20 23 26 30 34 38 Nuclear 6 1 0 0 2 6 14 24 40 53 55 57 Biomass 6 6 7 8 10 12 14 20 27 35 40 46 Other Renewables 6 6 7 8 10 12 14 20 27 35 40 46 Total 167 199 216 233 251 282 322 346 380 416 443 473 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.5 3.8 Oil 0.1 0.9 1.9 2.9 4.0 5.0 6.4 7.5 8.8 10.1 11.4 12.8 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.2 5.2 6.5 8.0 9.4 11.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.5 100.6 139.4 182.6 232.5 286.1 340.0 394.3 449.3 505.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 410 404 389 373 350 336 321 286 255 227 202 180 Grasslands 787 758 750 783 834 843 852 817 783 754 728 703 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 7 20 56 78 108 132 142 152 Forest 1056 1065 1103 1133 1176 1183 1190 1231 1274 1312 1344 1378 Others 886 912 897 850 772 746 721 716 711 712 720 728 Total 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.42 3.78 4.14 4.68 5.30 5.39 5.48 5.56 5.62 5.68 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.12 -0.05 -0.12 -0.05 0.04 -0.02 -0.07 -0.10 -0.08 -0.07 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.30 3.73 4.02 4.63 5.34 5.37 5.41 5.46 5.54 5.61 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 71 71 63 56 51 47 43 41 38 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.8 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.1 1.9 1.8 1.8 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 9.9 6.9 6.4 6.3 6.2 5.9 5.6 5.3 4.9 4.6 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 175 191 213 231 250 260 270 286 307 330 NMVOC Mt 42 36 37 39 39 34 30 25 21 18 17 16 NOx MtN 13 12 12 12 9 7 6 6 6 5 5 5 Statistical Table Scenario A1G-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 424 430 435 429 423 406 391 374 356 339 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.5 2.9 5.3 8.2 12.5 15.7 19.8 24.2 29.0 34.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 5 Scenario A1G-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 424 430 435 429 423 406 391 374 356 339 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.5 2.9 5.3 8.2 12.5 15.7 19.8 24.2 29.0 34.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 4 4 5 6 6 6 5 4 3 3 2 Liquids 19 11 11 11 13 14 16 17 18 20 21 22 Gas 19 14 20 23 27 37 46 49 52 53 53 53 Electricity 8 9 11 13 16 20 25 27 29 30 30 30 Others 0 0 0 0 Total 58 43 47 53 61 77 92 97 102 105 106 106 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 12 14 14 14 14 15 13 11 9 8 7 Oil 22 16 17 16 18 20 23 22 22 22 23 24 Gas 26 22 30 35 41 52 65 69 73 75 76 76 Nuclear 1 1 2 4 5 7 9 10 10 10 11 11 Biomass 2 4 0 0 1 1 3 6 9 12 13 13 Other Renewables 1 1 1 2 2 3 5 7 9 11 12 13 Total 71 57 64 71 80 98 121 126 135 141 142 144 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.2 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.9 1.2 1.7 2.3 2.9 3.6 4.4 5.1 5.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.3 33.4 45.4 59.2 75.5 92.9 109.5 125.5 141.3 157.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 279 284 296 298 298 287 276 260 245 225 202 181 Grasslands 346 357 400 466 551 563 575 565 555 540 521 502 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 7 15 31 38 46 46 38 31 Forest 960 961 951 952 951 957 963 984 1007 1034 1068 1103 Others 720 703 658 588 497 478 460 455 450 456 471 487 Total 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.06 1.14 1.26 1.50 1.79 1.74 1.69 1.67 1.67 1.68 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 -0.01 -0.02 -0.04 -0.06 -0.08 -0.10 -0.12 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.09 1.14 1.26 1.49 1.78 1.70 1.63 1.58 1.57 1.56 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 60 66 68 59 51 49 47 44 42 39 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 12.2 10.8 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 42 45 50 55 61 64 67 71 76 80 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 13 13 14 15 15 16 16 16 16 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 Statistical Table 429 Scenario A1G-AIM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ASIA Population Million 2798 3261 3556 3851 4147 4183 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.8 12.3 26.3 40.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 23 19 15 4 0 Solids 15 19 32 45 59 63 Liquids 11 15 30 49 77 100 Gas 2 4 9 16 27 42 Electricity 5 7 15 27 46 76 Others 0 0 Total 61 68 105 153 213 283 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 38 68 99 128 117 Oil 17 24 45 74 114 144 Gas 4 8 18 35 61 97 Nuclear 0 1 2 5 13 23 Biomass 28 24 19 14 7 11 Other Renewables 1 2 2 3 5 10 Total 80 96 154 230 327 403 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.7 2.9 3.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.6 1.2 2.1 3.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 46.7 89.0 147.1 218.4 Land Use Million ha Cropland 390 407 433 457 459 429 Grasslands 521 524 547 593 643 647 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 2 21 41 Forest 527 490 452 417 410 423 Others 576 593 583 545 482 463 Total 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 3.04 4.56 6.45 7.53 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.40 0.45 0.17 0.11 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.44 5.02 6.62 7.64 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 156 200 248 246 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.0 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 42.2 54.5 45.9 20.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 CO MtCO 235 270 487 676 836 977 NMVOC Mt 33 37 55 79 96 100 NOx MtN 7 9 13 17 20 20 4220 4016 3822 3541 3194 2882 63.4 86.3 117.5 149.4 177.4 210.6 0 0 0 0 0 0 66 60 54 48 42 35 124 155 187 210 224 238 56 75 94 108 119 129 106 143 180 208 227 246 0 0 352 433 514 574 611 648 107 100 94 86 78 70 182 199 217 233 245 257 156 196 247 289 313 340 43 54 66 78 86 95 17 29 48 64 66 68 20 34 56 78 90 103 525 611 729 827 877 933 5.2 6.1 7.1 8.1 8.9 9.7 5.1 6.7 8.8 11.2 13.4 16.2 3.1 4.7 7.0 9.7 12.6 16.2 300.9 394.0 496.5 607.6 724.2 844.6 401 363 327 302 284 268 650 631 613 601 597 592 81 116 166 198 200 201 436 451 467 478 485 492 445 438 431 434 448 462 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 8.79 9.69 10.69 11.39 11.74 12.09 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.08 0.11 0.14 8.86 9.76 10.75 11.47 11.85 12.23 244 202 166 144 130 118 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.5 2.4 8.5 8.0 7.5 7.1 6.7 6.3 224 292 292 285 275 262 35 39 43 46 48 46 50 55 48 35 33 37 1139 1251 1373 1502 1637 1783 105 111 117 109 89 71 19 18 17 15 14 13 430 Statistical Table Scenario A1G-AIM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1865 2211 2557 2761 2980 3024 3067 3013 2866 2727 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 5.3 10.3 19.8 32.3 52.8 70.4 93.9 118.6 141.7 169.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 19 18 20 22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 2 3 6 9 10 12 11 10 8 7 6 Liquids 17 22 39 60 93 131 169 198 227 244 251 258 Gas 4 9 18 33 49 73 96 114 132 142 145 147 Electricity 4 6 12 21 39 75 111 144 178 199 208 216 Others 0 0 0 0 Total 40 57 90 140 211 299 388 467 546 594 611 628 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 8 16 27 44 47 50 48 46 44 42 40 Oil 27 35 62 94 142 187 247 252 257 260 261 262 Gas 9 18 38 68 108 158 231 273 323 356 363 371 Nuclear 0 0 1 3 8 19 44 54 65 74 78 82 Biomass 14 18 19 20 26 32 40 67 112 148 152 157 Other Renewables 2 2 3 4 7 12 22 35 57 76 83 92 Total 57 82 138 217 334 455 634 729 861 957 980 1004 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.7 2.1 2.6 3.1 3.5 4.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.6 2.8 4.3 6.7 8.7 11.4 14.1 16.6 19.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.4 1.0 1.8 3.1 5.2 7.4 10.5 13.9 17.3 21.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 43.4 84.7 140.2 209.2 295.8 395.3 501.0 611.7 724.5 837.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 357 391 427 451 446 417 390 357 327 298 271 246 Grasslands 1636 1648 1776 2032 2287 2275 2264 2171 2081 2019 1981 1944 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 33 77 180 269 402 501 520 539 Forest 1706 1604 1474 1313 1230 1249 1269 1285 1302 1315 1327 1338 Others 1784 1840 1806 1687 1487 1433 1380 1361 1341 1348 1382 1416 Total 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 2.15 3.61 5.64 7.40 9.70 10.29 10.92 11.26 11.30 11.35 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 1.14 1.37 0.47 0.28 -0.05 -0.04 -0.03 -0.01 0.00 0.04 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 3.29 4.98 6.11 7.68 9.65 10.25 10.89 11.25 11.31 11.39 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 106 134 155 157 160 148 136 122 107 93 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 20.3 25.7 28.7 35.7 44.2 28.0 17.8 13.7 12.8 12.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 1.3 1.5 1.8 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 20.3 25.7 28.7 35.7 44.2 28.0 17.8 13.7 12.8 12.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 522 640 649 745 857 971 1101 1227 1344 1472 NMVOC Mt 48 55 75 99 121 125 130 132 134 125 106 89 NOx MtN 7 8 12 17 20 21 21 21 21 21 21 21 Statistical Table 431 Scenario A1G-MESSAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6117 6888 7617 8182 8531 8704 8667 8463 8125 7658 7056 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.8 36.8 57.0 91.3 135.4 187.1 254.1 322.9 393.2 469.6 550.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 25.7 33.4 45.7 67.2 98.7 139.0 186.4 246.8 313.2 382.0 456.6 535.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 38 25 20 16 10 7 5 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 42 57 67 75 84 88 74 47 39 25 5 3 Liquids 111 125 157 190 241 292 374 453 491 525 525 510 Gas 41 47 62 76 100 132 161 215 235 253 284 300 Electricity 35 46 64 101 161 242 344 464 573 668 749 800 Others 8 11 18 29 45 55 67 86 106 124 143 152 Total 275 311 387 487 640 815 1024 1265 1444 1595 1705 1765 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 104 130 167 220 266 272 261 259 214 153 84 Oil 128 155 172 194 235 279 365 451 479 506 461 391 Gas 71 85 119 164 236 328 449 649 796 916 1089 1239 Nuclear 7 8 11 17 30 54 90 128 169 225 282 332 Biomass 46 44 54 76 107 145 193 243 311 381 409 414 Other Renewables 8 13 23 38 61 91 125 165 203 237 264 277 Total 352 409 509 657 889 1163 1495 1898 2217 2479 2658 2737 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 2.0 3.3 4.9 7.1 9.8 12.5 15.1 17.7 19.9 21.4 Oil 0.0 1.4 3.0 4.7 6.7 9.0 11.8 15.4 20.0 24.7 29.8 34.4 Gas 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.8 4.4 6.8 10.1 14.6 21.1 29.0 38.2 49.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 170.0 272.2 397.4 556.1 751.2 988.8 1264.4 1562.3 1870.7 2178.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland 1459 1466 1462 1457 1454 1448 1442 1436 1429 1424 1422 1420 Grasslands 3389 3404 3429 3446 3458 3478 3498 3525 3552 3568 3572 3576 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 74 158 288 418 492 566 581 538 495 Forest 4296 4237 4173 4164 4164 4177 4190 4194 4199 4202 4203 4204 Others 3805 3842 3886 3807 3715 3558 3400 3301 3203 3173 3213 3253 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 5.99 6.90 8.49 10.66 14.00 17.56 21.45 26.11 29.08 30.58 31.14 30.31 Other CO2 c GtC 1.11 1.07 1.04 0.26 0.12 0.05 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 -0.01 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.54 10.91 14.12 17.61 21.42 26.08 29.04 30.55 31.13 30.31 CH4 total d MtCH4 310 323 363 419 496 538 566 555 531 497 474 436 N2O total e MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.1 6.1 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.2 6.2 6.2 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 64.3 60.3 63.9 71.9 69.0 59.1 51.2 45.7 43.1 40.5 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 986 1123 1344 1616 2026 2399 2717 3033 3199 3261 NMVOC Mt 139 141 160 178 200 237 297 370 416 459 474 484 NOx MtN 31 32 38 46 59 72 89 108 118 124 129 133 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. 432 Statistical Table Scenario A1G-MESSAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 OECD90 Population Million 859 919 965 1007 1043 1069 1081 1084 1089 1098 1108 1110 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.6 25.6 31.6 38.7 46.8 55.7 65.7 77.2 90.8 106.6 124.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 17.8 22.1 27.4 33.7 40.8 48.6 57.4 67.6 79.7 93.6 109.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 11 6 3 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 69 77 75 73 71 79 86 87 94 100 105 Gas 22 28 33 34 38 41 38 33 30 25 22 18 Electricity 22 28 35 45 58 73 89 106 124 139 153 165 Others 1 1 3 5 8 10 12 16 23 27 31 32 Total 124 138 153 162 178 195 218 241 264 284 305 321 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 38 45 52 57 55 40 26 20 19 17 15 Oil 72 84 83 75 67 64 76 80 82 91 99 99 Gas 33 45 55 66 78 87 101 118 140 139 156 162 Nuclear 6 7 8 10 15 26 41 53 59 68 68 74 Biomass 6 7 7 13 19 24 29 32 36 40 43 47 Other Renewables 4 5 9 12 16 22 28 35 44 49 54 57 Total 159 186 206 227 252 278 315 345 381 406 437 453 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.3 2.9 3.3 3.7 4.0 4.2 4.4 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.5 3.2 3.9 4.5 5.3 6.1 6.9 7.8 8.8 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.0 2.8 3.7 4.7 5.9 7.3 8.7 10.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.6 102.6 140.2 178.6 217.3 256.6 297.5 340.3 385.3 431.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland 381 380 377 376 375 372 368 364 359 356 356 355 Grasslands 760 763 771 774 776 787 797 818 839 849 847 846 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 11 24 44 63 74 86 88 81 75 Forest 1050 1053 1052 1053 1056 1062 1068 1061 1054 1050 1049 1048 Others 838 833 828 814 798 765 733 712 691 685 695 705 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 2.83 3.20 3.49 3.67 3.84 3.87 3.93 3.96 4.17 4.28 4.61 4.58 Other CO2 c GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.02 0.00 -0.02 -0.04 0.00 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.52 3.69 3.84 3.84 3.89 3.97 4.22 4.34 4.65 4.59 CH4 total d MtCH4 73 74 73 73 77 81 79 75 73 66 62 56 N2O total e MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 8.9 1.7 0.8 0.5 0.8 1.5 2.1 3.4 4.9 5.8 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 15 17 18 CO MtCO 179 161 172 176 173 184 205 214 217 228 236 234 NMVOC Mt 42 36 37 35 30 29 31 33 36 39 43 44 NOx MtN 13 12 13 14 14 14 13 13 14 15 17 18 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. Statistical Table 433 Scenario A1G-MESSAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 REF 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 427 433 435 433 423 409 392 374 357 339 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.0 2.1 5.4 9.4 12.6 16.2 20.0 24.4 29.2 34.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 2.2 2.5 3.7 6.0 9.4 12.6 16.2 20.0 24.4 29.2 34.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 4 3 3 3 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 10 10 12 16 16 22 28 29 28 27 28 Gas 14 10 12 16 19 20 16 12 9 8 7 5 Electricity 6 5 6 9 15 21 27 33 38 42 46 49 Others 7 6 6 8 12 14 13 Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 4 3 3 3 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 10 10 12 16 16 22 28 29 28 27 28 Gas 14 10 12 16 19 20 16 12 9 8 7 5 Electricity 6 5 6 9 15 21 27 33 38 42 46 49 Others 7 6 6 8 12 14 13 14 15 16 16 16 Total 50 35 38 47 64 71 79 86 90 94 97 97 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 13 10 14 20 23 22 25 23 21 21 20 Oil 20 14 13 13 16 16 19 27 30 32 23 19 Gas 27 21 25 29 36 38 40 45 49 60 71 92 Nuclear 1 1 1 1 2 4 7 11 16 20 25 24 Biomass 2 1 1 3 6 10 14 17 28 32 33 33 Other Renewables 1 1 2 3 5 7 9 12 16 19 21 23 Total 70 51 51 63 85 98 112 138 162 183 193 211 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.3 12.3 22.0 32.3 44.2 57.9 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.1 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.7 2.0 2.2 1.8 2.2 2.6 3.1 3.7 4.4 71.8 87.4 105.3 124.5 144.4 165.2 Land Use Million ha Cropland 268 266 265 265 265 264 263 262 262 261 260 Grasslands 341 361 364 366 367 368 370 371 371 372 373 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 6 11 16 19 22 23 21 Forest 966 950 918 904 894 899 905 909 912 916 922 Others 701 698 728 738 745 733 722 715 709 703 700 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 1.30 0.91 0.85 1.02 1.35 1.46 1.54 1.86 1.94 2.06 2.05 Other CO2 c GtC 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.01 0.00 -0.08 -0.15 -0.12 -0.09 -0.07 -0.06 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.03 1.03 1.34 1.39 1.39 1.74 1.85 1.99 1.98 CH4 total d MtCH4 47 39 42 50 59 59 53 52 51 51 51 N2O total e MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.2 4.8 3.9 4.5 4.1 4.2 3.3 3.3 3.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 CO MtCO 69 41 46 52 82 97 110 115 118 110 99 NMVOC Mt 16 13 16 20 26 32 38 55 78 96 93 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 5 6 6 6 6 5 4 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. 260 374 20 927 696 2276 2.24 -0.05 2.19 50 0.6 3.3 31 24 11 81 99 5 434 Statistical Table Scenario A1G-MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3620 3937 4147 4238 4220 4085 3867 3589 3258 2882 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.8 13.5 27.2 44.9 65.3 95.8 126.9 155.5 186.5 218.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 8.3 13.5 22.8 36.2 52.2 70.0 96.8 126.9 155.5 186.5 218.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 15 11 8 5 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 37 52 63 71 74 56 37 28 17 3 2 Liquids 13 22 37 55 83 116 162 188 201 213 211 198 Gas 2 3 6 10 17 29 43 87 105 111 117 119 Electricity 4 7 14 27 48 79 118 167 212 253 285 298 Others 1 2 6 10 16 17 22 31 38 43 52 59 Total 62 87 125 174 239 318 404 510 585 638 668 676 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 48 67 90 124 165 176 163 145 116 79 42 Oil 15 26 38 55 79 108 152 170 169 172 139 103 Gas 3 5 15 29 49 77 116 212 287 332 381 429 Nuclear 0 1 2 4 8 14 23 36 56 87 121 143 Biomass 24 22 28 37 47 59 80 109 127 142 151 153 Other Renewables 1 3 5 12 21 30 42 56 69 81 91 96 Total 74 105 156 226 327 453 588 746 853 929 962 965 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.4 3.6 5.3 7.0 8.6 10.0 11.2 12.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.2 3.3 4.8 6.5 8.2 9.9 11.3 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.8 2.9 5.0 7.9 11.2 15.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 8.9 23.3 44.3 78.0 124.8 191.0 277.7 381.2 496.0 615.6 733.8 845.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 435 434 433 432 431 431 430 429 428 428 428 Grasslands 608 606 609 611 613 615 617 618 619 621 622 624 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 17 37 68 99 117 134 138 127 117 Forest 535 522 512 524 535 535 535 544 552 556 555 555 Others 583 601 609 579 547 515 483 456 429 421 431 441 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 1.15 1.78 2.73 3.94 5.65 7.77 9.58 11.13 11.96 12.16 11.61 10.70 Other CO2 c GtC 0.37 0.26 0.22 -0.13 -0.12 -0.04 0.03 -0.03 -0.09 -0.10 -0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.95 3.81 5.54 7.72 9.60 11.09 11.87 12.07 11.57 10.71 CH4 total d MtCH4 113 125 151 182 226 242 254 238 216 198 183 162 N2O total e MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.5 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 31.2 36.0 40.5 47.4 42.2 31.7 24.2 19.7 17.1 15.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 235 270 345 425 554 701 928 1103 1227 1318 1390 1372 NMVOC Mt 33 37 46 54 63 77 107 130 144 155 155 150 NOx MtN 7 9 12 16 23 31 40 49 53 55 54 54 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. Statistical Table 435 Scenario A1G-MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1875 2241 2557 2791 2980 3089 3115 3064 2934 2727 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 4.4 9.8 20.0 34.3 53.5 76.5 98.7 122.5 147.2 173.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 3.8 5.1 7.5 13.3 22.8 36.7 55.3 76.5 98.7 122.5 147.2 173.1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 10 9 8 5 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 5 6 6 9 13 17 10 11 8 2 1 Liquids 17 24 33 49 70 90 111 151 174 190 186 179 Gas 4 6 11 16 26 43 63 83 91 109 138 159 Electricity 3 5 9 19 40 68 110 158 199 234 266 288 Others 0 2 3 6 9 14 20 26 31 38 45 46 Total 39 51 71 104 159 231 324 428 506 579 635 672 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 5 8 12 19 23 35 47 71 59 36 8 Oil 21 31 39 51 72 91 119 175 197 212 199 170 Gas 8 14 24 41 73 126 192 273 321 385 482 555 Nuclear 0 0 1 2 6 11 18 27 38 51 68 92 Biomass 14 14 17 24 36 53 70 86 121 168 183 182 Other Renewables 2 4 7 12 21 32 47 62 75 88 98 102 Total 49 67 96 142 225 335 481 670 822 961 1065 1109 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.5 2.1 2.6 2.9 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.2 3.1 4.3 6.0 8.0 10.1 12.1 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.6 2.9 4.8 7.5 10.7 14.5 19.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.1 59.2 88.2 128.5 184.5 263.6 365.5 481.8 607.3 736.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 384 383 382 381 381 380 379 379 378 378 Grasslands 1680 1673 1685 1695 1702 1708 1714 1718 1722 1726 1730 1733 Energy Biomass 1.5 2.2 3.1 4.3 6.0 8.0 10.1 12.1 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.6 2.9 4.8 7.5 10.7 14.5 19.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.1 59.2 88.2 128.5 184.5 263.6 365.5 481.8 607.3 736.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use – Million ha Cropland 371 385 384 383 382 381 381 380 379 379 378 378 Grasslands 1680 1673 1685 1695 1702 1708 1714 1718 1722 1726 1730 1733 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 42 90 165 240 282 324 333 308 284 Forest 1745 1711 1690 1683 1680 1681 1682 1681 1680 1678 1676 1674 Others 1684 1710 1720 1676 1625 1544 1463 1419 1374 1364 1387 1411 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.43 2.03 3.15 4.47 6.41 9.16 11.01 12.07 12.88 12.78 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.60 0.36 0.25 0.19 0.14 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.03 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.03 2.39 3.40 4.66 6.54 9.28 11.11 12.15 12.93 12.82 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 98 114 134 155 180 190 192 181 179 168 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.0 14.7 15.8 16.5 18.8 18.6 18.7 16.4 14.9 13.3 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 423 469 535 634 782 967 1154 1378 1473 1573 NMVOC Mt 48 55 61 70 82 98 122 152 159 169 184 191 NOx MtN 7 8 9 12 17 22 30 40 45 49 53 56 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-A1 marker run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A1 marker run. Statistical Table Illustrative Scenario A1FI-MiniCAM, World previously A1G-MiniCAM Population Million 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 5293 6100 6874 7618 8122 8484 8703 8623 8430 8126 7621 7137 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 38.1 52.8 80.0 117.1 164.0 226.1 293.3 365.7 441.6 525.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 57 73 94 118 140 158 128 108 99 89 79 Liquids 121 126 141 165 182 229 306 366 423 476 455 435 Gas 52 63 81 105 126 141 150 182 212 242 232 223 Electricity 35 54 86 133 207 301 413 525 630 728 782 837 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 300 381 497 634 810 1027 1201 1373 1546 1559 1572 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 115 150 193 299 393 475 448 432 429 518 607 Oil 131 136 150 173 165 202 283 353 416 471 359 248 Gas 70 85 129 203 268 333 398 494 573 634 606 578 Nuclear 24 26 35 51 79 108 137 155 177 201 217 233 Biomass 0 6 12 18 28 40 52 73 85 89 106 123 Other Renewables 24 24 27 32 42 60 86 128 169 208 246 284 Total 336 392 503 669 882 1135 1431 1650 1850 2032 2052 2073 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.2 2.6 4.2 7.0 10.4 14.6 19.1 23.6 27.9 32.9 37.9 Oil 0.1 1.5 2.9 4.5 6.2 8.1 10.4 13.8 17.7 22.0 25.8 29.6 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.1 3.6 6.1 9.2 12.7 17.4 22.8 28.7 34.8 40.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 171.0 283.3 427.9 608.7 828.0 1075.9 1340.8 1620.6 1906.1 2189.4 Carbon Sequestration Land Use Million ha Cropland 1472 1466 1474 1495 1481 1439 1369 1208 1053 903 786 669 Grasslands 3209 3348 3602 3970 4367 4681 4911 4730 4478 4155 3918 3682 Energy Biomass 0 4 9 16 30 47 68 115 130 116 162 208 Forest 4173 4214 4140 3951 3625 3362 3162 3471 3838 4265 4432 4598 Others 4310 4132 3940 3733 3662 3636 3655 3641 3664 3725 3867 4008 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.65 11.19 14.61 18.66 23.10 25.14 27.12 29.04 29.64 30.32 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.08 1.55 1.57 1.31 0.80 0.55 0.16 -0.36 -1.22 -2.08 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.73 12.73 16.19 19.97 23.90 25.69 27.28 28.68 28.42 28.24 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 359 416 489 567 630 655 677 695 715 735 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.3 10.9 12.8 14.5 15.0 15.4 15.7 16.1 16.6 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 80.8 86.9 96.1 94.0 80.5 56.3 42.6 39.4 39.8 40.1 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 1020 1204 1436 1726 2159 2270 2483 2776 2685 2570 NMVOC Mt 139 141 166 192 214 256 322 361 405 449 435 420 NOx MtN 31 32 40 50 63 77 95 102 109 115 111 110 Statistical Table Illustrative Scenario A1FI-MiniCAM, OECD90 previously A1G-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 838 908 965 1007 1024 1066 1081 1084 1090 1098 1105 1112 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 25.6 31.5 34.4 44.6 53.5 63.2 74.2 86.4 101.4 117.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 13 14 14 14 15 17 13 12 12 12 12 Liquids 72 73 75 77 73 70 81 87 94 102 97 93 Gas 27 36 47 59 60 62 62 70 80 91 90 89 Electricity 22 28 37 48 53 70 85 95 105 116 126 137 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 151 173 197 199 217 245 265 290 320 325 330 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 47 48 45 51 70 82 86 93 104 167 231 Oil 76 78 79 79 71 59 70 71 72 74 34 -6 Gas 34 47 69 100 103 112 116 131 146 160 158 157 Nuclear 20 16 14 16 17 18 18 19 22 25 29 33 Biomass 0 2 4 5 5 7 9 11 13 13 17 20 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 10 12 14 18 23 28 35 42 Total 182 201 225 254 257 279 310 336 368 404 440 476 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.4 1.7 2.6 3.4 4.2 5.1 6.1 7.6 9.2 Oil 0.1 0.9 1.6 2.4 2.8 3.7 4.3 5.1 5.8 6.5 6.9 7.3 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.1 1.9 2.4 4.0 5.2 6.4 7.8 9.3 10.9 12.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 67.5 107.1 149.4 193.9 242.3 294.5 349.7 408.5 472.7 544.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 410 412 414 409 385 358 312 272 238 207 177 Grasslands 796 820 866 935 970 1058 1094 1058 1013 962 918 873 Energy Biomass 0 4 6 8 10 18 24 34 38 36 50 63 Forest 921 931 921 894 869 809 787 864 938 1011 1039 1067 Others 998 959 917 872 865 853 858 856 861 876 909 942 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.58 3.95 4.03 4.46 5.02 5.34 5.76 6.30 7.14 8.02 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.13 0.25 0.24 0.16 0.05 0.02 -0.07 -0.24 -0.35 -0.47 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.72 4.19 4.27 4.63 5.07 5.36 5.69 6.06 6.78 7.55 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 86 101 108 131 149 172 196 223 246 270 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.7 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.2 4.3 4.4 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 13.9 4.7 4.0 4.2 5.1 5.2 5.7 6.5 7.3 8.0 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 181 199 187 211 250 269 274 304 307 319 NMVOC Mt 42 36 39 39 32 33 37 41 45 52 55 60 NOx MtN 13 12 14 16 15 16 16 16 18 20 23 24 187 211 250 269 274 304 307 319 NMVOC Mt 42 36 39 39 32 33 37 41 45 52 55 60 NOx MtN 13 12 14 16 15 16 16 16 18 20 23 24 Statistical Table 4.38 Illustrative Scenario A1FI-MiniCAM, REF previously A1G-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 426 433 434 431 395 410 454 526 608 673 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.1 3.5 5.1 6.9 10.0 13.6 17.7 21.6 26.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 9 9 9 10 11 8 7 6 5 5 Liquids 18 12 9 11 12 14 17 19 21 22 21 19 Gas 19 15 14 17 20 22 22 26 29 32 28 25 Electricity 6 8 13 21 29 38 48 58 66 73 73 74 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 44 45 57 70 84 97 110 122 133 127 122 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 19 24 46 60 68 60 53 45 61 77 Oil 20 14 11 13 6 3 5 10 15 22 19 15 Gas 26 20 22 33 41 47 50 59 65 69 61 54 Nuclear 3 4 6 10 13 16 17 18 19 20 20 20 Biomass 0 1 1 2 3 5 6 8 9 9 10 11 Other Renewables 3 3 3 4 5 7 10 14 18 21 24 27 Total 70 58 63 85 115 138 156 168 178 186 195 205 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.1 2.8 3.3 3.8 4.4 5.0 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.1 1.6 2.0 2.6 3.2 3.9 4.5 5.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.7 33.2 49.2 70.0 94.2 120.1 146.4 172.3 197.7 222.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0 0 1 4 8 13 18 25 25 19 23 27 Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 294 304 316 320 316 303 263 223 183 159 135 Grasslands 395 410 454 526 608 673 719 666 601 525 492 458 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 4 8 13 18 25 25 19 23 27 Forest 1007 1016 996 945 865 804 762 850 950 1061 1088 1115 Others 691 657 622 587 575 571 575 573 578 590 616 642 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.94 1.24 1.76 2.17 2.47 2.53 2.54 2.53 2.66 2.79 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.12 0.12 0.07 0.10 0.09 0.03 -0.14 -0.32 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.97 1.32 1.88 2.29 2.55 2.63 2.63 2.56 2.52 2.48 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 49 68 91 109 122 123 122 120 120 121 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.6 1.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.3 10.5 13.3 13.4 10.7 5.8 3.1 2.4 2.5 2.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 49 63 103 136 166 151 151 130 120 89 NMVOC Mt 16 13 17 24 32 45 57 72 100 114 113 110 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 7 8 9 8 7 6 5 5 Statistical Table 4.39 Illustrative Scenario A1FI-MiniCAM, ASIA previously A1G-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3226 3608 3937 4115 4210 4219 4062 3852 3589 3245 2919 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.5 11.7 23.8 40.3 61.0 86.0 111.7 138.3 164.3 192.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 31 46 64 84 99 111 88 73 66 57 48 Liquids 14 19 28 39 53 74 103 123 141 156 146 136 Gas 2 5 9 15 20 24 29 37 43 49 46 42 Electricity 4 11 25 47 84 129 182 232 276 314 328 343 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 67 109 165 240 327 424 480 533 584 576 569 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 45 73 110 165 212 251 221 200 188 194 200 Oil 16 21 30 42 48 66 97 126 148 165 136 107 Gas 3 9 22 43 71 103 137 174 200 216 200 183 Nuclear 1 4 9 18 33 49 67 74 82 91 94 98 Biomass 0 2 5 9 15 20 26 35 41 42 48 54 Other Renewables 3 4 5 6 11 20 33 52 71 88 102 116 Total 49 85 145 228 342 470 611 682 742 790 774 758 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.1 1.9 3.4 5.3 7.6 9.8 12.0 13.9 15.8 17.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.7 3.9 5.2 6.8 8.2 9.6 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 1.2 2.1 3.2 4.9 6.7 8.8 10.8 12.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.6 82.4 137.4 211.6 305.0 409.2 515.3 623.3 728.8 827.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 400 410 420 422 416 403 358 316 275 238 202 Grasslands 508 524 555 602 650 690 721 712 695 669 640 610 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 4 8 13 19 33 37 32 44 55 Forest 1168 1144 1102 1044 988 948 922 960 1016 1088 1144 1199 Others 664 632 600 568 557 555 559 557 562 573 596 620 Total 2729 2699 2669 2637 2627 2622 2624 2621 2625 2637 2662 2686 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.82 4.27 6.17 8.12 10.13 10.42 10.68 10.93 10.42 9.92 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.27 0.29 0.26 0.17 0.10 0.03 -0.05 -0.19 -0.33 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.02 4.54 6.46 8.38 10.30 10.52 10.71 10.88 10.23 9.59 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 135 148 166 186 208 198 189 179 181 182 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 3.8 4.3 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 38.8 52.7 57.1 51.9 37.0 24.3 17.0 15.1 14.6 14.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 235 270 371 494 639 777 1030 1067 1133 1226 1242 1187 NMVOC Mt 33 37 50 63 73 86 119 126 133 144 139 130 NOx MtN 7 9 13 19 26 34 44 47 48 51 49 47 Statistical Table 4.40 Illustrative Scenario A1FI-MiniCAM, ALM previously A1G-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1541 1876 2241 2531 2778 2980 3068 3096 3064 2913 2766 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.6 7.4 15.4 27.1 42.5 66.9 93.9 123.4 154.2 188.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 5 7 11 15 20 17 16 16 15 14 Liquids 17 22 29 38 49 71 105 138 168 197 192 187 Gas 5 7 10 15 25 32 38 49 60 71 69 66 Electricity 3 6 11 18 37 63 98 141 184 225 254 283 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 38 55 78 121 182 261 346 428 509 530 551 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 10 14 31 50 73 80 87 92 95 99 Oil 20 23 30 39 49 73 111 147 180 210 171 132 Gas 7 10 17 27 49 72 95 131 162 189 187 185 Nuclear 0 2 5 7 16 25 35 44 54 65 73 81 Biomass 0 1 1 2 5 8 12 18 22 25 31 38 Other Renewables 5 6 8 11 15 21 29 44 58 71 85 99 Total 35 48 70 102 165 249 355 464 563 652 643 634 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.3 3.2 4.0 5.0 5.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 2.0 2.8 4.2 5.9 7.8 9.5 11.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.5 2.3 3.5 5.0 6.7 8.6 10.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.1 60.6 91.9 133.2 186.4 252.2 329.4 416.5 506.9 594.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 391 363 348 344 335 322 305 274 242 208 181 154 Grasslands 1510 1594 1727 1907 2104 2260 2376 2294 2168 1998 1869 1740 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 2 6 23 31 29 46 63 Forest 3641 3591 3480 3307 3118 2968 2857 2949 3100 3309 3451 3593 Others 1957 1883 1800 1707 1672 1637 1662 1655 1663 1688 1746 1805 Total 7499 7432 7354 7265 7229 7210 7206 7196 7204 7232 7293 7355 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. 46 63 Forest 3641 3591 3480 3307 3118 2968 2857 2949 3100 3309 3451 3593 Others 1957 1883 1800 1707 1672 1637 1662 1655 1663 1688 1746 1805 Total 7499 7432 7354 7265 7229 7210 7206 7196 7204 7232 7293 7355 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.30 1.73 2.66 3.91 5.48 6.86 8.13 9.27 9.43 9.58 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.72 0.95 0.92 0.77 0.50 0.32 0.12 -0.09 -0.53 -0.96 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.02 2.68 3.58 4.68 5.98 7.18 8.25 9.18 8.90 8.62 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 90 100 124 141 150 162 170 173 168 162 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.7 3.4 4.1 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.3 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.9 16.1 18.6 21.5 24.7 17.9 13.8 12.4 12.4 12.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 420 448 506 601 714 783 925 1117 1016 975 NMVOC Mt 48 55 60 66 76 91 110 121 127 138 128 119 NOx MtN 7 8 9 11 15 19 25 30 35 38 35 33 Statistical Table 441 Scenario A1T-AIM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6117 6805 7493 8182 8439 8704 8538 8375 8030 7528 7056 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.6 37.7 56.3 89.2 127.4 182.0 235.8 305.5 378.2 447.3 529.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 48 34 27 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 36 36 46 59 76 76 76 58 45 35 29 24 Liquids 111 118 130 148 177 205 239 260 283 299 305 311 Gas 51 58 84 113 146 167 191 200 210 219 227 235 Electricity 38 48 63 82 115 180 282 370 484 573 614 657 Others Total 285 307 356 430 532 647 787 901 1032 1128 1176 1226 Primary Energy EJ Coal 93 89 116 142 174 159 146 112 86 68 57 48 Oil 143 158 176 186 183 168 158 141 126 116 110 104 Gas 73 99 142 190 244 284 336 344 355 366 378 390 Nuclear 6 11 17 27 43 68 116 114 111 110 111 112 Biomass 50 48 38 47 81 120 179 215 258 289 302 315 Other Renewables 10 11 14 20 34 70 151 249 409 550 603 663 Total 376 416 502 611 758 868 1086 1174 1345 1500 1561 1632 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.0 2.0 3.3 4.9 6.3 8.1 9.1 10.2 11.1 11.7 12.4 Oil 0.1 1.6 3.3 5.1 7.0 8.5 10.4 11.6 13.0 14.3 15.4 16.6 Gas 0.1 1.0 2.2 3.8 6.0 8.4 11.8 14.7 18.3 22.1 25.7 29.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 171.3 278.0 396.3 515.4 630.1 738.9 839.5 934.0 1025.3 1113.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1437 1486 1548 1573 1533 1434 1341 1251 1167 1076 981 895 Grasslands 3290 3289 3481 3846 4193 4145 4098 4062 4027 3964 3875 3788 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 66 328 494 745 813 888 949 993 1039 Forest 4249 4122 3965 3801 3709 3786 3864 3898 3932 3980 4042 4106 Others 3966 4046 3948 3655 3179 3033 2894 2908 2922 2966 3039 3114 Total 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 12942 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.37 9.79 11.28 11.32 11.43 10.49 9.66 9.14 8.85 8.58 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.44 1.73 0.87 0.34 -0.15 0.00 -0.03 0.15 0.12 0.08 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.81 11.52 12.15 11.67 11.28 10.49 9.63 9.29 8.97 8.66 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 393 466 528 509 492 442 397 358 323 291 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.4 7.8 7.6 7.1 6.7 6.2 5.7 5.4 5.1 4.8 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 87.4 100.9 91.5 69.3 64.3 46.9 35.7 30.7 29.0 27.4 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 1030 1160 1161 1202 1244 1294 1347 1402 1460 1520 NMVOC Mt 139 141 163 188 213 209 206 195 186 167 138 114 NOx MtN 31 32 40 49 52 50 49 47 45 43 41 40 442 Statistical Table Scenario A1T-AIM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 919 960 1002 1043 1062 1081 1086 1091 1097 1103 1110 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.4 25.2 31.0 38.1 45.5 54.3 64.2 76.0 89.3 104.0 121.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 6 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 10 10 10 10 9 8 6 5 4 3 2 Liquids 64 72 68 69 70 71 72 72 72 73 75 76 Gas 25 32 38 44 47 45 43 40 38 36 36 35 Electricity 22 27 30 33 37 46 58 72 90 105 115 126 Others Total 127 142 146 156 165 173 181 194 207 219 229 239 Primary Energy EJ Coal 41 36 35 31 27 26 24 18 13 10 8 7 Oil 76 87 82 80 68 52 40 31 24 22 22 23 Gas 34 51 59 65 68 68 67 62 58 55 54 52 Nuclear 5 8 11 14 18 20 22 21 20 19 20 20 Biomass 6 1 0 3 11 19 34 41 49 55 58 60 Other Renewables 6 6 7 9 13 21 32 50 77 102 114 128 Total 167 189 194 203 205 205 220 223 242 264 276 291 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.6 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 Oil 0.1 0.9 1.7 2.6 3.3 3.8 4.4 4.7 5.0 5.2 5.5 5.7 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.6 2.3 2.9 3.7 4.2 4.8 5.4 6.0 6.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 64.3 94.6 123.2 149.5 173.8 195.6 214.1 230.2 245.0 258.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 410 402 394 377 353 327 302 281 261 237 208 183 Grasslands 787 762 764 792 827 813 799 794 790 775 750 727 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 19 67 102 156 165 174 182 189 195 Forest 1056 1066 1079 1099 1127 1156 1185 1196 1208 1229 1261 1294 Others 886 910 903 853 765 731 697 702 706 715 727 740 Total 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 3140 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.14 3.05 2.82 2.61 2.41 2.04 1.72 1.55 1.48 1.41 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.07 -0.05 -0.09 -0.08 -0.07 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 -0.04 -0.07 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.06 3.00 2.72 2.53 2.34 2.01 1.70 1.52 1.44 1.34 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 72 71 70 61 53 50 47 44 41 39 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.2 2.0 1.9 1.7 1.5 1.4 1.3 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 9.9 6.9 6.4 6.3 6.2 5.9 5.6 5.3 4.9 4.6 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 170 178 192 199 206 210 215 222 234 245 NMVOC Mt 42 36 34 33 31 26 21 14 8 5 4 3 NOx MtN 13 12 12 12 9 7 6 6 6 5 5 5 Statistical Table 443 Scenario A1T-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 424 430 435 429 423 406 391 374 356 339 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.5 2.9 5.3 8.1 12.4 15.6 19.6 24.0 28.6 34.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 4 4 5 5 5 4 3 2 2 2 0 Liquids 19 10 8 7 7 8 9 9 10 10 11 11 Gas 19 13 18 20 22 25 28 26 24 22 21 20 Electricity 8 9 10 11 12 18 26 31 37 40 40 39 Others Total 58 40 39 42 46 56 67 70 74 75 73 72 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 8 8 9 10 10 10 7 5 4 4 4 Oil 22 13 10 8 7 7 7 6 5 5 4 4 Gas 26 22 27 29 30 32 34 31 27 26 25 25 Nuclear 1 2 3 4 5 7 10 9 8 8 9 10 Biomass 2 4 0 1 3 5 8 10 12 13 13 14 Other Renewables 1 1 1 2 2 6 14 21 31 37 34 32 Total 71 51 50 52 57 66 83 83 89 93 91 90 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.7 2.0 2.3 2.6 8 10 12 13 13 14 Other Renewables 1 1 1 2 2 6 14 21 31 37 34 32 Total 71 51 50 52 57 66 83 83 89 93 91 90 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.7 2.0 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.6 30.9 40.3 49.7 58.9 67.4 74.4 80.4 86.2 92.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 279 284 295 299 308 300 292 273 255 235 215 196 Grasslands 346 356 398 462 550 565 581 577 574 566 553 541 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 6 11 24 30 38 46 52 59 Forest 960 961 954 960 953 958 963 974 985 997 1009 1021 Others 720 703 657 585 488 466 445 448 451 459 473 488 Total 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 2305 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.92 0.93 0.92 0.93 0.94 0.78 0.66 0.61 0.61 0.60 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.02 -0.01 0.03 0.00 -0.01 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.94 0.92 0.95 0.93 0.93 0.76 0.63 0.58 0.58 0.58 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 59 65 68 59 51 49 48 45 43 41 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 12.2 10.8 7.5 4.3 2.4 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 39 40 43 46 49 50 51 52 54 55 NMVOC Mt 16 13 13 11 10 10 9 7 6 5 4 4 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 444 Statistical Table Scenario A1T-AIM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3556 3851 4147 4183 4220 4016 3822 3541 3194 2882 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.7 12.2 26.2 40.6 62.9 85.5 116.4 147.7 174.9 207.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 24 17 11 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 15 20 29 39 53 52 51 39 31 24 20 16 Liquids 11 16 23 29 41 49 59 67 77 83 83 83 Gas 2 4 8 16 29 36 45 53 63 73 82 91 Electricity 5 7 13 22 40 67 111 148 197 236 254 272 Others Total 61 70 91 118 166 210 265 315 373 417 439 462 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 38 58 79 108 92 79 62 48 38 31 25 Oil 17 24 35 40 44 37 32 28 25 22 20 18 Gas 4 9 18 33 58 76 99 111 125 138 151 165 Nuclear 0 1 3 5 13 25 47 47 46 46 45 45 Biomass 28 24 19 17 17 26 41 49 59 66 69 73 Other Renewables 1 2 2 4 9 23 58 98 166 227 251 278 Total 80 97 135 178 250 281 357 395 469 537 568 604 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.5 2.5 3.3 4.3 4.9 5.5 6.0 6.3 6.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.1 3.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 3.4 4.6 6.0 7.4 9.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.4 78.4 121.3 167.9 212.4 255.0 295.8 334.9 372.5 409.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 390 408 432 448 432 401 372 349 328 307 286 267 Grasslands 521 523 546 584 620 618 615 611 606 599 589 580 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 21 88 123 172 189 209 224 233 242 Forest 527 490 453 420 406 419 432 437 442 448 456 464 Others 576 593 582 540 469 446 423 426 428 435 448 462 Total 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 2014 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.59 3.36 4.51 4.40 4.29 4.06 3.85 3.69 3.57 3.45 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.39 0.44 0.27 0.14 0.07 0.10 0.13 0.14 0.13 0.13 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.98 3.81 4.78 4.54 4.36 4.16 3.99 3.83 3.70 3.58 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 156 196 238 235 233 197 167 146 131 118 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.9 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.1 2.0 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 42.2 54.5 45.9 20.0 8.5 8.0 7.5 7.1 6.7 6.3 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 235 270 342 397 421 444 468 484 500 512 522 532 NMVOC Mt 33 37 48 61 73 73 73 74 76 68 55 43 NOx MtN 7 9 13 17 20 20 19 18 17 15 14 13 Statistical Table 445 Scenario A1T-AIM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1865 2211 2557 2761 2980 3024 3067 3013 2866 2727 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 5.3 10.3 19.6 32.1 52.4 69.8 93.0 117.2 139.8 166.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 18 17 16 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 2 3 5 9 10 12 9 7 6 5 4 Liquids 17 21 31 43 59 76 99 111 124 133 137 141 Gas 4 8 19 33 48 60 75 80 84 87 88 89 Electricity 4 6 11 17 26 47 87 118 159 191 205 220 Others Total 40 55 80 115 156 206 274 321 377 417 435 454 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 7 14 22 29 31 33 26 20 16 14 12 Oil 27 34 48 58 63 71 79 75 72 67 63 59 Gas 9 18 38 64 88 109 135 140 145 147 148 148 Nuclear 0 0 1 3 6 15 37 37 37 37 36 36 Biomass 14 18 19 27 50 69 96 115 138 154 161 168 Other Renewables 2 2 3 5 9 21 47 80 135 184 203 225 Total 57 80 124 179 246 316 427 472 545 606 625 648 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.3 1.9 2.5 3.3 4.0 4.7 5.5 6.1 6.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.9 1.7 2.6 3.9 5.1 6.6 8.1 9.5 12.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 41.1 74.1 111.5 148.3 184.9 220.9 255.2 288.5 321.5 353.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 357 392 426 449 441 406 374 348 323 297 272 248 Grasslands 1636 1647 1773 2009 2196 2149 2103 2080 2057 2024 1982 1941 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 26 167 257 393 428 466 497 520 543 Forest 1706 1605 1478 1322 1223 1253 1284 1291 1297 1305 1316 1327 Others 1784 1840 1806 1677 1456 1391 1328 1333 1338 1357 1390 1424 Total 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 5483 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.71 2.45 3.02 3.39 3.80 3.60 3.42 3.29 3.20 3.11 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 1.11 1.35 0.66 0.28 -0.15 -0.05 -0.11 0.06 0.05 0.05 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.82 3.79 3.69 3.67 3.65 3.55 3.31 3.35 3.25 3.16 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 106 133 152 154 155 145 136 123 108 94 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.1 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 20.2 25.7 28.8 35.8 44.2 28.0 17.8 13.7 12.8 12.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 479 545 506 513 521 550 582 615 650 688 NMVOC Mt 48 55 68 84 99 101 103 100 97 88 75 63 NOx MtN 7 8 12 17 20 21 21 21 21 21 21 21 446 Statistical Table Illustrative Scenario A1T-MESSAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6117 6888 7617 8182 8531 8704 8667 8463 8125 7658 7056 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.8 36.8 57.0 91.3 135.4 187.1 254.1 322.9 393.2 469.6 550.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 25.7 33.4 45.7 67.2 98.7 139.0 186.4 246.8 313.2 382.0 456.6 535.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 38 25 20 16 10 7 5 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 42 60 66 71 72 46 31 27 22 15 2 1 Liquids 111 125 157 193 246 300 344 357 354 346 343 311 Gas 41 48 66 83 107 135 155 180 177 159 132 100 Electricity 35 48 66 100 153 209 275 349 424 483 534 589 Others 8 12 18 33 48 61 83 108 138 179 220 268 Total 275 317 393 495 634 757 893 1020 1115 1182 1231 1270 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 106 125 151 193 246 300 344 357 354 346 343 311 Gas 41 48 66 83 107 135 155 180 177 159 132 100 Electricity 35 48 66 100 153 209 275 349 424 483 534 589 Others 8 12 18 33 48 61 83 108 138 179 220 268 Total 275 317 393 495 634 757 893 1020 1115 1182 1231 1270 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 106 125 151 180 153 119 87 60 53 40 25 Oil 128 155 172 193 223 241 250 236 205 143 113 77 Gas 71 87 124 166 231 288 324 344 324 291 240 196 Nuclear 7 8 11 17 40 78 115 145 175 175 153 114 Biomass 46 46 55 75 104 137 183 235 280 324 353 370 Other Renewables 8 15 25 48 73 122 222 358 544 756 985 1239 Total 352 416 513 649 850 1018 1213 1407 1588 1743 1884 2021 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 2.0 3.2 4.7 6.5 8.1 9.3 10.1 10.7 11.3 11.7 Oil 0.0 1.4 3.0 4.7 6.6 8.9 11.3 13.8 16.1 18.2 19.6 20.8 Gas 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.9 4.5 6.8 9.7 13.0 16.4 19.6 22.6 25.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 169.2 267.4 380.5 505.7 630.2 748.4 854.7 944.1 1015.5 1068.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1459 1466 1462 1457 1454 1448 1442 1436 1429 1424 1422 1420 Grasslands 3389 3404 3429 3446 3458 3478 3498 3525 3552 3568 3572 3576 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 74 158 288 418 492 566 581 538 495 Forest 4296 4237 4173 4164 4164 4177 4190 4194 4199 4202 4203 4204 Others 3805 3842 3886 3807 3715 3558 3400 3301 3203 3173 3213 3253 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.33 10.00 12.26 12.60 12.29 11.41 9.91 8.05 6.27 4.31 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.04 0.26 0.12 0.05 -0.02 -0.03 -0.03 -0.03 -0.01 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.38 10.26 12.38 12.65 12.26 11.38 9.87 8.02 6.26 4.32 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 362 415 483 495 500 459 404 359 317 274 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.1 6.1 6.2 6.2 6.1 6.0 5.7 5.6 5.5 5.4 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 64.7 59.9 59.6 45.9 40.2 34.4 30.1 25.2 23.3 20.2 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 CO MtCO 879 877 1003 1147 1362 1555 1770 1944 2078 2164 2156 2077 NMVOC Mt 139 141 164 190 212 229 241 242 229 199 167 128 NOx MtN 31 32 39 46 56 60 61 60 52 43 35 28 a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM A1T run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM A1T run. Statistical Table 447 Illustrative Scenario A1T-MESSAGE OECD90 Population Million 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 859 919 965 1007 1043 1069 1081 1084 1089 1098 1108 1110 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.6 25.6 31.6 38.7 46.8 55.7 65.7 77.2 90.8 106.6 124.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 17.8 22.1 27.4 33.7 40.8 48.6 57.4 67.6 79.7 93.6 109.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 13 6 3 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 69 74 73 72 70 66 65 62 61 60 55 Gas 22 28 33 34 35 35 32 27 21 19 15 12 Electricity 22 29 36 44 55 65 74 83 95 104 112 118 Others 1 1 3 6 7 10 13 17 22 29 38 48 Total 124 139 152 160 171 180 185 193 201 212 225 233 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 36 36 32 25 11 4 3 2 1 1 1 Oil 72 83 81 72 63 55 46 39 30 23 20 14 Gas 33 45 57 70 79 78 76 66 59 56 45 34 Nuclear 6 7 8 10 22 43 56 64 67 58 45 28 Biomass 6 9 11 17 21 24 31 37 41 45 52 55 Other Renewables 4 6 10 15 20 27 44 65 98 143 194 245 Total 159 186 202 214 230 238 257 275 297 325 356 377 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.4 3.1 3.8 4.3 4.8 5.2 5.5 5.7 5.9 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.1 2.9 3.6 4.4 5.0 5.6 6.2 6.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.7 98.4 129.2 155.8 177.3 195.7 211.4 224.7 235.8 244.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 381 380 377 376 375 372 368 364 359 356 356 355 Grasslands 760 763 771 774 776 787 797 818 839 849 847 846 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 11 24 44 63 74 86 88 81 75 Forest 1050 1053 1052 1053 1056 1062 1068 1061 1054 1050 1049 1048 Others 838 833 828 814 798 765 733 712 691 685 695 705 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.31 3.18 2.96 2.38 2.00 1.71 1.38 1.17 0.95 0.66 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.02 0.00 -0.02 -0.04 0.00 0.05 0.06 0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.35 3.20 2.96 2.35 1.96 1.72 1.43 1.24 0.98 0.67 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 68 66 60 56 52 48 47 45 43 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.1 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 8.3 2.1 0.6 -0.1 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.3 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 16 20 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 CO MtCO 179 161 183 190 184 186 202 210 206 206 208 190 NMVOC Mt 42 36 38 38 33 30 27 26 23 20 16 10 NOx MtN 13 12 14 13 13 11 9 7 6 5 4 4 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM A1T run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM A1T run. Statistical Table Illustrative Scenario A1T-MESSAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 427 433 435 433 423 409 392 374 357 339 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.0 2.1 5.4 9.4 12.6 16.2 20.0 24.4 29.2 34.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 2.2 2.5 3.7 6.0 9.4 12.6 16.2 20.0 24.4 29.2 34.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 5 4 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 11 10 12 14 14 12 13 13 14 16 17 Gas 14 11 14 17 22 26 27 26 23 19 13 9 Electricity 6 6 7 10 14 20 23 26 28 32 34 34 Others 7 6 6 9 13 13 12 12 11 11 12 13 Total 50 38 41 51 65 72 73 76 76 76 75 73 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 14 11 13 17 16 11 4 2 1 8 8 Oil 20 15 13 14 15 14 12 12 8 6 5 3 Gas 27 23 29 32 40 44 50 63 72 70 46 31 Nuclear 1 1 1 1 4 9 10 9 5 3 3 2 Biomass 2 1 1 1 3 4 7 10 12 14 16 19 Other Renewables 1 1 2 4 6 7 12 14 19 26 42 52 Total 70 54 56 65 84 95 101 112 117 120 119 116 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.2 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.3 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.4 3.1 3.8 4.5 5.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.2 32.6 43.7 55.7 66.5 77.0 88.0 98.7 108.1 115.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 268 266 265 265 265 264 263 262 262 261 260 260 Grasslands 341 361 364 366 367 368 370 371 371 372 373 374 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 6 11 16 19 22 23 21 20 Forest 966 950 918 904 894 899 905 909 912 916 922 927 Others 701 698 728 738 745 733 722 715 709 703 700 696 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 262 261 260 260 Grasslands 341 361 364 366 367 368 370 371 371 372 373 374 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 6 11 16 19 22 23 21 20 Forest 966 950 918 904 894 899 905 909 912 916 922 927 Others 701 698 728 738 745 733 722 715 709 703 700 696 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.88 1.00 1.22 1.24 1.16 1.20 1.20 1.11 0.91 0.66 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.18 0.01 0.00 -0.08 -0.15 -0.12 -0.09 -0.07 -0.06 -0.05 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.06 1.01 1.22 1.17 1.01 1.09 1.11 1.03 0.84 0.61 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 42 49 58 58 54 52 48 43 36 30 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.5 4.9 5.2 4.5 4.1 1.8 1.2 0.7 3.0 3.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO 69 41 49 61 82 98 112 121 118 105 90 75 NMVOC Mt 16 13 16 20 25 31 34 39 37 33 30 26 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 5 5 5 5 4 4 3 2 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM A1T run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM A1T run. Statistical Table 449 Illustrative Scenario A1T-MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3620 3937 4147 4238 4220 4085 3867 3589 3258 2882 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.8 13.5 27.2 44.9 65.3 95.8 126.9 155.5 186.5 218.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.1 8.3 13.5 22.8 36.2 52.2 70.0 96.8 126.9 155.5 186.5 218.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 15 11 8 4 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 38 51 60 63 38 24 21 21 13 1 0 Liquids 13 22 38 56 86 120 152 157 156 149 142 131 Gas 2 3 8 14 22 40 54 73 77 72 62 45 Electricity 4 8 15 30 51 70 98 128 160 183 201 222 Others 1 3 5 11 15 18 25 35 46 59 74 89 Total 62 88 128 178 241 289 356 414 459 476 479 486 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 51 71 96 122 102 79 57 39 40 26 12 Oil 15 26 39 55 76 91 102 95 90 60 45 31 Gas 3 5 14 28 48 74 98 108 101 88 81 68 Nuclear 0 1 2 4 8 15 27 43 65 74 65 48 Biomass 24 23 27 33 44 59 83 108 123 132 132 142 Other Renewables 1 3 6 15 26 44 79 130 191 261 343 435 Total 74 108 160 231 323 385 467 540 609 655 692 736 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.6 2.5 3.7 4.8 5.6 6.1 6.5 6.9 7.2 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.1 3.1 4.1 5.0 5.9 6.5 7.0 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.7 3.8 4.8 5.7 6.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.3 77.8 122.4 174.6 227.3 276.5 319.5 355.3 383.4 403.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 435 434 433 432 431 431 430 429 428 428 428 Grasslands 608 606 609 611 613 615 617 618 619 621 622 624 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 17 37 68 99 117 134 138 127 117 Forest 535 522 512 524 535 535 535 544 552 556 555 555 Others 583 601 609 579 547 515 483 456 429 421 431 441 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.73 3.90 5.26 5.36 5.19 4.65 4.06 3.29 2.47 1.52 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.22 -0.13 -0.12 -0.04 0.03 -0.03 -0.09 -0.10 -0.04 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.95 3.77 5.14 5.32 5.22 4.62 3.97 3.19 2.43 1.53 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 152 185 225 226 227 200 167 147 130 110 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 32.3 35.4 35.8 22.8 16.3 13.4 11.6 8.8 6.6 5.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO 235 270 340 422 564 663 784 853 896 914 866 777 NMVOC Mt 33 37 47 58 70 75 82 82 83 76 63 41 NOx MtN 7 9 12 17 23 26 28 26 22 18 15 12 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM A1T run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM A1T run. 450 Statistical Table Illustrative Scenario A1T-MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1875 2241 2557 2791 2980 3089 3115 3064 2934 2727 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 4.4 9.8 20.0 34.3 53.5 76.5 98.7 122.5 147.2 173.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 3.8 5.1 7.5 13.3 22.8 36.7 55.3 76.5 98.7 122.5 147.2 173.1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 10 9 8 5 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 4 5 5 6 8 7 6 2 1 1 1 Liquids 17 24 35 52 75 97 114 122 123 122 125 109 Gas 4 6 11 18 27 35 43 54 56 49 42 36 Electricity 3 5 9 17 33 54 81 111 140 165 188 215 Others 0 2 4 7 12 21 33 44 59 80 96 118 Total 39 52 73 106 157 217 279 336 379 418 452 478 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 5 8 10 16 24 26 24 18 12 5 4 Oil 21 31 40 53 69 81 90 89 77 54 43 28 Gas 8 14 23 37 65 91 101 107 92 78 69 63 Nuclear 0 0 1 2 6 12 23 30 38 40 40 35 Biomass 14 13 17 24 36 50 62 81 104 134 153 153 Other Renewables 2 4 8 14 21 44 87 150 236 326 406 508 Total 49 68 96 139 213 301 389 480 565 644 717 791 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.4 1.5 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.2 3.0 3.9 4.8 5.6 6.1 6.5 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.5 2.4 3.4 4.5 5.4 6.2 6.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.0 58.5 85.3 119.6 159.0 199.2 235.8 265.4 288.2 305.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 384 383 382 381 381 380 379 379 378 378 Grasslands 1680 1673 1685 1695 1702 1708 1714 1718 1722 1726 1730 1733 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 42 90 165 240 282 324 333 308 284 Forest 1745 1711 1690 1683 1680 1681 1682 1681 1680 1678 1676 1674 Others 1684 1710 1720 1676 1625 1544 1463 1419 1374 1364 1387 1411 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 0.72 1.01 1.41 1.92 2.82 3.62 3.94 3.84 3.26 2.48 1.94 1.48 Other CO2 c GtC 0.73 0.82 0.60 0.36 0.25 0.19 0.14 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.03 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.01 2.28 3.07 3.81 4.07 3.96 3.36 2.56 2.00 1.51 CH4 total d MtCH4 77 85 98 114 133 150 162 155 141 123 105 90 N2O total e MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 13.7 14.6 15.0 15.7 16.8 15.7 13.5 11.3 8.8 6.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 CO MtCO 396 404 431 474 533 608 671 760 858 938 992 1035 NMVOC Mt 48 55 63 74 83 92 98 95 87 69 58 50 NOx MtN 7 8 10 12 15 18 20 21 19 15 13 12 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial 55 63 74 83 92 98 95 87 69 58 50 NOx MtN 7 8 10 12 15 18 20 21 19 15 13 12 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A1 marker land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-A1 marker run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM A1T run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM A1 marker run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM A1T run. Statistical Table 451 Scenario A1T-MARIA World Population Million 1990 5262 2000 6117 2010 6888 2020 7617 2030 8048 2040 8207 2050 8704 2060 8536 2070 8372 2080 8028 2090 7527 2100 7056 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 19.4 25.9 35.9 52.0 75.1 113.5 177.4 226.2 282.1 347.5 418.0 518.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 48 38 39 27 19 13 9 11 17 26 39 27 Solids 138 152 185 234 269 310 357 363 429 416 475 512 Liquids 56 65 84 110 156 201 250 278 213 232 177 179 Gas 35 48 56 67 80 96 128 148 160 177 197 215 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 278 302 364 439 525 621 744 800 819 852 888 934 Total 90 69 61 44 32 23 16 16 21 29 41 29 Primary Energy EJ Coal 123 132 154 187 190 213 239 190 209 152 169 190 Oil 71 101 134 169 222 266 303 331 268 289 235 239 Gas 22 28 33 44 72 117 162 225 252 298 351 404 Nuclear 28 31 41 64 100 111 128 180 227 270 313 329 Biomass 9 8 7 7 6 17 65 67 69 69 67 65 Other Renewables 343 370 431 515 620 747 913 1010 1044 1106 1175 1255 Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.6 2.2 2.6 3.0 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.7 4.0 4.4 Oil 0.0 1.2 2.5 4.1 6.0 7.9 10.0 12.4 14.3 16.4 17.9 19.6 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.7 3.1 4.8 7.0 9.6 12.7 16.0 18.7 21.5 23.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 165.8 256.2 352.3 454.4 563.6 672.1 773.5 868.6 959.2 1049.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1451 1451 1613 2001 2170 2213 2344 2069 1802 1545 1287 1182 Grasslands 3395 3395 3236 2851 2682 2645 2606 2597 2597 2597 2597 2597 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 40 324 592 848 1107 1212 Forest 4138 4142 4157 4177 4208 4244 4301 4374 4375 4375 4375 4375 Others 4061 4057 4039 4017 3985 3944 3754 3681 3681 3681 3681 3681 Total 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.97 8.70 9.39 9.82 10.58 11.26 10.43 9.85 9.18 8.98 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.04 0.99 0.87 0.70 0.47 0.18 0.09 0.03 -0.04 -0.04 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.70 9.39 9.82 10.58 11.26 10.43 9.85 9.18 8.94 8.94 CH4 total MtCH4 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 N2O total MtN2O-N 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SOx total MtS 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 88 84 95 HFC MtC eq. 10.5 12.8 13.7 14.6 15.0 15.7 16.8 15.7 13.5 11.3 8.8 6.8 PFC MtC eq. 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 SF6 MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 CO MtCO 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 NMVOC Mt 396 404 431 474 533 608 671 760 858 938 992 1035 NOx MtN 48 55 63 74 83 92 98 95 87 69 58 50 452 Statistical Table Scenario A1T-MARIA OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 919 965 1007 1035 1046 1081 1085 1091 1096 1103 1110 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 15.6 18.9 22.8 27.1 32.0 38.1 45.7 57.0 70.0 86.1 102.5 119.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 12 8 6 4 3 2 1 5 11 19 30 21 Solids 71 64 57 53 51 49 49 47 74 58 76 71 Liquids 28 35 48 57 65 70 75 84 60 78 55 74 Gas 21 25 27 29 31 32 36 40 45 51 57 63 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 132 133 139 144 150 154 161 176 190 206 219 229 Total Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 28 20 15 12 9 6 9 13 21 32 22 Oil 71 64 58 53 51 49 49 47 74 58 76 70 Gas 34 53 73 85 97 105 101 111 91 112 94 114 Nuclear 18 15 12 15 18 23 29 36 45 56 68 83 Biomass 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 5 Other Renewables 5 5 4 4 3 3 16 20 21 21 20 18 Total 171 168 170 175 183 190 202 223 245 270 292 313 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.7 2.0 Oil 0.0 0.7 1.4 1.9 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.4 5.2 5.8 6.5 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.9 1.6 2.4 3.4 4.5 5.5 6.6 7.5 8.6 9.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.0 97.2 129.6 162.4 193.6 223.7 255.5 290.1 327.7 367.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 331 266 213 Grasslands 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 47 112 164 Forest 756 756 756 756 756 756 796 834 834 834 834 834 Others 794 794 794 794 794 794 754 716 716 716 716 716 Total 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.19 3.22 3.28 3.21 3.09 2.99 3.02 3.35 3.57 3.94 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.05 -0.10 -0.25 -0.27 -0.24 -0.21 -0.19 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.22 3.28 3.21 3.27 2.99 2.74 2.75 3.11 3.36 3.75 CH4 total MtCH4 19 58 110 108 115 118 122 123 123 124 125 125 N2O total MtN2O-N 18 13 13 11 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 SOx total MtS 23 23 14 5 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 453 Scenario A1T-MARIA REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 427 433 432 430 423 406 391 374 356 339 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 0.9 1.3 1.8 2.6 4.5 7.9 13.4 17.6 21.7 26.1 31.5 38.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 13 9 6 4 3 2 2 2 3 5 7 5 Solids 17 13 12 11 12 13 13 12 15 11 17 28 Liquids 21 23 26 30 41 52 64 69 66 68 61 53 Gas 7 8 7 7 9 11 13 14 15 15 16 16 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 58 53 51 53 65 78 92 98 99 99 101 102 Total Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 13 9 6 4 3 2 2 3 6 7 5 Oil 19 14 12 11 12 13 14 13 15 11 17 28 Gas 27 31 34 39 53 68 81 88 85 86 79 70 Nuclear 3 2 2 2 3 3 4 5 7 8 10 13 Biomass 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 4 4 4 4 4 3 Total 69 63 58 60 73 89 105 112 114 115 118 121 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.5 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.8 2.5 3.3 4.2 5.1 5.9 6.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.0 29.2 38.3 49.3 62.1 75.6 89.0 102.2 115.0 128.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 217 217 217 217 217 217 217 174 139 111 89 78 Grasslands 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43 78 106 128 139 Forest 815 815 815 815 815 815 827 862 862 862 862 862 Others 722 722 722 722 722 722 710 675 675 675 675 675 Total 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.80 0.82 0.83 1.00 1.20 1.38 1.35 1.35 1.29 1.28 1.34 Other CO2 GtC 0.91 0.02 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.01 -0.03 -0.12 -0.15 -0.20 -0.25 -0.24 Total CO2 GtC 2.21 0.82 0.85 0.85 1.01 1.21 1.35 1.23 1.20 1.09 1.03 1.10 CH4 total MtCH4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 N2O total MtN2O-N 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SOx total MtS 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 454 Statistical Table Scenario A1T-MARIA ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2642 3080 3425 3728 3861 3895 4008 3814 3632 3368 3040 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 Statistical Table Scenario A1T-MARIA ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2642 3080 3425 3728 3861 3895 4008 3814 3632 3368 3040 2744 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.2 2.6 5.8 12.3 20.8 35.9 61.8 80.3 102.5 128.8 159.8 204.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 20 18 25 17 12 8 6 4 3 2 2 1 Liquids 26 42 65 97 120 146 168 172 190 200 212 214 Gas 2 3 4 8 16 25 35 41 29 24 17 22 Electricity 4 9 11 16 19 24 34 41 46 52 59 64 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 52 72 106 139 168 203 243 257 267 277 289 301 Primary Energy EJ Coal 28 24 29 20 14 10 7 5 3 2 2 1 Oil 14 23 36 51 51 72 92 72 56 39 45 41 Gas 3 5 8 14 20 28 38 42 30 25 17 22 Nuclear 1 12 18 26 28 50 55 79 89 103 122 133 Biomass 13 21 31 51 80 81 81 104 137 162 168 174 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 20 20 20 20 20 20 Total 61 86 124 163 195 243 293 322 335 352 373 391 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 Oil 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.7 1.3 1.8 2.5 3.4 4.1 4.7 5.1 5.5 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 1.9 2.1 2.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 41.5 66.1 90.9 117.3 148.0 179.0 205.0 225.8 244.1 261.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 366 366 380 380 380 380 380 377 373 336 305 263 Grasslands 431 431 421 423 423 423 384 375 375 375 375 375 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 40 52 57 93 124 167 Forest 365 367 380 388 397 404 404 404 404 404 404 404 Others 458 456 440 430 421 414 412 412 412 412 412 412 Total 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.53 1.78 2.03 2.20 2.40 2.36 2.53 2.31 2.44 2.73 2.83 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.16 0.12 0.10 0.09 0.07 0.04 0.02 0.00 -0.03 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 1.78 2.03 2.20 2.40 2.53 2.44 2.38 2.35 2.33 2.31 2.80 CH4 total MtCH4 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 N2O total MtN2O-N 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SOx total MtS 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO Mt CO NMVOC Mt NOx Mt N Statistical Table Scenario A1T-MARIA ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1348 1699 2071 2449 2720 2836 3192 3231 3259 3190 3029 2864 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.7 3.1 5.5 10.0 17.8 31.7 56.5 71.4 87.9 106.5 124.2 155.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 3 2 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 24 33 50 72 86 103 127 132 150 148 171 199 Gas 5 4 6 14 35 54 75 84 59 63 44 31 Electricity 3 6 10 15 21 29 45 53 54 59 65 72 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 35 45 68 103 143 186 247 268 263 270 280 302 Primary Energy EJ Coal 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 Oil 18 30 48 71 75 79 84 59 63 44 31 50 Gas 7 12 19 32 51 65 83 90 63 65 46 32 Nuclear 0 0 0 0 23 40 74 105 112 130 151 174 Biomass 8 6 7 11 18 28 46 75 88 105 141 149 Other Renewables 2 2 1 1 1 12 25 24 25 24 24 24 Total 41 53 79 117 170 226 313 353 351 369 392 430 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.1 4.6 5.3 5.7 6.0 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.9 2.7 3.6 4.2 4.9 5.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 38.3 63.7 93.4 125.4 159.9 193.9 224.0 250.6 272.4 292.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 490 490 639 1026 1195 1238 1370 1141 913 767 627 627 Grasslands 2095 2095 1946 1559 1390 1352 1352 1352 1352 1352 1352 1352 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 229 457 603 742 742 Forest 2202 2204 2207 2218 2241 2268 2274 2274 2274 2274 2274 2274 Others 2086 2084 2081 2070 2047 2014 1878 1878 1878 1878 1878 1878 Total 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 0.73 0.82 1.45 1.83 1.47 0.79 2.26 2.09 0.74 2.83 2.47 Other CO2 GtC 1.01 0.73 0.82 0.38 0.64 0.54 0.50 0.48 0.47 0.45 0.43 0.42 Total CO2 GtC 1.73 1.46 1.64 1.83 2.47 2.01 1.29 2.74 2.57 1.19 3.26 2.89 CH4 total MtCH4 205 210 210 206 196 N2O total MtN2O-N 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 SOx total MtS 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO Mt CO NMVOC Mt NOx Mt N Statistical Table Scenario A1-MiniCAM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5293 6100 6874 7618 8122 8484 8703 8623 8430 8126 7621 7137 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 38.1 52.8 80.2 117.3 164.2 226.6 294.1 366.9 445.1 531.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 45 54 64 75 87 96 101 78 63 55 50 46 Gas 121 121 129 146 152 177 221 256 289 318 334 350 Electricity 52 61 75 96 110 117 116 136 156 175 176 177 Others 35 51 76 112 161 218 283 338 387 429 459 488 Total 253 286 344 429 510 607 721 808 894 978 1019 1061 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 108 130 153 206 250 284 249 223 205 192 179 Oil 131 130 137 152 147 167 214 259 299 333 351 369 Gas 70 82 118 179 223 259 287 343 387 417 408 399 Nuclear 24 24 30 41 60 81 102 101 105 116 126 135 Biomass 0 5 11 16 23 30 37 48 54 54 52 50 Other Renewables 24 24 27 31 39 51 68 91 112 131 146 162 Total 336 374 453 573 698 838 992 1091 1179 1255 1274 1293 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.3 3.7 5.7 7.9 10.5 13.1 15.5 17.6 19.6 21.5 Oil 0.1 1.4 2.8 4.2 5.7 7.3 9.2 11.7 14.5 17.5 21.0 24.5 Gas 0.1 0.9 1.9 3.3 5.4 7.9 10.5 13.8 17.5 21.4 25.5 29.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 168.1 270.7 393.9 535.2 692.8 861.1 1034.4 1210.5 1383.2 1547.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1472 1466 1474 1495 1483 1442 1373 1212 1055 903 791 679 Land Use Million ha Cropland 3209 3348 3603 3974 4374 4690 4923 4749 4493 4155 3951 3748 Grasslands 0 3 6 8 10 11 12 22 21 10 6 3 Energy Biomass 4173 4214 4140 3952 3628 3372 3184 3515 3904 4349 4496 4643 Forest 4310 4132 3941 3735 3669 3648 3673 3666 3690 3747 3920 4093 Others 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.08 9.16 9.81 11.35 11.74 13.29 13.70 14.97 15.80 16.53 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.08 1.54 1.56 1.56 1.27 1.27 0.74 0.74 0.74 0.74 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.16 10.70 11.37 12.91 13.01 14.56 14.97 15.71 16.54 17.27 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 355 405 462 523 567 585 599 611 625 640 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.3 10.8 12.6 14.3 14.8 15.2 15.3 16.0 16.7 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 74.2 79.5 79.6 72.7 58.9 41.5 31.4 28.6 28.5 28.5 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 566 654 659 654 639 614 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 89 97 106 114 119 115 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 119 127 113 84 95 Statistical Table Scenario A1-MiniCAM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 585 14.8 41.5 654 97 127 17.37 0.16 17.53 599 15.2 31.4 659 106 113 18.06 -0.36 17.70 611 15.3 28.6 654 114 18.20 -1.37 16.83 625 16.0 28.5 639 119 84 18.36 -2.37 15.98 640 16.7 28.5 614 115 95 Statistical Table 457 Scenario Alvl-MiniCAM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 838 908 965 1007 1024 1066 1081 1084 1090 1098 1105 1112 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 25.6 31.6 34.5 44.7 53.6 63.3 74.4 86.7 102.2 119.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 12 11 11 11 12 9 7 7 7 7 Liquids 72 70 69 69 63 55 59 61 64 68 72 75 Gas 27 35 44 54 54 53 49 54 60 67 69 71 Electricity 22 27 33 41 44 53 61 64 67 70 74 79 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 144 159 175 173 173 181 188 198 211 221 231 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 44 43 36 39 48 54 51 48 42 37 32 Oil 76 75 73 70 63 50 52 52 56 62 68 74 Gas 34 45 63 90 91 92 88 95 103 109 110 111 Nuclear 20 15 13 13 14 14 15 13 14 15 17 19 Biomass 0 2 3 4 4 5 6 7 8 8 7 7 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 10 11 12 14 16 18 21 24 Total 182 192 206 223 221 219 226 234 243 254 261 268 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.3 1.5 2.2 2.7 3.2 3.7 4.1 4.5 4.9 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.6 2.3 2.6 3.4 3.9 4.4 5.0 5.6 6.2 6.9 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.2 3.6 4.5 5.4 6.4 7.5 8.5 9.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.7 103.5 141.5 179.0 216.3 254.0 291.9 329.4 365.9 401.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 410 412 414 409 386 359 313 273 240 211 182 Grasslands 796 820 867 937 972 1062 1100 1064 1019 967 932 896 Energy Biomass 0 3 5 5 6 8 9 13 12 9 6 3 Forest 921 931 922 894 870 812 792 873 951 1026 1053 1080 Others 998 959 917 872 866 856 862 861 867 880 921 962 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 CH4 total MtCH4 73 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 SOx total MtS 22.7 HFC MtC eq. 19 PFC MtC eq. 18 SF6 MtC eq. 23 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 3.20 0.00 3.20 74 2.6 17.0 58 13 23 3.41 0.13 3.54 84 2.8 12.5 110 13 14 3.58 0.24 3.82 97 3.0 6.2 108 11 5 3.55 0.24 3.79 104 3.2 5.4 115 9 6 3.56 0.15 3.71 127 3.7 5.0 118 3.72 0.03 3.75 145 4.0 5.2 122 9 9 3.78 0.01 3.79 163 4.1 5.1 123 10 11 3.86 -0.08 3.78 174 4.1 5.2 123 12 13 3.94 -0.23 3.71 179 4.2 5.5 124 13 16 3.99 -0.39 3.60 182 4.4 5.9 125 14 18 4.04 -0.55 3.49 185 4.5 6.2 125 16 20 Statistical Table 459 Scenario Alvl-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 426 433 434 431 423 408 392 374 357 340 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.1 3.5 5.1 6.9 10.0 13.6 17.7 21.8 26.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 8 7 7 6 6 4 3 3 3 2 Liquids 18 11 8 9 9 9 10 10 10 11 11 11 Gas 19 14 13 15 17 16 14 15 16 17 16 15 Electricity 6 8 11 17 21 25 28 30 31 33 33 34 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 44 41 49 54 57 58 59 61 64 63 62 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 17 19 27 32 34 26 21 18 18 17 Oil 20 13 10 11 7 6 8 10 12 13 13 13 Gas 26 20 21 29 32 33 31 32 34 34 32 29 Nuclear 3 4 6 8 10 10 11 9 8 9 9 9 Biomass 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 Other Renewables 3 3 3 4 5 6 8 9 11 12 13 14 Total 70 57 58 73 83 90 93 91 89 90 87 85 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.2 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.6 2.0 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.4 31.6 44.0 57.9 72.3 86.2 99.5 112.0 123.0 131.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 294 305 317 321 317 304 263 221 180 157 134 Grasslands 395 410 454 527 612 678 725 671 602 517 491 465 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 1007 1016 996 945 866 808 769 865 970 1086 1104 1122 Others 691 657 623 587 577 574 579 579 584 594 625 657 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.87 1.05 1.22 1.33 1.36 1.26 1.20 1.18 1.16 1.15 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.12 0.12 0.07 0.11 0.09 0.03 -0.16 -0.35 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.91 1.13 1.34 1.44 1.43 1.37 1.29 1.20 1.00 0.80 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 48 64 78 89 98 99 101 106 113 120 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.2 10.4 11.8 11.2 8.6 4.6 2.3 1.8 1.9 2.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 31 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 24 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 10 11 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 459 Scenario Alvl-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3226 3608 3937 4115 4210 4219 4062 3852 3589 3245 2919 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.5 11.7 23.9 40.4 61.1 86.2 112.1 138.8 165.9 195.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 29 39 51 60 66 68 52 41 35 31 27 Liquids 14 19 25 35 44 57 74 86 96 104 106 108 Gas 2 5 9 13 18 21 23 29 33 37 36 35 Electricity 4 10 22 39 64 93 124 149 169 184 192 200 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 62 95 138 186 237 290 316 339 359 364 370 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 42 62 87 116 137 149 122 102 92 85 77 Oil 16 20 27 37 42 54 73 92 105 112 114 115 Gas 3 8 20 38 59 79 99 121 135 141 132 124 Nuclear 1 4 8 14 25 37 50 49 50 53 55 57 Biomass 0 2 5 8 12 16 19 25 27 27 25 24 Other Renewables 3 4 5 6 10 16 24 35 45 53 59 65 Total 49 79 126 190 264 339 415 443 464 477 470 462 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.6 2.7 4.0 5.4 6.7 7.8 8.8 9.6 10.5 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.3 3.2 4.1 5.2 6.3 7.5 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.6 3.8 5.0 6.4 7.7 9.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.4 76.7 121.5 177.0 241.6 309.9 377.3 443.5 507.1 566.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 400 410 420 424 419 407 365 321 276 243 211 Grasslands 508 524 555 603 653 694 726 719 702 674 649 624 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 2 3 3 3 6 6 2 1 -1 Forest 1168 1144 1102 1044 990 952 929 973 1034 1113 1172 1231 Others 664 632 601 568 559 557 563 562 567 577 607 637 Total 2729 2699 2669 2638 2628 2624 2627 2625 2630 2642 2672 2702 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.58 3.64 4.77 5.80 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.27 0.28 0.25 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.77 3.90 5.05 6.04 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 134 145 161 176 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.7 4.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 34.8 45.1 44.1 37.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 6.72 0.16 6.87 189 4.7 25.1 total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.7 4.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 34.8 45.1 44.1 37.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 6.72 0.16 6.87 189 4.7 25.1 224 35 50 6.69 0.10 6.79 180 4.9 16.4 292 39 55 6.66 0.03 6.68 174 4.9 11.3 292 43 48 6.62 -0.06 6.56 173 5.0 9.8 285 46 35 6.39 -0.23 6.17 174 5.2 9.5 275 48 33 6.17 -0.39 5.78 174 5.4 9.1 262 46 37 460 Statistical Table Scenario Alv1-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1541 1876 2241 2531 2778 2980 3068 3096 3064 2913 2766 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.6 7.4 15.4 27.2 42.5 67.0 94.1 123.7 155.2 190.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 4 6 9 12 15 13 11 11 10 10 Liquids 17 21 26 33 40 56 78 99 118 136 146 156 Gas 5 6 9 13 21 26 29 38 46 54 55 56 Electricity 3 6 9 15 29 47 70 96 120 143 159 176 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 35 49 67 99 141 192 245 296 344 371 399 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 5 8 11 22 34 48 50 52 53 52 52 Oil 20 22 27 34 41 57 82 105 127 146 156 166 Gas 7 9 14 23 40 55 70 95 116 133 134 136 Nuclear 0 2 4 5 12 19 27 29 34 40 45 50 Biomass 0 1 1 2 4 6 9 12 15 15 15 15 Other Renewables 5 6 8 11 15 19 24 33 40 47 53 60 Total 35 45 62 86 133 190 258 324 383 434 456 478 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.6 2.1 2.6 3.1 3.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.3 3.3 4.5 5.8 7.4 8.9 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.8 2.7 3.8 5.0 6.3 7.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.7 58.8 86.9 121.3 162.6 210.9 265.7 325.7 387.2 447.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC 391 363 347 344 334 320 303 272 240 207 180 152 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1510 1594 1727 1906 2102 2257 2373 2296 2170 1996 1880 1763 Grasslands 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 0 0 0 Energy Biomass 3641 3591 3480 3308 3121 2975 2868 2970 3128 3341 3487 3633 Forest 1957 1884 1800 1707 1674 1661 1668 1664 1673 1695 1766 1837 Others 7499 7432 7354 7266 7231 7213 7212 7204 7213 7240 7313 7385 Total 0.72 1.01 1.22 1.54 2.20 3.02 4.00 4.88 5.66 6.32 6.65 7.00 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.72 0.95 0.91 0.76 0.48 0.31 0.12 -0.09 -0.58 -1.08 Other CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.94 2.49 3.11 3.77 4.48 5.19 5.77 6.23 6.07 5.92 Total CO2 GtC 77 85 89 99 118 130 134 144 150 154 157 160 CH4 total MtCH4 1.2 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.7 3.3 4.0 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.2 N2O total MtN2O-N 10.5 12.8 13.7 14.8 15.3 16.1 17.0 12.4 9.6 8.4 8.3 8.1 SOx total MtS 0 2 15 39 81 139 184 205 210 210 206 196 HFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 9 14 19 23 26 28 30 31 30 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 10 14 19 32 40 42 37 23 24 26 Statistical Table 461 Scenario Alv2-MiniCAM World Population Million 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 5293 5953 6597 7228 7725 8113 8393 8413 8359 8229 8001 7780 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 36.7 48.4 67.6 91.5 120.2 157.1 197.2 240.8 287.8 339.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 56 68 81 98 110 119 97 82 75 72 68 Liquids 121 123 130 143 145 164 201 232 262 292 315 337 Gas 52 62 77 97 108 113 112 129 148 168 170 172 Electricity 35 52 80 117 163 214 272 325 374 420 460 501 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 293 355 438 513 602 705 783 866 955 1016 1078 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 131 112 137 163 220 264 295 258 232 217 210 Oil 203 88 131 132 139 151 140 154 195 236 273 308 332 356 Gas 70 84 122 183 221 252 277 328 370 405 403 401 Nuclear 24 25 32 44 62 80 98 98 104 115 128 140 Biomass 0 6 11 17 24 30 37 49 54 54 53 51 Other Renewables 24 24 27 31 39 51 66 89 110 129 148 167 Total 336 384 468 589 705 831 968 1057 1127 1187 1227 1273 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.2 2.4 3.9 6.0 8.4 11.1 13.8 16.2 18.5 20.6 22.7 Oil 0.1 1.5 2.8 4.3 5.7 7.2 8.9 11.2 13.7 16.6 19.8 23.1 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.0 3.4 5.5 7.9 10.5 13.7 17.2 21.0 25.0 29.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 168.5 271.7 395.5 536.0 690.4 853.3 1019.8 1189.0 1356.5 1518.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1472 1456 1457 1477 1472 1439 1378 1226 1081 943 847 752 Land Use Million ha Cropland 3209 3344 3588 3941 4316 4609 4820 4651 4417 4119 3975 3832 Grasslands 0 2 5 11 14 18 20 31 31 20 15 10 Energy Biomass 4173 4215 4142 3957 3630 3376 3193 3517 3876 4272 4349 4425 Forest 4310 4148 3971 3779 3732 3723 3753 3739 3758 3810 3978 4145 Others 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.18 9.91 11.81 13.54 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.05 1.51 1.52 1.24 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.23 11.42 13.34 14.78 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 353 400 453 504 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.2 10.7 12.4 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 76.3 82.8 86.0 81.7 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 791 337 369 482 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 31 43 61 77 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 43 48 66 99 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 15.39 0.71 16.10 541 14.0 69.9 566 89 119 15.95 0.53 16.49 545 14.6 49.2 654 97 127 16.62 0.18 16.80 550 15.0 35.3 659 106 113 17.39 -0.35 17.04 556 15.3 28.2 654 114 95 17.79 -1.32 16.47 565 16.2 27.0 639 119 18.22 -2.29 15.93 574 17.2 25.7 614 115 95 462 Statistical Table Scenario Alv2-MiniCAM OECD90 Population Million 838 870 893 906 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 24.3 27.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 12 11 Liquids 72 71 68 63 Gas 27 35 42 48 Electricity 22 27 33 38 Others 0 0 0 0 Total 130 145 155 160 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 75 43 34 Oil 76 45 71 65 Gas 34 15 61 81 Nuclear 20 2 10 12 Biomass 0 11 10 10 Other Renewables 12 193 201 206 Total 182 193 201 206 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.5 0.9 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.6 2.2 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 410 933 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.1 0.5 3 Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 407 408 894 Grasslands 796 820 866 883 Energy Biomass 0 2 3 3123 Forest 921 931 922 3123 Others 998 963 924 3123 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.32 3.29 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.13 0.24 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.44 3.53 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 82 92 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 13.1 7.9 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 110 108 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 13 15 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 14 10 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 3.29 0.24 3.53 92 3.0 7.9 108 115 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 902 879 851 806 763 722 683 646 28.7 31.5 33.5 35.7 37.9 40.2 42.6 45.1 na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 10 10 8 6 6 5 5 Liquids 57 47 49 49 49 50 50 50 Gas 48 43 39 41 44 48 47 46 Electricity 40 45 49 49 50 50 51 51 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 155 145 146 147 149 153 152 152 Primary Energy EJ Coal 36 41 43 38 35 32 32 32 Oil 57 43 44 43 43 44 44 44 Gas 80 75 69 72 75 77 74 71 Nuclear 12 12 11 10 10 10 10 10 Biomass 12 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 49 49 50 50 51 51 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 5 45 146 147 149 153 5 2 152 36 4 43 38 35 32 32 32 57 43 44 43 43 44 44 44 80 75 69 72 75 77 74 71 2 2 0 0 0 0 2 4 5 5 6 6 6 5 5 0 0 2 4 5 6 8 199 185 184 182 182 184 182 181 1.5 2.1 2.5 2.9 3.2 3.6 3.9 4.2 2.5 3.3 3.7 4.1 4.6 5.0 5.4 5.9 2.1 3.2 4.0 4.7 5.4 6.2 6.9 7.7 135.8 168.6 199.5 229.3 258.1 285.5 313.0 334.6 406 386 362 318 281 251 226 201 966 1049 0 8 2 0 4 8 1008 962 936 911 3 5 5 7 7 5 4 2 869 811 792 871 943 1009 1022 1035 878 873 881 878 883 895 935 974 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3.19 3.00 3.00 2.92 2.88 2.87 2.82 2.78 0.23 0.14 0.03 0.02 -0.06 -0.21 -0.37 -0.52 3.42 3.14 3.03 2.94 2.82 2.65 2.45 2.26 96 90 2 0 127 135 142 146 151 3.2 3.6 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.4 4.6 6.5 5.5 4.8 4.3 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 5 8 122 123 123 124 125 125 9 8 9 10 12 13 14 16 6 7 9 11 13 16 18 20 Statistical Table 463 Scenario Alv2-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 446 460 470 466 454 434 408 380 352 326 301 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.2 3.4 4.6 5.9 7.2 8.4 9.4 10.7 12.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 11 10 10 10 10 9 7 5 4 4 3 Liquids 18 13 11 13 13 13 14 14 14 13 13 13 Gas 19 16 16 21 23 23 21 21 22 22 20 19 Electricity 6 9 15 24 29 35 40 41 40 39 40 40 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 48 52 67 75 80 84 83 81 78 77 75 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 19 22 26 37 43 44 36 29 22 18 13 Oil 20 15 13 15 10 8 10 11 13 14 15 16 Gas 26 22 26 40 45 46 44 45 45 43 39 36 Nuclear 3 4 7 11 14 15 15 13 11 11 11 11 Biomass 0 1 2 3 3 4 5 5 5 4 4 3 Other Renewables 3 3 3 4 5 7 9 11 12 13 14 15 Total 70 64 73 99 113 122 127 122 115 107 100 94 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.0 3.2 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.4 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.7 2.2 2.6 3.1 3.5 3.9 4.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.1 34.5 50.3 68.3 87.0 105.0 121.5 135.9 147.5 156.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 291 300 312 318 315 304 265 227 189 170 152 Grasslands 395 410 452 521 601 662 704 652 590 519 505 491 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 3 5 6 6 7 6 2 1 -1 Forest 1007 1016 996 946 867 808 770 863 960 1063 1066 1069 Others 691 660 628 595 588 587 593 591 595 605 635 666 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 1.01 1.36 1.61 1.75 1.80 1.64 1.48 1.30 1.18 1.07 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.12 0.12 0.06 0.10 0.08 0.01 -0.17 -0.35 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 1.04 1.44 1.73 1.87 1.86 1.74 1.56 1.31 1.01 0.72 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 49 67 81 91 97 101 99 93 91 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 12.6 14.8 14.8 12.6 7.5 4.2 2.7 2.5 2.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 19 29 31 32 33 33 34 33 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 5 8 14 20 21 22 23 24 25 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 8 10 14 18 21 19 15 14 11 464 Statistical Table Scenario Alv2-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3165 3517 3847 4078 4237 4322 4242 4123 3965 3779 3597 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.3 11.1 20.7 32.7 46.9 63.7 81.5 100.2 119.0 139.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 30 42 55 70 81 88 71 60 55 52 49 Liquids 14 19 25 34 42 53 69 80 91 101 108 114 Gas 2 5 9 13 17 19 21 27 32 38 38 39 Electricity 4 11 22 40 64 91 122 152 179 203 219 236 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 64 98 142 192 244 299 330 362 397 417 438 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 43 65 91 125 151 168 141 124 116 112 107 Oil 16 20 27 37 41 51 67 86 102 113 119 125 Gas 3 8 20 37 57 77 96 121 140 153 150 146 Nuclear 1 4 8 14 25 36 48 49 53 58 63 68 Biomass 0 2 5 9 13 16 20 27 31 31 30 29 Other Renewables 3 4 5 6 10 15 23 35 46 56 65 74 Total 49 81 130 195 270 346 422 460 495 527 538 549 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.7 2.9 4.3 5.8 7.3 8.6 9.9 11.0 12.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.2 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.2 7.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.5 3.7 5.0 6.4 7.9 9.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.5 77.3 123.0 180.2 247.1 318.5 390.0 462.4 534.5 604.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 397 406 415 420 417 406 366 326 286 259 232 Grasslands 508 523 553 598 642 678 706 698 682 658 640 622 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 4 6 8 9 16 18 13 11 9 Forest 1168 1146 1108 1052 1001 964 943 983 1038 1108 1156 1204 Others 664 635 606 575 569 569 575 573 577 586 615 644 Total 2729 2702 2674 2645 2638 2636 2639 2637 2641 2652 2681 2710 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.61 3.70 4.90 5.99 6.99 7.03 7.15 7.35 7.33 7.31 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.19 0.26 0.28 0.25 0.16 0.10 0.03 -0.06 -0.21 -0.37 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.80 3.96 5.18 6.24 7.15 7.13 7.18 7.30 7.12 6.94 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 133 144 160 174 187 174 169 171 171 172 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.7 4.2 4.6 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.3 5.5 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 34.9 44.6 46.3 42.4 32.7 20.9 13.2 9.6 9.0 8.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 18 45 92 153 224 292 292 285 275 262 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 8 15 23 30 35 39 43 46 48 46 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 19 28 42 50 55 48 35 33 37 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 465 Scenario Alv2-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1472 1727 2004 2282 2543 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.6 7.4 13.9 22.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 4 6 8 10 Liquids 17 21 26 33 39 51 Gas 5 7 10 15 22 27 Electricity 3 6 10 15 28 43 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 36 50 69 96 132 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 8 11 20 30 Oil 20 22 27 34 40 53 Gas 7 9 15 25 40 54 Nuclear 0 2 4 6 11 17 Biomass 0 1 1 2 4 5 Other Renewables 5 6 8 11 14 18 Total 35 46 64 89 129 178 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.7 58.8 86.3 118.9 Land Use Million ha Cropland 391 360 343 340 333 321 Grasslands 1510 1591 1718 1890 2074 2220 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 3641 3597 3494 3329 3150 3010 Others 1957 1890 1813 1726 1702 1694 Total 7499 7438 7367 7285 7258 7246 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.23 1.56 2.11 2.79 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.71 0.93 0.89 0.73 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.94 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.7 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.4 17.8 36.7 58.8 86.3 118.9 391 360 343 340 333 321 1510 1591 1718 1890 2074 2220 0 0 0 0 0 0 3641 3597 3494 3329 3150 3010 1957 1890 1813 1726 1702 1694 7499 7438 7367 7285 7258 7246 0.72 1.01 1.23 1.56 2.11 2.79 0.73 0.82 0.71 0.93 0.89 0.73 1.45 1.83 1.94 2.49 3.00 3.52 77 85 89 98 116 129 1.2 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.7 3.3 10.5 12.8 13.8 14.8 15.5 16.1 0 2 15 39 81 139 4 4 5 9 14 19 3 5 10 14 19 32 2785 2957 3092 3190 3213 3236 33.9 50.5 69.5 91.0 115.5 143.1 na na na na na na 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 11 10 10 11 11 70 89 109 128 145 161 31 40 50 61 64 68 62 83 106 128 151 174 0 0 0 0 0 0 175 223 274 327 370 413 40 42 44 46 48 51 74 95 116 137 154 171 67 90 111 132 140 148 23 26 30 36 43 50 7 10 12 14 14 14 23 30 37 44 52 59 235 293 351 409 452 494 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.3 2.8 3.2 2.3 3.2 4.2 5.4 6.9 8.5 1.8 2.7 3.7 4.9 6.3 7.6 156.9 200.5 250.1 305.2 363.5 423.0 306 277 247 216 192 168 2327 2253 2137 1980 1894 1808 0 0 0 0 0 0 2911 3011 3158 3351 3464 3576 1704 1697 1704 1724 1793 1861 7248 7238 7246 7271 7342 7413 3.60 4.36 5.12 5.88 6.46 7.07 0.46 0.31 0.13 -0.09 -0.57 -1.05 4.06 4.67 5.24 5.78 5.88 6.02 137 142 147 151 156 162 3.9 4.2 4.4 4.6 5.0 5.4 16.7 13.5 10.8 8.6 8.2 7.7 184 205 210 210 206 196 23 26 28 30 31 30 40 42 37 23 24 26 466 Statistical Table Scenario A2-AIM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6132 7165 8198 9231 10208 11287 12008 12776 13536 14281 15068 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.1 25.1 31.8 40.2 50.7 63.9 80.7 101.2 126.9 157.7 194.3 239.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 194.3 239.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 57 69 68 69 62 55 36 24 0 0 0 Solids 36 48 65 79 95 108 121 131 141 150 157 165 Liquids 111 115 135 162 190 204 220 244 270 308 360 421 Gas 51 56 80 101 129 147 167 177 186 201 220 241 Electricity 38 51 69 88 116 145 181 226 283 348 420 507 Total 285 327 418 499 599 668 744 824 911 1024 1169 1334 Primary Energy EJ Coal 93 119 177 230 301 344 396 477 575 692 837 1016 Oil 143 155 179 182 176 163 152 134 121 107 92 80 Gas 73 96 133 170 216 244 276 292 309 334 368 406 Nuclear 6 9 11 14 16 27 48 65 88 116 150 195 Biomass 50 48 38 66 99 119 143 161 181 194 199 203 Other Renewables 10 11 13 15 20 25 31 45 67 91 112 140 Total 376 438 551 677 829 921 1046 1173 1341 1535 1758 2040 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.2 2.6 4.7 7.3 10.2 14.3 18.5 23.9 30.4 38.1 47.7 Oil 0.1 1.6 3.3 5.1 6.9 8.3 10.2 11.4 12.7 14.0 14.9 16.0 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.1 3.6 5.5 7.6 10.4 12.9 16.0 19.4 22.8 26.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 145.9 148.4 338.9 341.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0 0 42.96 42.48 38.05 38.05 Land Use Million ha Cropland 173.4 281.3 406.7 551.9 714.6 898.1 1105.7 1342.9 1617.6 1937.8 Grasslands 1518 1551 1586 1623 1660 1702 1744 1787 1833 1879 Energy Biomass 3446 3478 3510 3546 3582 3611 3640 3664 3683 3701 Forest 0 89 194 252 311 316 322 314 291 268 Others 4217 4254 4301 4307 4314 4306 4299 4292 4285 4277 Total 3768 3577 3359 3220 3082 3013 2944 2892 2858 2823 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 9.30 11.29 Other CO2 GtC LU 1.07 0.92 0.07 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 10.22 11.36 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 362 385 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.3 7.4 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 86.7 105.0 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 785 292 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 41 51 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 50 64 CO MtCO 879 877 983 952 NMVOC Mt 139 141 183 205 NOx MtN 31 32 37 42 13.70 15.05 16.60 18.73 21.20 24.41 28.56 33.43 0.02 0.26 0.64 0.74 0.87 0.97 1.00 1.04 13.72 15.31 17.23 19.47 22.07 25.38 29.56 34.47 412 422 434 457 481 505 526 549 7.6 7.9 8.1 8.4 8.8 9.1 9.5 9.8 132.8 135.1 140.7 151.9 165.1 148.0 113.3 92.9 258 291 312 384 457 549 662 753 64 77 92 113 129 148 168 178 75 89 104 122 129 135 153 165 1029 1101 1179 1268 1366 1500 1679 1881 230 225 221 208 197 186 177 169 47 48 50 53 56 60 65 71 Statistical Table 467 Scenario A2-AIM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 OECD90 Population Million 859 914 966 1018 1071 1111 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 15.3 18.6 21.9 25.5 29.7 34.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 6210 6000 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 14 16 18 20 21 Liquids 64 69 72 82 88 87 Gas 25 31 38 44 49 51 Electricity 22 27 32 37 44 50 Others 6 1 0 6 15 20 Total 127 142 158 181 201 209 Primary Energy EJ Coal 41 46 60 70 80 86 Oil 76 83 84 84 74 61 Gas 34 46 54 62 70 72 Nuclear 5 7 8 9 9 11 Biomass 6 10 6 15 20 6 Other Renewables 6 7 8 10 12 Total 167 189 211 238 257 262 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.6 2.4 3.1 Oil 0.1 0.9 1.7 2.5 3.3 3.9 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.5 2.2 2.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.7 104.0 144.7 188.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC 381 384 391 398 405 413 Land Use Million ha Cropland 760 765 775 786 797 813 Grasslands 0 0 0 17 37 48 Energy Biomass 1050 1062 1080 1109 1137 1137 Forest 838 818 783 720 652 617 Others 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Total 2.83 3.20 3.62 4.08 4.41 4.48 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.07 -0.18 -0.68 -0.04 Other CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.55 3.90 4.23 4.44 Total CO2 GtC 73 74 74 74 75 69 CH4 total MtCH4 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.8 N2O total MtN2O-N 22.7 17.0 11.1 8.6 9.2 9.6 SOx total MtS 19 57 107 103 111 116 HFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 14 14 14 PFC MtC eq. 23 23 25 28 29 29 SF6 MtC eq. 179 161 189 216 251 265 CO MtCO 42 36 37 38 39 35 NMVOC Mt 13 12 12 12 12 10 NOx MtN 1152 1218 1288 1357 1425 1496 468 Statistical Table Scenario A2-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 428 444 460 476 497 519 555 593 630 667 706 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 0.9 0.8 1.1 1.5 2.0 2.7 3.7 4.9 6.4 8.4 10.8 13.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 4 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 7 10 11 13 14 15 15 16 16 16 17 Liquids 19 9 8 8 8 8 7 8 9 10 12 14 Gas 19 13 18 22 27 31 36 37 39 42 46 51 Electricity 8 9 12 14 16 20 25 30 37 44 52 61 Others Total 58 43 48 55 64 72 82 91 101 113 127 143 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 23 28 33 36 39 49 62 83 118 166 Oil 22 13 11 16 17 Liquids 19 9 8 8 8 8 7 8 9 10 12 14 Gas 19 13 18 22 27 31 36 37 39 42 46 51 Electricity 8 9 12 14 16 20 25 30 37 44 52 61 Others Total 58 43 48 55 64 72 82 91 101 113 127 143 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 23 28 33 36 39 49 62 83 118 166 Oil 22 13 11 10 9 8 7 5 3 2 1 1 Gas 26 21 27 32 37 40 44 46 47 51 56 61 Nuclear 1 1 2 2 2 4 7 9 12 15 19 24 Biomass 2 4 0 1 3 5 6 7 8 9 9 9 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 5 7 10 13 16 Total 71 58 63 75 85 94 106 121 141 170 215 277 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.7 3.5 4.6 6.0 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.3 2.8 3.3 3.9 4.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.5 34.0 46.5 60.7 76.6 94.8 116.2 141.8 173.5 213.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 268 270 276 282 288 295 302 309 317 325 333 341 Grasslands 341 362 366 370 373 376 379 382 385 387 390 392 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 4 9 11 14 14 14 14 13 12 Forest 966 950 936 938 941 942 942 936 929 924 920 915 Others 701 694 698 682 665 651 638 634 630 626 621 615 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.11 1.30 1.47 1.59 1.73 1.98 2.27 2.73 3.45 4.36 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.01 -0.14 -0.12 -0.09 -0.05 -0.01 0.04 0.07 0.08 0.10 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.13 1.16 1.35 1.50 1.68 1.97 2.31 2.80 3.54 4.45 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 48 47 45 46 46 53 60 69 79 90 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.9 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 14.8 17.4 15.3 10.4 7.0 6.4 5.9 6.8 9.5 13.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 13 20 27 31 37 41 44 48 52 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 17 20 25 30 35 40 42 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 7 10 12 15 19 24 28 32 36 38 CO MtCO 69 41 41 43 46 47 48 50 53 57 62 68 NMVOC Mt 16 13 14 14 14 13 13 13 12 12 12 12 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 Statistical Table 469 Scenario A2-AIM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ASIA Population Million 2798 3278 3783 4288 4793 5255 5762 6065 6385 6701 7013 7339 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.4 2.3 3.4 5.1 7.4 10.4 14.5 19.4 25.9 33.7 42.9 54.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 31 37 35 35 30 26 14 7 0 0 0 Solids 15 24 33 41 50 57 67 72 79 84 90 95 Liquids 11 16 22 30 41 47 54 62 71 83 99 118 Gas 2 3 6 9 14 17 21 24 26 28 30 31 Electricity 5 8 14 21 33 42 55 72 94 119 147 181 Others Total 61 82 114 136 172 196 223 250 281 320 369 426 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 46 72 95 130 148 168 203 245 291 338 393 Oil 17 24 34 37 38 36 33 28 24 20 15 11 Gas 4 9 16 23 36 46 58 64 71 78 85 92 Nuclear 0 1 1 2 3 7 15 21 30 40 53 70 Biomass 28 24 19 21 21 26 33 37 42 45 46 47 Other Renewables 1 2 2 2 4 5 7 12 20 29 37 48 Total 80 106 144 180 233 267 314 365 431 502 574 662 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.8 3.0 4.2 6.0 7.7 10.0 12.7 15.8 19.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.2 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.6 2.1 2.8 3.6 4.4 5.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.2 76.0 116.3 166.1 223.4 289.9 366.7 455.2 556.7 672.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 440 451 462 473 485 497 509 522 535 549 562 Grasslands 608 607 612 616 621 625 629 633 637 641 644 648 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 21 45 58 69 69 69 69 68 67 Forest 535 523 515 529 542 544 546 546 547 548 548 548 Others 583 593 586 537 484 452 421 402 384 368 356 344 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.68 3.44 4.59 5.16 5.80 6.71 7.77 8.96 10.30 11.83 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.26 -0.03 0.07 0.16 0.37 0.41 0.47 0.51 0.53 0.55 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.94 3.41 4.65 5.31 6.16 7.12 8.24 9.47 10.83 12.38 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 141 154 171 181 192 203 214 223 229 236 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.7 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 38.6 52.7 71.2 70.2 69.2 70.0 70.7 56.8 36.3 23.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 11 18 27 38 54 69 77 100 130 167 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 11 15 20 25 32 34 42 49 56 64 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 16 20 27 32 34 43 49 55 62 CO MtCO 235 270 304 302 352 383 417 417 452 491 543 615 NMVOC Mt 33 37 51 60 70 69 69 69 65 62 57 52 NOx MtN 7 9 11 14 17 19 21 21 22 23 24 25 Statistical Table Scenario A2-AIM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 ALM Population Million 1192 1512 1972 2432 2892 3338 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 2.4 3.4 5.4 8.1 11.5 16.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 20 31 33 34 32 Solids 1 3 6 9 13 16 Liquids 17 22 33 42 53 62 Gas 4 9 18 27 39 48 Electricity 4 7 11 16 23 32 Others Total 40 60 99 126 163 190 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 10 23 37 58 75 Oil 27 35 50 52 55 59 Gas 9 20 37 53 74 86 Nuclear 0 0 1 1 2 5 Biomass 14 18 19 37 60 68 Other Renewables 2 2 3 3 4 6 Total 57 85 132 184 254 297 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.6 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.3 1.8 2.3 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.5 2.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 39.9 67.3 99.3 137.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 390 400 409 419 430 Grasslands 1680 1677 1693 1706 1719 1732 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 47 103 134 Forest 1745 1712 1686 1678 1680 1685 Others 1684 1700 1701 1639 1558 1499 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.88 2.47 3.23 3.83 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.71 0.42 0.26 0.24 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.59 2.89 3.49 4.06 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 99 109 121 126 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.4 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 19.3 23.4 34.2 42.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 19 32 49 69 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 8 12 16 21 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 7 10 13 18 CO MtCO 396 404 449 391 380 405 NMVOC Mt 48 55 80 94 107 107 NOx MtN 7 8 10 12 14 15 3854 4169 4510 4847 5176 5527 23.1 30.8 41.1 53.2 66.9 84.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 29 22 17 0 0 0 Solids 19 21 24 26 27 29 Liquids 72 85 100 119 143 171 Gas 58 64 70 78 87 97 Electricity 44 58 76 96 119 146 Others Total 221 253 289 332 384 444 Primary Energy EJ Coal 97 119 145 171 194 220 Oil 62 65 67 66 62 58 Gas 100 109 120 133 149 167 Nuclear 12 17 24 33 43 56 Biomass 76 86 97 104 106 109 Other Renewables 7 11 17 24 31 41 Total 354 406 470 531 586 651 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 2.6 3.6 4.9 6.5 8.3 10.3 Oil 1.7 3.0 3.6 4.2 4.9 5.5 Gas 1.7 3.3 4.2 5.4 6.7 8.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 12.5 181.1 232.7 293.4 364.7 447.8 544.3 Land Use Million ha Cropland 440 451 462 474 486 498 Grasslands 1744 1755 1765 1775 1785 1794 Energy Biomass 166 169 172 168 155 143 Forest 1689 1689 1688 1687 1686 1685 Others 1440 1416 1392 1376 1368 1359 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 4.52 5.34 6.29 7.39 8.64 10.10 Other CO2 GtC 0.22 0.24 0.27 0.30 0.29 0.28 Total CO2 GtC 4.75 5.58 6.57 7.69 8.93 10.38 CH4 total MtCH4 131 135 140 143 145 148 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 SOx total MtS 51.4 61.5 73.5 67.8 48.3 34.5 HFC MtC eq. 98 139 181 233 295 336 PFC MtC eq. 26 34 39 45 50 52 SF6 MtC eq. 23 29 32 37 41 43 CO MtCO 434 472 516 569 636 714 NMVOC Mt 107 104 102 97 91 86 NOx MtN 17 19 21 24 27 30 Statistical Table 471 Marker Scenario A2-ASF World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5282 6170 7188 8206 9170 10715 11296 12139 12587 13828 14743 15068 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.1 25.2 31.9 40.5 51.2 72.3 81.6 101.9 114.1 159.3 218.4 242.8 50 52 23 29 32 37 41 43 434 472 516 569 636 714 107 104 102 97 91 86 17 19 21 24 27 30 Statistical Table 471 Marker Scenario A2-ASF World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5282 6170 7188 8206 9170 10715 11296 12139 12587 13828 14743 15068 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.1 25.2 31.9 40.5 51.2 72.3 81.6 101.9 114.1 159.3 218.4 242.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 52 51 58 65 61 58 55 58 61 63 65 67 Liquids 117 150 187 246 275 304 334 371 408 469 552 635 Gas 49 53 65 92 124 155 187 209 231 246 254 262 Electricity 41 48 63 85 125 164 204 247 290 343 405 468 Others 468 Total 257 303 373 488 585 682 779 884 990 1120 1276 1431 Primary Energy EJ Coal 92 90 106 129 184 239 294 415 536 658 781 904 Oil 134 172 220 291 270 249 228 148 69 23 12 0 Gas 71 74 89 126 176 225 275 297 319 330 331 331 Nuclear 8 13 14 17 32 47 62 87 112 147 190 234 Biomass 0 0 6 12 32 52 71 92 112 130 146 162 Other Renewables 8 11 15 20 27 34 42 49 56 65 75 86 Total 313 360 450 595 720 846 971 1088 1204 1353 1535 1717 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.2 4.7 6.9 9.5 13.1 17.9 31.1 38.3 46.8 Oil 0.0 1.7 3.6 6.2 9.0 11.6 13.9 15.7 16.7 17.0 17.2 17.2 Gas 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.7 4.2 6.2 8.7 11.6 14.7 17.9 21.3 24.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 170.2 279.3 414.2 568.2 735.7 918.6 1118.8 1339.3 1586.2 1862.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC -1.8 -1.6 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.46 11.01 13.53 15.01 16.49 18.49 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.12 1.25 1.19 1.06 0.93 0.67 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.58 12.25 14.72 16.07 17.43 19.16 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 370 424 486 542 598 654 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.1 9.6 10.7 11.3 12.0 12.9 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 74.7 99.5 112.5 109.0 105.4 89.6 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 785 292 258 291 312 384 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 41 51 64 77 92 113 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 50 64 75 89 104 122 CO MtCO 879 877 977 1075 1259 1344 1428 1545 NMVOC Mt 139 141 155 179 202 214 225 238 NOx MtN 31 32 39 50 61 66 71 75 20.49 0.40 20.89 711 13.9 73.7 457 129 129 1662 251 80 22.97 0.25 23.22 770 14.8 64.7 549 148 135 1842 275 87 25.94 0.21 26.15 829 15.7 62.5 662 168 153 2084 309 28.91 0.18 29.09 889 16.5 60.3 753 178 165 2326 342 109 472 Statistical Table Marker Scenario A2-ASF OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 851 923 975 1027 1072 1131 1151 1202 1228 1323 1451 1496 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 15.3 18.7 22.3 26.0 30.0 37.1 39.9 46.3 50.0 63.1 80.7 87.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 12 12 12 13 13 14 14 15 15 16 16 16 Liquids 67 85 93 99 97 94 92 95 98 109 128 146 Gas 27 30 29 33 37 41 46 49 52 54 57 60 Electricity 23 27 33 39 46 52 59 69 79 93 112 130 Others Total 130 154 167 184 193 202 211 227 244 272 312 352 Primary Energy EJ Coal 33 29 32 37 55 74 92 115 138 164 191 218 Oil 76 94 107 116 94 72 49 31 12 2 1 0 Gas 34 37 37 43 52 61 69 72 74 75 76 77 Nuclear 7 10 11 11 14 17 20 27 34 45 58 72 Biomass 0 0 1 4 10 16 23 23 23 24 26 29 Other Renewables 5 6 7 8 10 11 12 13 15 17 20 23 Total 155 176 194 220 235 250 266 281 296 326 372 418 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 2.1 2.9 4.0 5.3 6.8 8.6 10.6 Oil 0.0 0.9 1.9 3.1 4.1 4.9 5.5 5.9 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.2 2.9 3.6 4.3 5.0 5.8 6.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.5 103.8 145.7 190.6 237.2 285.6 335.8 389.1 448.0 513.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.51 3.96 4.42 4.58 4.74 4.93 5.11 5.55 6.23 6.91 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.51 3.96 4.42 4.58 4.74 4.93 5.11 5.55 6.23 6.91 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 78 84 91 98 105 113 121 133 149 166 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.7 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 7.9 8.7 9.3 9.5 9.8 9.3 8.8 9.1 10.5 11.8 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 107 103 111 116 125 130 135 142 151 160 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 14 14 14 14 13 11 13 15 17 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 25 28 29 29 28 26 20 12 14 16 CO MtCO 179 161 168 175 175 158 141 147 154 174 209 243 NMVOC Mt 42 36 40 44 46 44 42 44 45 50 58 67 NOx MtN 13 12 14 16 17 17 16 16 16 17 19 21 Statistical Table 473 Marker Scenario A2-ASF REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 418 421 438 454 473 507 519 551 568 622 684 706 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 0.9 0.8 1.0 1.4 2.1 3.2 3.7 4.9 5.7 8.5 12.5 14.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 12.5 14.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 17 10 10 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 11 Liquids 15 10 11 13 14 16 17 19 22 25 31 37 Gas 15 11 13 17 22 27 32 36 40 42 44 46 Electricity 8 6 8 11 14 16 19 22 26 31 37 43 Others Total 55 38 43 52 61 70 79 89 99 110 123 137 Primary Energy EJ Coal 23 12 13 17 19 21 23 26 30 37 48 59 Oil 17 12 13 15 17 19 21 16 11 7 3 0 Gas 25 19 22 29 33 37 40 43 46 49 51 52 Nuclear 1 1 1 2 3 4 6 8 10 14 18 22 Biomass 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 5 9 12 14 15 Other Renewables 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5 6 7 Total 67 45 52 64 74 84 93 102 111 124 139 155 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.5 3.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.2 2.6 3.1 3.6 4.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.0 33.2 46.3 60.6 75.6 91.3 108.3 126.6 147.1 170.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.03 1.22 1.40 1.46 1.52 1.63 1.75 1.93 2.17 2.41 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.03 1.22 1.40 1.46 1.52 1.63 1.75 1.93 2.17 2.41 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 41 46 57 67 78 92 106 119 131 143 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 11.1 12.0 12.0 11.1 10.2 8.2 6.2 4.8 4.0 3.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 13 20 27 31 37 41 44 48 52 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 17 20 25 30 35 40 42 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 7 10 12 15 19 24 28 32 36 38 CO MtCO 69 41 40 40 47 51 56 63 70 83 101 119 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 19 25 28 31 29 27 29 33 37 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 5 5 5 5 6 6 7 8 474 Statistical Table Marker Scenario A2-ASF ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2791 3295 3801 4308 4779 5500 5764 6137 6333 6858 7214 7340 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.4 2.3 3.5 5.3 7.6 12.6 15.0 20.0 23.1 34.9 50.5 57.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 21 28 33 38 33 27 22 22 23 23 23 23 Liquids 13 24 39 64 77 90 103 118 134 156 185 215 Gas 2 5 9 19 28 36 45 51 56 59 60 60 Electricity 5 9 13 20 42 64 86 104 121 140 160 181 Others Total 42 65 95 141 179 218 256 295 334 379 429 479 Primary Energy EJ Coal 32 43 52 62 86 110 134 181 227 272 313 355 Oil 17 30 48 77 70 64 57 35 13 1 1 0 Gas 3 6 13 24 42 60 79 85 91 93 88 84 Nuclear 0 13 20 42 64 86 104 121 140 160 181 Others Total 42 65 95 141 179 218 256 295 334 379 429 479 Primary Energy EJ Coal 32 43 52 62 86 110 134 181 227 272 313 355 Oil 17 30 48 77 70 64 57 35 13 1 1 0 Gas 3 6 13 24 42 60 79 85 91 93 88 84 Nuclear 0 1 2 3 11 19 26 37 47 60 75 90 Biomass 0 0 1 3 10 16 23 22 21 20 20 20 Other Renewables 1 2 3 5 8 12 16 18 21 25 28 32 Total 53 82 119 174 228 281 335 378 421 470 526 581 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.5 2.2 3.2 4.4 6.0 8.1 10.6 13.5 16.9 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.3 2.0 2.7 3.3 3.7 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.0 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.9 2.7 3.6 4.5 5.4 6.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.6 77.2 121.7 175.4 236.4 305.0 381.1 465.1 558.2 660.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.47 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.34 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.81 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 144 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 3.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 36.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 11 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 11 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 CO MtCO 235 270 321 NMVOC Mt 33 37 41 NOx MtN 7 9 12 3.52 4.64 5.45 6.27 7.08 7.90 8.79 9.75 10.71 0.39 0.35 0.28 0.22 0.15 0.08 0.04 0.03 0.02 3.92 4.99 5.73 6.48 7.23 7.98 8.83 9.78 10.74 163 184 205 227 241 255 272 290 308 4.0 4.6 4.9 5.3 5.8 6.2 6.6 6.9 7.2 51.5 56.6 52.7 48.9 40.1 31.3 25.6 23.1 20.5 18 27 38 54 77 100 130 167 204 15 20 25 32 42 49 56 64 67 16 20 27 34 43 49 55 62 67 361 435 479 522 576 630 707 806 906 46 50 53 56 60 64 69 76 82 16 20 23 26 28 30 33 36 40 Statistical Table 475 Marker Scenario A2-ASF ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1222 1530 1974 2417 2846 3578 3862 4250 4458 5025 5394 5526 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 2.4 3.4 5.1 7.8 11.5 19.3 23.0 30.6 35.4 52.9 74.7 83.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 1 1 3 5 7 8 10 12 13 14 16 Liquids 21 31 45 70 87 104 121 138 155 178 208 238 Gas 5 8 13 24 37 50 64 73 83 89 93 96 Electricity 4 6 9 15 23 32 40 52 64 79 97 115 Others Total 31 47 69 112 153 193 234 273 313 359 411 464 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 7 9 14 24 35 45 92 140 185 228 272 Oil 24 36 53 82 88 94 100 67 34 14 7 0 Gas 8 11 17 29 48 68 87 97 107 114 116 118 Nuclear 0 0 2 5 12 19 25 43 60 74 86 98 Biomass 0 0 1 4 7 9 15 20 28 39 50 62 Other Renewables 1 2 7 13 16 18 21 25 Total 38 56 85 137 184 231 278 327 376 433 498 563 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.8 3.0 4.6 6.7 9.2 Oil 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.8 1.4 2.3 3.2 4.2 5.0 5.5 5.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.5 2.2 3.2 4.2 5.3 6.4 7.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 38.1 100.5 236.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 5.1 100.5 141.6 186.5 236.7 293.7 358.5 432.9 517.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.45 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.77 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.23 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 107 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.6 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 16.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 19 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 8 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 7 CO MtCO 396 404 448 NMVOC Mt 48 55 60 NOx MtN 7 8 10 2.31 0.85 3.16 132 1.9 24.4 32 12 10 499 70 14 3.08 0.84 3.92 153 2.2 31.7 49 16 13 603 81 19 3.52 0.78 4.30 171 2.5 32.6 69 21 18 656 89 21 3.96 0.71 4.68 188 2.8 33.5 98 26 23 709 96 24 4.84 0.52 5.36 208 3.1 29.0 139 34 29 758 106 26 5.72 0.32 6.04 229 3.5 24.4 181 39 32 808 115 29 6.70 0.21 6.91 246 3.8 22.1 233 45 37 877 127 32 7.79 0.18 7.97 259 4.1 21.9 295 50 41 968 142 36 8.87 0.16 9.03 272 4.4 21.8 336 52 43 1058 156 40 476 Statistical Table Scenario A2G-IMAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5297 8225 11298 14719 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 21.0 45.3 111.3 248.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 0.0 0.0 0.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 50 40 22 16 Liquids 98 145 203 191 Gas 50 108 229 341 Electricity 35 91 262 444 Others 0 0 0 0 Total 272 428 781 1092 Primary Energy EJ Coal 82 101 253 237 Oil 116 175 235 178 Gas 78 187 396 458 Nuclear 1 6 46 71 Biomass 6 40 22 16 Non-commercial 17 37 107 344 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 344 Total 344 546 781 1092 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 2.3 7.4 21.6 Oil 0.1 4.3 10.5 21.5 Gas 0.1 3.8 12.2 35.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 0 7.1 18.17 82.4 172.4 282.9 415.3 570.7 749.2 939.9 1131.6 1324.4 1518.4 1713.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 0.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Grasslands 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.98 9.07 12.10 15.14 18.17 18.05 17.93 17.81 17.69 17.57 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 2.04 3.01 2.29 1.56 0.84 1.07 1.30 1.53 1.76 1.99 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 10.02 12.08 14.39 16.70 19.01 19.12 19.23 19.34 19.45 19.56 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 408 493 537 581 625 653 681 709 737 765 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 9.6 12.2 12.7 13.3 13.9 14.5 15.0 15.6 16.2 16.7 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 69.9 70.7 83.8 96.9 110.0 104.9 99.7 94.6 89.4 84.3 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 785 292 258 291 312 384 457 549 662 753 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 41 51 64 77 92 104 122 135 153 165 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 50 64 75 89 104 82 78 77 75 73 CO MtCO 879 877 812 748 713 678 642 669 696 723 750 776 NMVOC Mt 139 141 154 166 165 163 161 167 172 177 183 188 NOx MtN 31 32 37 42 55 68 70 78 78 77 75 73 14719 248.5 0.0 16 99 191 341 444 0 1092 237 178 458 71 16 344 1304 21.6 21.5 35.5 7.1 82.4 172.4 282.9 415.3 570.7 749.2 939.9 1131.6 1324.4 1518.4 1713.4 0.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 17.57 1.99 19.56 765 16.7 84.3 753 178 165 776 188 73 Statistical Table 477 Scenario A2G-IMAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 801 953 1068 1393 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.5 30.7 57.7 109.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 6 4 2 2 Liquids 7 7 9 17 Gas 51 55 56 57 Electricity 34 49 66 103 Others 21 46 70 111 Total 119 161 201 289 Primary Energy EJ Coal 24 17 23 36 Oil 55 62 58 50 Gas 51 96 119 151 Nuclear 1 22 6 11 Biomass 6 2 2 2 Non-commercial 10 40 80 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 10 40 80 Total 147 202 248 330 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.0 2.5 Oil 0.1 1.1 2.4 4.4 Gas 0.1 2.1 5.1 11.4 2.8 33.0 66.5 103.2 142.6 184.6 229.0 276.0 325.8 378.2 433.4 491.2 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.40 3.60 3.77 3.95 4.12 4.29 4.45 4.62 4.78 4.95 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.22 0.30 0.37 0.45 0.55 0.66 0.76 0.87 0.98 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.51 3.82 4.07 4.32 4.57 4.84 5.11 5.38 5.65 5.92 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 88 103 107 111 116 121 127 133 139 144 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.6 3.7 3.8 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 13.4 9.8 10.7 11.6 12.6 13.7 14.8 15.9 17.1 18.2 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 107 103 111 116 125 130 135 142 151 160 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 14 14 14 14 13 11 13 15 17 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 25 28 29 29 28 26 20 12 14 16 CO MtCO 179 161 123 85 87 89 91 96 102 107 113 118 NMVOC Mt 42 36 35 34 36 37 38 40 43 45 48 50 NOx MtN 13 12 11 9 10 11 11 12 13 13 14 14 478 Statistical Table Scenario A2G-IMAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 28 26 20 12 14 16 CO MtCO 179 161 123 85 87 89 91 96 102 107 113 118 NMVOC Mt 42 36 35 34 36 37 38 40 43 45 48 50 NOx MtN 13 12 11 9 10 11 11 12 13 13 14 14 Statistical Table 478 Scenario A2G-IMAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 421 391 405 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.0 1.5 3.5 6.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 1 1 0 Solids 11 5 3 4 Liquids 18 15 12 9 Gas 12 10 12 12 Electricity 7 10 18 21 Others Total 50 41 46 46 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 12 14 12 Oil 26 21 21 12 Gas 21 19 27 21 Nuclear Biomass 0 0 1 2 Non-commercial 2 1 1 0 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 2 4 9 14 Total 78 58 71 61 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.6 Oil 0.0 0.5 1.1 1.8 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.2 2.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 20.2 25.5 30.0 35.3 41.2 47.5 53.4 59.1 64.4 69.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.65 0.39 0.44 0.49 0.53 0.47 0.41 0.35 0.28 0.22 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.08 0.10 0.14 0.17 0.21 0.24 0.28 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.66 0.41 0.49 0.56 0.64 0.61 0.58 0.55 0.52 0.49 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 44 50 49 48 48 47 47 46 45 45 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.5 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.2 4.0 3.9 3.8 3.7 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 13 20 27 31 37 41 44 48 52 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 17 20 25 30 35 40 42 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 7 10 12 15 19 24 28 32 36 38 CO MtCO 69 41 25 10 11 12 13 12 11 10 10 9 NMVOC Mt 16 13 12 11 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 3 3 2 2 Statistical Table 479 Scenario A2G-IMAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 4294 5746 7284 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.4 5.8 25.6 69.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 20 14 2 Solids 4 29 17 3 Liquids 0 28 2 79 Gas 25 26 36 35 Electricity 24 145 56 40 Others 53 4 25 6 Total 184 1.2 0.8 0.8 Primary Energy EJ Coal 11 35 62 110 Oil 113 331 147 50 Gas 172 28 11 41 Nuclear 449 4.1 2.2 4.0 Biomass 7 48 39 144 Non-commercial 170 409 114 20 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 170 26 7 141 Total 477 11.9 3.8 13.8 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 1.5 19.3 43.1 73.6 Oil 115.8 174.5 249.6 331.3 Gas 409.8 485.1 557.2 626.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.48 3.19 4.78 6.36 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.23 0.21 0.27 0.32 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.72 3.40 5.04 6.69 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 156 186 216 245 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 3.0 3.4 3.8 4.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 28.4 31.5 35.5 39.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 11 18 27 38 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 11 15 20 25 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 16 20 27 CO MtCO 235 270 252 235 269 304 NMVOC Mt 33 37 40 42 46 51 NOx MtN 7 9 12 16 23 31 7.95 7.62 7.29 6.96 6.63 6.30 0.38 0.39 0.40 0.41 0.42 0.43 8.33 8.01 7.69 7.37 7.05 6.73 275 285 295 305 316 326 4.5 4.6 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1 43.6 38.1 32.6 27.1 21.5 16.0 54 77 100 130 167 204 32 42 49 56 64 67 34 43 49 55 62 67 339 346 353 360 368 375 55 56 56 57 57 58 39 37 35 32 30 28 480 Statistical Table Scenario A2G-IMAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1293 2557 4093 5637 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 2.1 7.3 24.5 63.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 10 9 7 Solids 2 6 17 30 Liquids 15 40 74 87 Gas 3 14 42 83 Electricity 2 12 61 142 Others Total 35 81 203 349 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 16 69 75 Oil 18 51 107 96 Gas 3 19 78 117 Nuclear Biomass 0 1 11 32 Non-commercial 14 10 9 7 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 3 5 18 109 Total 41 103 291 437 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 1.4 5.6 Oil 0.0 1.9 4.9 11.5 Gas 0.0 0.4 1.8 7.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 42.7 80.6 126.8 176.4 229.4 285.1 342.6 402.0 463.3 526.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.45 1.89 3.12 4.34 5.56 5.67 5.78 5.89 6.00 6.11 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 1.69 2.56 1.67 0.79 -0.09 -0.01 0.07 0.15 0.23 0.31 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 3.14 4.45 4.79 5.13 5.47 5.66 5.85 6.04 6.22 6.41 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 120 154 165 176 187 200 212 225 237 250 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 3.2 5.2 5.3 5.5 5.6 5.9 6.2 6.5 6.8 7.1 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 17.6 22.4 30.4 38.5 46.6 45.9 45.3 44.7 44.0 43.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 19 32 49 69 98 139 181 233 295 336 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 8 12 16 21 26 34 39 45 50 52 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 7 10 13 18 23 29 32 37 41 43 CO MtCO 396 404 412 419 346 273 201 215 230 245 260 274 NMVOC Mt 48 55 67 79 72 65 58 60 63 66 68 71 NOx MtN 7 8 11 14 18 23 28 28 28 28 28 29 Statistical Table 481 Scenario A2-MESSAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6170 7188 8206 9170 10715 11296 12139 12587 13828 14743 15068 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.9 25.2 31.9 40.5 51.2 72.3 81.6 101.9 114.1 159.3 218.4 242.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 25.7 31.2 39.7 50.5 63.3 82.2 106.0 132.2 155.2 180.1 208.0 225.6 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 38 23 26 24 22 20 18 17 16 16 15 15 Solids 42 39 27 20 13 24 32 30 21 9 7 6 Liquids 111 137 181 235 279 284 296 302 352 391 456 501 Gas 41 51 58 68 85 105 132 162 145 156 143 161 Electricity 35 46 60 82 109 147 184 230 277 337 397 459 Others 8 11 17 28 44 65 88 113 137 158 180 200 Total 275 306 368 457 552 645 750 855 947 1066 1197 1342 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 83 97 122 157 211 273 342 458 569 735 871 Oil 128 171 208 253 274 244 205 146 109 86 64 47 Gas 71 86 108 135 173 208 245 292 268 285 281 289 Nuclear 7 9 13 17 22 34 47 62 79 97 116 136 Biomass 46 41 42 50 69 97 141 194 245 271 287 299 Other Renewables 8 14 21 34 50 77 103 132 165 196 228 280 Total 352 404 489 610 745 871 1014 1168 1323 1504 1710 1921 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.7 2.7 3.9 5.5 7.6 10.3 13.7 18.3 24.0 31.4 Oil 0.0 1.5 3.2 5.3 7.8 10.5 13.0 15.0 16.5 17.6 18.4 19.1 Gas 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.7 4.0 5.8 7.9 10.3 13.2 15.9 18.8 21.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 169.6 274.1 398.1 537.8 690.5 855.3 1034.3 1234.7 1466.3 1732.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.34 10.32 12.28 13.66 15.11 16.46 18.38 21.10 24.90 28.21 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.11 1.14 1.05 0.96 0.81 0.59 0.38 0.22 0.10 -0.02 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.45 11.46 13.33 14.62 15.91 17.05 18.76 21.32 25.00 28.19 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 363 418 489 592 671 743 803 900 993 1069 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.6 6.8 7.1 7.3 7.6 7.9 8.1 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 68.3 79.8 94.2 106.5 103.6 99.0 83.8 74.3 68.1 68.7 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 785 292 258 291 312 384 457 549 662 753 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 41 51 64 77 92 113 129 148 168 178 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 50 64 75 89 104 122 129 135 153 165 CO MtCO 879 877 972 1100 1246 1396 1585 1810 2075 2250 2426 2646 NMVOC Mt 139 141 170 204 229 239 242 241 247 262 281 311 NOx MtN 31 32 38 47 56 61 66 71 78 87 97 110 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation 291 312 384 457 549 662 753 32 25 41 51 64 77 92 113 129 148 168 178 38 40 50 64 75 89 104 122 129 135 153 165 879 877 972 1100 1246 1396 1585 1810 2075 2250 2426 2646 139 141 170 204 229 239 242 241 247 262 281 311 31 32 38 47 56 61 66 71 78 87 97 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A2 land-use data. a: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). b: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (IS92f). c: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. d: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. 482 Statistical Table Scenario A2-MESSAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 851 923 975 1027 1072 1131 1151 1202 1228 1323 1451 1496 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 15.3 18.7 22.3 26.0 30.0 37.1 39.9 46.3 50.0 63.1 80.7 87.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 16.0 18.5 20.8 23.1 28.2 30.8 36.2 39.0 49.5 63.8 69.8 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 9 5 3 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 72 88 102 105 99 88 78 79 80 85 94 Gas 22 26 22 16 19 23 28 33 27 26 26 27 Electricity 22 28 35 43 53 65 75 88 101 117 133 153 Others 1 1 1 4 7 10 14 18 25 28 33 39 Total 124 136 151 168 185 197 205 217 232 251 277 314 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 40 47 56 71 91 112 126 151 195 232 240 Oil 72 89 99 105 96 83 62 41 31 23 16 11 Gas 33 38 42 43 52 52 58 77 80 72 81 99 Nuclear 6 7 9 11 13 17 19 25 31 36 42 50 Biomass 6 6 6 8 12 16 21 29 32 35 37 41 Other Renewables 4 6 7 11 15 21 27 32 39 43 48 55 Total 159 185 209 233 259 280 300 328 363 404 457 496 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.8 2.5 3.4 4.6 5.9 7.7 10.1 13.0 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.7 2.7 3.7 4.7 5.5 6.1 6.5 6.8 7.1 7.2 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.6 2.1 2.6 3.2 4.0 4.8 5.5 6.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 67.0 105.0 146.5 191.1 238.2 287.7 341.8 404.0 476.7 556.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 a GtC 2.83 3.20 3.61 3.98 4.33 4.58 4.83 5.08 5.74 6.70 7.86 8.06 Other CO2 b GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.61 3.98 4.33 4.58 4.83 5.08 5.74 6.70 7.86 8.06 CH4 total c MtCH4 73 74 72 72 78 89 99 111 126 149 176 175 N2O total d MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.8 2.9 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 11.0 5.9 4.0 3.1 2.1 1.9 2.8 3.9 5.1 5.7 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 107 103 111 116 125 130 135 142 151 160 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 14 14 14 14 13 11 13 15 17 SF6 MtC eq. 23 23 25 28 29 29 30 26 25 12 27 25 CO MtCO 179 161 170 180 185 200 208 226 223 229 233 243 NMVOC Mt 42 36 37 36 35 35 30 27 25 24 24 26 NOx MtN 13 12 14 15 16 17 18 18 19 20 21 25 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A2 land-use data. a: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). b: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (IS92f). c: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. d: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. Statistical Table 483 Scenario A2-MESSAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 418 421 438 454 473 507 519 551 568 622 684 706 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 0.9 0.8 1.0 1.4 2.1 3.2 3.7 4.9 5.7 8.5 12.5 14.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 2.6 3.2 4.2 5.0 6.2 9.0 10.9 13.0 12.5 12.8 13.8 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 4 3 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 13 15 18 22 21 21 24 29 33 38 45 Gas 14 14 16 17 18 18 20 19 18 18 19 19 Electricity 6 6 7 9 11 15 19 24 27 31 37 43 Others 7 6 5 7 10 13 14 18 21 22 24 24 Total 50 43 46 53 62 67 74 85 94 104 117 131 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 11 11 13 17 18 23 34 47 50 64 82 Oil 20 18 18 20 21 18 13 12 9 6 5 2 Gas 27 28 30 33 39 45 52 47 35 39 45 51 Nuclear 1 1 1 0 1 1 2 4 5 7 9 10 Biomass 1 1 1 2 4 6 11 18 28 26 24 1 Other Renewables 1 1 2 3 5 8 10 13 16 19 22 27 Total 70 60 62 70 84 95 107 121 131 148 170 195 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.6 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.6 3.0 3.4 3.8 4.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.7 31.9 44.0 57.5 72.3 88.5 106.0 124.1 144.9 170.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 a GtC 1.30 0.91 0.96 1.09 1.31 1.40 1.54 1.71 1.78 1.86 2.30 2.84 Other CO2 b GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.96 1.09 1.31 1.40 1.54 1.71 1.78 1.86 2.30 2.84 CH4 total c MtCH4 47 39 41 44 51 58 66 69 72 78 94 113 N2O total d MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.9 12.5 15.3 18.2 20.7 23.3 18.2 11.8 6.2 6.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 13 20 27 31 37 41 44 48 52 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 17 20 25 30 35 40 42 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 7 10 12 15 19 24 28 32 36 38 CO MtCO 69 41 43 51 61 68 75 82 100 114 145 183 NMVOC Mt 16 13 16 19 21 24 23 20 20 21 25 32 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 5 5 5 6 7 7 7 9 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A2 land-use data. a: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). b: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (IS92f). c: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. d: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. 484 Statistical Table Scenario A2-MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2791 3295 3801 4308 4779 5500 5764 6137 6333 6858 7214 7340 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.4 2.3 3.5 5.3 7.6 12.6 15.0 20.0 23.1 34.9 50.5 57.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 7.4 10.3 14.3 19.5 27.3 36.8 47.5 57.1 66.1 74.7 79.9 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 16 17 17 15 14 12 11 11 10 10 9 Solids 19 19 15 12 9 21 29 28 18 6 4 2 Liquids 13 26 42 61 85 93 105 104 119 133 155 180 Gas 2 4 8 17 21 19 26 46 43 53 49 45 Electricity 4 6 10 17 25 35 46 58 75 96 114 131 Others 1 4 7 11 17 25 35 44 53 62 71 78 Total 62 75 100 135 172 207 252 291 319 360 402 445 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 27 33 42 54 82 104 128 187 235 310 390 Oil 15 31 47 67 86 80 71 47 27 16 10 4 Gas 3 7 15 23 27 23 29 50 47 56 49 41 Nuclear 0 1 2 3 5 8 13 17 22 29 34 39 Biomass 24 21 24 29 36 47 63 77 77 79 82 84 Other Renewables 1 3 6 9 14 22 31 42 57 73 81 90 Total 74 90 125 173 222 262 312 361 417 489 566 648 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.9 2.7 3.7 4.9 6.9 9.4 12.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.6 2.5 3.3 4.0 4.5 4.8 4.9 5.0 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.2 1.8 2.2 2.8 3.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 42.6 72.8 110.7 154.8 203.5 256.9 318.0 390.9 478.9 585.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 a GtC 1.15 1.78 2.36 3.16 3.93 4.48 4.97 5.48 6.61 7.90 9.72 11.69 Other CO2 b GtC 0.37 0.26 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.2 1.8 2.2 2.8 3.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 42.6 72.8 110.7 154.8 203.5 256.9 318.0 390.9 478.9 585.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.36 3.16 3.93 4.48 4.97 5.48 6.61 7.90 9.72 11.69 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.26 0.27 0.22 0.17 0.12 0.09 0.05 0.01 -0.03 -0.08 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.62 3.42 4.15 4.66 5.10 5.57 6.66 7.91 9.69 11.62 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 153 190 232 283 319 356 394 444 487 523 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 27.8 36.7 44.3 52.9 47.2 40.7 30.8 27.5 26.8 26.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 11 18 27 38 54 77 100 130 167 204 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 11 15 20 25 32 42 49 56 64 67 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 16 20 27 34 43 49 55 62 67 CO MtCO 235 270 335 422 497 538 589 653 746 859 968 1107 NMVOC Mt 33 37 49 63 72 73 75 82 91 102 113 128 NOx MtN 7 9 12 16 19 21 23 25 28 33 38 43 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using a: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). b: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (IS92f). c: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. d: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. Statistical Table 485 Scenario A2-MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1222 1530 1974 2417 2846 3578 3862 4250 4458 5025 5394 5526 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 2.4 3.8 3.4 5.2 5.1 7.7 7.8 11.2 11.5 15.7 19.3 20.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 23.0 29.4 30.6 37.5 35.4 46.1 52.9 52.0 74.7 56.7 Land Use Million ha Cropland 83.8 62.2 14 8 9 7 6 6 6 6 6 6 Grasslands 1 7 4 3 2 2 3 2 2 3 3 3 Energy Biomass 17 26 36 54 68 71 83 96 125 145 178 183 Forest 4 6 11 19 27 45 58 64 57 59 50 70 Others 3 5 8 14 20 33 45 61 75 92 113 133 Total 0 1 3 6 10 18 25 33 39 45 52 59 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 39 53 71 101 134 174 219 262 303 350 402 454 Solids 5 5 7 11 15 19 34 53 73 90 129 159 Liquids 21 34 44 62 71 62 59 46 42 41 34 30 Gas 8 13 22 36 55 89 107 119 107 118 107 98 Electricity 0 1 1 2 4 7 12 17 21 26 31 37 Others 14 13 12 12 18 31 50 78 117 129 141 151 Total 2 3 7 11 16 26 35 45 53 60 75 107 Primary Energy EJ Coal 49 69 93 134 179 234 296 358 412 463 517 582 Oil 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.4 1.8 2.1 2.5 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.7 2.4 3.0 3.6 4.1 4.5 4.9 5.2 Nuclear 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.2 3.3 4.5 5.5 6.7 7.8 Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 1.4 17.8 38.2 64.3 96.8 134.4 176.5 222.2 268.6 315.7 365.8 419.9 Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.40 2.10 2.71 3.19 3.77 4.18 4.25 4.65 5.02 5.61 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.85 0.87 0.83 0.79 0.68 0.51 0.33 0.20 0.13 0.06 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.25 2.97 3.54 3.98 4.45 4.69 4.58 4.85 5.16 5.67 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 99 112 128 163 187 207 212 229 235 259 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 15.6 21.7 27.6 29.4 30.6 30.2 29.1 28.1 27.0 26.9 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 19 32 49 69 98 139 181 233 295 336 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 8 12 16 21 26 34 39 45 50 52 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 7 10 13 18 23 29 32 37 41 43 CO MtCO 396 404 424 448 503 591 712 848 1007 1048 1081 1113 NMVOC Mt 48 55 68 86 101 108 113 112 112 115 119 125 NOx MtN 7 8 10 12 15 18 20 27 24 27 29 32 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM A2 land-use data. a: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). b: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (IS92f). c: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. d: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-A2 run. 486 Statistical Table Scenario A2-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 World Population Million 5293 6208 7174 8192 9250 10284 11296 12238 13108 13905 14508 15124 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 35.4 44.7 55.6 69.5 86.4 108.7 135.2 165.9 204.1 246.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 58 73 88 100 114 131 131 136 145 150 155 Liquids 121 125 131 136 150 150 183 216 257 306 354 403 Gas 52 62 72 80 82 77 67 64 66 71 66 62 Electricity 35 53 78 109 144 190 246 320 410 517 643 769 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 299 353 416 462 532 628 732 869 1039 1214 1388 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 117 144 170 239 325 429 529 629 729 858 988 Oil 131 135 139 144 111 91 84 69 68 79 72 64 Gas 70 84 113 155 173 181 179 186 201 222 202 183 Nuclear 24 25 30 39 53 71 93 105 123 148 181 214 Biomass 0 6 11 17 25 37 52 77 99 116 139 163 Other Renewables 24 24 27 31 39 52 70 108 153 206 279 353 Total 336 392 465 556 640 757 907 1074 1272 1501 1732 1964 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.2 2.5 4.0 6.3 9.2 12.8 17.9 23.7 30.3 38.6 46.9 Oil 0.1 1.5 2.8 4.3 5.4 6.5 7.3 8.1 8.8 9.5 10.2 11.0 Gas 0.1 0.9 1.9 3.2 4.9 6.6 8.4 10.3 12.2 14.3 16.4 18.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 167.9 267.6 382.8 513.5 664.0 837.0 1033.3 1254.0 1501.5 1779.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1472 1481 1531 1620 1689 1729 1739 1676 1629 1598 1585 1573 Grasslands 3209 3348 3554 3828 4074 4274 4427 4373 4348 4351 4411 4471 Energy Biomass 0 4 8 15 38 75 126 201 251 277 336 396 Forest 4173 4214 4137 3942 3685 3503 3396 3591 3717 3772 3636 3500 Others 4310 4118 3934 3759 3678 3584 3476 3323 3220 3166 3195 3224 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.06 9.40 10.81 12.77 15.24 17.62 20.34 23.41 26.28 29.39 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.06 1.44 1.38 1.18 0.91 0.82 0.48 -0.09 -0.09 -0.09 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.12 10.83 12.19 13.96 16.15 18.44 20.83 23.32 26.19 29.30 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 348 381 415 452 485 508 540 580 621 663 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.9 8.8 9.7 10.8 11.7 12.1 12.7 13.5 14.6 15.6 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 81.1 82.7 91.4 100.7 110.6 112.1 108.7 100.2 89.7 79.3 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 785 292 258 291 312 384 457 549 662 753 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 41 51 64 77 92 113 129 148 168 178 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 50 64 75 89 104 122 129 135 153 165 Statistical Table 487 Scenario A2-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 OECD90 Population Million 838 916 980 1030 1053 1116 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 24.5 28.3 29.6 34.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 13 13 13 14 Liquids 72 72 70 67 62 33 Gas 27 35 42 47 46 39 Electricity 22 28 35 43 47 59 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 147 160 170 167 166 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 46 47 43 51 75 Oil 76 76 73 68 56 28 Gas 28 34 46 62 82 82 Nuclear 20 15 13 14 14 16 Biomass 0 13 13 13 14 72 72 70 67 62 33 27 35 42 47 46 39 22 28 35 43 47 59 0 0 0 0 0 0 130 147 160 170 167 166 40 46 47 43 51 75 76 76 73 68 56 28 34 46 62 82 82 76 20 15 13 14 14 16 0 4 4 5 8 12 11 10 10 10 10 12 182 196 209 221 218 216 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.4 1.7 2.6 0.1 0.8 1.6 2.3 2.5 3.2 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.1 3.3 2.8 33.0 66.7 103.1 140.5 178.5 408 414 427 447 452 461 796 819 854 899 916 961 0 4 6 8 13 29 921 930 921 892 875 836 998 955 915 875 866 835 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 2.83 3.20 3.42 3.53 3.54 3.71 0.00 0.00 0.13 0.21 0.20 0.16 2.83 3.20 3.54 3.74 3.74 3.86 73 74 81 88 90 99 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.3 22.7 17.0 16.2 8.3 7.5 6.6 19 57 107 103 111 116 18 13 14 14 14 14 23 23 25 28 29 29 1151 1197 1253 1319 1405 1493 38.4 42.5 47.6 53.8 62.4 71.6 na na na na na na 0 0 0 0 0 0 16 15 14 15 15 16 57 57 61 68 76 83 32 28 27 28 26 24 69 74 83 96 112 128 0 0 0 0 0 0 173 174 185 206 229 251 94 112 131 152 194 236 18 10 5 5 4 3 68 63 62 63 52 40 18 18 19 22 27 32 11 14 16 18 22 26 14 18 24 31 42 53 223 236 259 292 341 390 3.4 4.5 5.7 7.1 9.0 10.8 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.7 3.8 4.0 4.7 5.3 5.9 6.5 7.0 218.5 260.7 305.1 352.5 405.0 464.7 457 440 429 424 419 414 984 979 978 981 989 996 41 50 56 60 72 85 829 877 906 916 894 872 811 777 754 742 749 756 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3.99 4.17 4.51 4.98 5.68 6.44 0.14 0.14 0.07 -0.07 -0.09 -0.11 4.12 4.31 4.57 4.91 5.60 6.33 105 114 123 133 148 163 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 5.8 5.4 5.4 5.7 6.5 7.3 125 130 135 142 151 160 14 13 11 13 15 17 28 26 20 12 14 16 488 Statistical Table Scenario A2-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 430 439 455 474 495 519 550 585 623 664 707 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.2 2.7 3.7 4.9 6.4 8.3 10.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 8 7 7 8 9 9 9 9 9 9 Liquids 18 12 8 7 7 7 8 9 11 14 16 17 Gas 19 15 12 10 10 9 7 7 7 8 7 7 Electricity 6 8 11 14 16 20 24 32 41 51 62 73 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 44 39 39 41 43 48 57 68 81 94 106 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 17 18 34 53 76 123 169 214 290 367 Oil 20 14 10 9 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Gas 26 20 18 20 20 19 17 17 19 21 18 16 Nuclear 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 11 12 14 17 19 Biomass 0 1 1 2 3 4 6 9 12 14 17 19 Other Renewables 3 3 3 4 5 6 8 11 16 21 28 34 Total 70 58 55 59 72 91 116 171 227 283 370 457 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.9 3.0 4.5 6.3 9.1 11.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.1 29.9 40.3 53.1 68.8 89.8 118.1 153.2 197.4 253.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 297 317 345 368 382 388 368 353 345 348 350 Grasslands 395 410 444 498 548 585 611 586 573 572 594 615 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 2 7 14 23 39 49 54 64 74 Forest 1007 1016 995 942 879 836 815 871 906 919 879 839 Others 691 655 621 590 576 559 541 514 496 487 493 498 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.81 0.83 1.05 1.34 1.68 2.42 3.15 3.90 5.03 6.31 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.09 0.10 0.08 0.03 0.06 0.03 -0.06 -0.03 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.84 0.92 1.16 1.42 1.72 2.47 3.18 3.84 5.00 6.31 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 45 55 65 74 83 99 118 140 171 203 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.7 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.4 10.0 11.8 13.6 15.4 16.1 16.4 16.2 14.9 13.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 13 20 27 31 37 41 44 48 52 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 17 20 25 30 35 40 42 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 7 10 12 15 19 24 28 32 36 38 Statistical Table 489 Scenario A2-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3296 3802 4308 4817 5302 5763 6180 6558 6898 7133 7372 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 5.5 8.7 13.0 18.3 24.6 33.0 43.1 54.8 69.1 85.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 33 46 60 68 78 88 88 92 99 102 106 Liquids 14 20 26 32 35 42 54 66 80 96 112 128 Gas 2 5 8 11 11 10 10 10 11 12 12 11 Electricity 4 11 22 37 49 67 88 120 159 204 259 314 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 70 103 139 163 197 240 284 341 412 485 559 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 48 71 96 121 154 192 225 252 273 273 272 Oil 16 22 28 34 28 24 22 16 15 17 14 10 Gas 3 9 18 31 38 43 48 52 58 67 63 58 Nuclear 1 4 8 13 19 27 38 43 50 61 75 89 Biomass 0 2 5 8 12 17 23 33 41 48 57 65 Other Renewables 3 4 5 6 9 15 23 38 57 80 111 142 Total 49 89 135 187 227 280 345 407 474 546 591 637 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.1 1.9 3.0 4.4 6.1 8.3 10.6 13.2 16.0 18.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.2 2.7 3.4 4.0 4.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.5 76.3 117.2 165.4 222.2 287.9 362.0 444.8 534.1 627.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 508 461 472 476 462 452 445 439 433 428 423 Grasslands 605 630 653 659 665 670 673 676 679 682 685 688 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 1168 1141 1100 1043 991 944 904 899 896 895 885 876 Others 664 630 599 570 557 542 525 501 484 476 481 486 Total 2729 2697 2668 2640 2626 2610 2592 2568 2553 2545 2550 2554 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.60 3.50 4.14 4.96 5.97 6.85 7.77 8.72 9.14 9.57 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.27 0.28 0.25 0.19 0.13 0.06 0.00 0.01 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.79 3.77 4.42 5.21 6.16 6.98 7.84 8.72 9.15 9.59 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 133 143 152 163 176 180 184 186 179 172 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.1 3.4 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.8 5.0 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 36.8 46.0 51.1 55.8 60.2 59.5 56.1 50.1 43.5 36.9 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 11 18 27 38 54 77 100 130 167 204 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 11 15 20 25 32 42 49 56 64 67 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 16 20 27 34 43 49 55 62 67 CO MtCO 403 421 444 461 472 476 462 452 445 439 433 428 NMVOC Mt 523 546 578 605 630 653 659 665 670 673 676 679 NOx MtN 0 1 4 12 22 33 47 56 60 71 83 95 490 Statistical Table Scenario A2-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ALM Population Million GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 7 10 13 17 19 Electricity 3 6 10 16 28 45 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 38 52 68 93 126 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 9 13 26 44 Oil 20 23 28 33 35 38 Gas 7 10 15 22 34 42 Nuclear 0 2 4 6 12 19 Biomass 0 1 1 2 4 8 Other Renewables 5 6 8 11 15 20 Total 35 48 66 89 126 171 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 Total 1.4 17.8 36.6 58.3 84.8 116.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 391 368 365 384 403 414 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1510 1596 1710 1853 1989 2097 Land Use Million ha Cropland 0 0 0 0 0 10 Grasslands 3641 3585 3478 3318 3161 3028 Energy Biomass 19.57 18.78 18.00 17.23 16.88 16.47 Forest 7499 7427 7353 7279 7241 7196 Others 0.72 1.01 1.24 1.54 2.08 2.77 Total 0.73 0.82 0.70 0.87 0.80 0.69 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.94 2.41 2.88 3.46 Other CO2 GtC 77 85 89 96 108 116 Total CO2 GtC 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.3 2.7 CH4 total MtCH4 10.5 12.8 14.7 15.4 18.1 21.7 N2O total MtN2O-N 0 2 19 32 49 69 SOx total MtS 4 4 8 12 16 21 HFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 10 13 18 PFC MtC eq. 3862 4311 4712 5065 5306 5552 SF6 MtC eq. 20.7 29.5 39.5 50.9 64.3 79.3 CO MtCO 0 0 0 0 0 0 NMVOC Mt 19 20 22 23 24 25 NOx MtN 65 83 104 128 151 174 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Scenario A2-MiniCAM (continued) Population Million 3862 4311 4712 5065 5306 5552 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.7 29.5 39.5 50.9 64.3 79.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 20 22 23 24 25 Liquids 65 83 104 128 151 174 Gas 18 19 20 23 21 20 Electricity 65 94 128 166 210 254 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 167 216 274 340 406 472 Primary Energy EJ Coal 67 69 77 91 101 112 Oil 44 43 48 57 54 51 Gas 46 53 62 72 70 68 Nuclear 27 33 41 50 62 74 Biomass 12 22 30 36 44 53 Other Renewables 26 40 56 74 98 123 Total 223 261 313 380 430 480 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 1.4 2.1 2.8 3.6 4.6 5.6 Oil 1.9 2.4 2.8 3.3 3.9 4.4 Gas 1.5 2.0 2.6 3.3 4.0 4.7 Total 154.5 198.6 248.1 303.5 365.0 432.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 418 405 394 384 379 375 Carbon Sequestration GtC 2179 2149 2132 2128 2156 2184 Land Use Million ha Cropland 28 65 90 104 129 153 Grasslands 2920 2930 2936 2939 2890 2841 Energy Biomass 1599 1532 1486 1461 1473 1484 Forest 7145 7081 7038 7016 7027 7037 Others 3.61 4.18 4.91 5.81 6.42 7.07 Total 0.54 0.49 0.32 0.04 0.02 0.00 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 4.15 4.67 5.24 5.84 6.44 7.07 Other CO2 GtC 120 114 115 121 123 125 Total CO2 GtC 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.8 4.2 4.6 CH4 total MtCH4 26.1 28.1 27.8 25.2 21.9 18.5 N2O total MtN2O-N 98 139 181 233 295 336 SOx total MtS 26 34 39 45 50 52 HFC MtC eq. 23 29 32 37 41 43 Statistical Table Scenario A2-A1-MiniCAM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5293 6007 6762 7558 8332 9054 9723 10217 10696 11161 11620 12090 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 33.0 37.6 41.8 48.8 58.6 76.4 98.2 123.8 158.1 197 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 60 70 73 80 90 103 102 106 116 125 135 Liquids 121 128 130 128 116 124 151 198 253 314 381 447 Gas 52 64 73 78 81 91 110 128 155 191 208 225 Electricity 35 55 74 90 101 128 164 237 317 406 523 640 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 308 346 369 380 433 528 665 831 1027 1237 1447 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 121 136 133 148 167 189 196 213 239 266 294 Oil 131 138 138 133 114 118 145 200 260 327 395 464 Gas 70 87 111 142 149 171 209 263 328 405 444 483 Nuclear 24 27 30 32 37 47 64 95 123 149 214 278 Biomass 0 6 10 13 16 18 22 34 44 51 55 59 Other Renewables 24 24 27 31 36 43 51 70 92 118 151 183 Total 336 403 452 485 499 564 679 857 1061 1289 1525 1761 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.5 4.2 5.3 6.9 8.2 10.6 12.6 14.8 17.5 20.1 Oil 0.1 1.1 5.2 9.4 13.8 17.7 21.5 25.8 29.4 33.4 37.9 42.5 Gas 0.1 0.9 1.9 3.1 4.6 6.3 7.9 9.8 11.4 13.6 15.3 17.1 Total 7.9 9.8 12.1 14.9 18.7 22.5 28.1 35.6 44.2 52.3 59.9 66.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 523.9 641.8 778.8 943.5 1135.8 1352.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 86 10.6 12.6 14.8 17.5 20.1 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1472 1461 1463 1478 1423 1359 1285 1214 1174 1165 1107 1050 Grasslands 3209 3343 3464 3572 3545 3524 3508 3557 3703 3948 4091 4234 Energy Biomass 0 4 8 14 16 17 18 45 65 75 71 67 Forest 4173 4214 4155 3995 4092 4252 4475 4571 4436 4069 3925 3782 Others 4310 4142 4074 4106 4088 4012 3878 3777 3787 3908 3970 4032 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.62 7.89 8.13 8.89 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 0.76 0.62 0.37 0.35 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.39 8.51 8.50 9.24 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 339 354 363 379 N2O total MtN2O-N 67.7 70.7 78.8 86.9 94.9 99.7 SOx total MtS 0.73 0.65 0.66 0.70 0.78 0.83 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq 1672 883 785 292 258 291 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 41 51 64 77 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 50 64 75 89 CO MtCO 11.46 12.40 14.83 17.77 20.28 23.00 NMVOC Mt 0.58 0.13 0.04 0.31 0.10 -0.11 NOx MtN 11.05 12.52 14.87 18.08 20.38 22.89 402 428 473 537 582 627 10.6 11.5 13.0 15.1 17.2 19.3 78.1 81.4 84.0 86.2 85.4 84.5 312 384 457 549 662 753 92 113 129 148 168 178 104 122 129 135 153 165 492 Statistical Table 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Scenario A2-A1-MiniCAM OECD90 Population Million 838 874 903 924 926 924 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 23.5 25.5 26.1 27.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 13 12 12 12 Liquids 72 73 71 66 61 51 Gas 27 36 43 47 47 48 Electricity 22 28 34 40 42 48 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 149 161 166 161 159 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 47 46 38 39 42 Oil 76 77 75 68 60 47 Gas 34 46 62 80 80 81 Nuclear 20 16 14 13 13 14 Biomass 0 2 4 4 4 5 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 10 10 Total 182 199 210 213 207 198 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.4 1.6 2.2 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.6 2.3 2.6 3.4 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.1 3.3 Total 2.8 33.0 65.9 99.3 131.6 162.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 408 408 408 406 395 365 Carbon Sequestration GtC 796 819 838 854 849 840 Land Use Million ha Cropland 0 4 6 7 8 9 Grasslands 921 931 924 902 919 976 Energy Biomass 998 961 946 954 952 933 Forest 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Others 2.83 3.20 3.37 3.33 3.23 3.10 Total 0.00 0.00 0.03 -0.05 -0.05 -0.03 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.40 3.27 3.19 3.08 Other CO2 GtC 73 74 81 85 85 87 Total CO2 GtC 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.9 2.9 3.1 CH4 total MtCH4 22.7 17.0 15.0 9.2 7.8 6.6 N2O total MtN2O-N 19 57 107 103 111 116 SOx total MtS 18 13 14 14 14 14 HFC MtC eq. 23 23 25 28 29 29 PFC MtC eq. 913 895 883 877 882 886 SF6 MtC eq. 29.5 31.4 33.7 36.4 40.1 44.1 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 29.5 31.4 33.7 36.4 40.1 44.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 11 9 8 8 9 9 Liquids 54 57 60 64 69 73 Gas 52 52 55 61 62 64 Electricity 53 57 61 64 72 80 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 170 175 185 198 212 226 Primary Energy EJ Coal 42 39 37 35 38 40 Oil 49 53 57 61 65 69 Gas 86 87 90 97 98 99 Nuclear 15 16 18 19 24 30 Biomass 5 6 7 7 7 7 Other Renewables 11 12 14 17 19 22 Total 207 213 223 236 251 267 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 2.6 3.0 3.4 3.7 4.1 4.5 Oil 3.9 4.4 4.9 5.5 6.2 6.8 Gas 4.1 5.0 5.9 6.8 7.8 8.8 Total 194.5 226.6 258.3 291.1 325.5 361.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 349 329 317 311 285 259 Carbon Sequestration GtC 842 848 873 915 930 944 Land Use Million ha Cropland 9 15 18 18 16 15 Grasslands 1020 1048 1029 963 962 961 Energy Biomass 903 882 886 915 930 945 Forest 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 3.22 3.21 3.28 3.43 12 14 17 19 22 207 213 223 236 251 267 2.6 3.0 3.4 3.7 4.1 4.5 3.9 4.4 4.9 5.5 6.2 6.8 4.1 5.0 5.9 6.8 7.8 8.8 194.5 226.6 258.3 291.1 325.5 361.1 349 329 317 311 285 259 842 848 873 915 930 944 9 15 18 18 16 15 1020 1048 1029 963 962 961 903 882 886 915 930 945 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3.22 3.21 3.28 3.43 3.58 3.74 0.03 -0.06 -0.09 -0.05 -0.08 -0.11 3.25 3.15 3.19 3.37 3.50 3.63 92 100 109 120 131 143 3.3 3.4 3.7 4.2 4.5 4.9 5.6 5.0 5.0 5.6 6.3 7.0 125 130 135 142 151 160 14 13 11 13 15 17 28 26 20 12 14 16 Statistical Table 493 Scenario A2-A1-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 446 462 475 480 480 475 470 466 464 470 475 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.6 2.2 3.0 3.9 5.1 6.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 11 10 8 7 6 6 6 5 5 6 6 Liquids 18 12 9 8 6 6 6 8 9 11 13 15 Gas 19 16 13 11 10 10 11 12 15 18 19 20 Electricity 6 9 11 13 13 13 14 20 26 32 39 47 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 48 43 40 36 35 37 45 55 66 77 88 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 19 19 17 18 19 20 18 18 20 22 24 Oil 20 15 11 9 6 5 6 8 11 13 15 17 Gas 26 21 20 21 19 18 18 23 28 33 35 37 Nuclear 3 4 6 6 6 6 6 8 10 11 15 19 Biomass 0 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 4 Other Renewables 3 3 3 4 5 5 6 8 9 11 13 16 Total 70 64 60 58 55 54 57 67 79 92 105 118 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.2 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.7 2.0 2.3 2.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.0 29.3 36.8 43.6 50.4 57.5 65.2 75.0 86.5 98.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 293 301 310 298 281 260 247 244 251 242 232 Grasslands 395 410 430 458 450 441 428 436 473 539 571 604 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 2 2 2 2 6 9 9 7 5 Forest 1007 1016 999 956 978 1018 1075 1093 1054 958 925 891 Others 691 659 646 652 649 636 612 595 598 621 633 644 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.81 0.74 0.67 0.65 0.66 0.75 0.88 1.04 1.16 1.29 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.07 0.03 0.02 0.04 -0.04 -0.03 0.07 0.03 -0.02 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.83 0.81 0.70 0.66 0.70 0.71 0.84 1.11 1.19 1.27 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 43 49 51 55 61 67 78 94 107 120 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.3 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.8 9.3 9.8 10.1 10.3 10.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 8 13 20 27 31 37 41 44 48 52 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 17 20 25 30 35 40 42 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 7 10 12 15 19 24 28 32 36 38 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 494 Statistical Table Scenario A2-A1-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3193 3603 4022 4396 4723 5004 5179 5343 5496 5663 5833 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 4.5 5.6 6.9 9.6 13.6 22.0 31.9 43.4 58.1 75.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 34 43 48 54 63 76 77 80 88 94 99 Liquids 14 21 24 24 24 30 41 62 84 107 132 156 Gas 2 6 7 8 8 10 15 21 29 39 43 47 Electricity 4 12 19 24 28 40 59 100 145 193 250 306 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 72 93 104 114 143 191 260 338 426 517 608 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 49 63 68 75 87 105 112 124 141 154 168 Oil 16 22 26 26 24 28 39 64 90 115 140 165 Gas 3 10 16 21 24 34 51 79 109 140 154 168 Nuclear 1 4 7 8 11 17 27 45 60 75 105 135 Biomass 0 2 4 6 7 9 11 18 24 29 31 34 Other Renewables 3 4 5 6 8 11 15 25 37 51 67 83 Total 49 92 121 136 148 186 249 344 444 550 652 753 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.2 5.3 6.5 7.8 9.3 10.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.2 1.6 2.1 2.9 3.9 5.3 6.6 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.3 2.1 3.0 4.2 5.7 7.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 41.7 67.2 94.3 124.5 161.7 208.2 265.2 335.0 416.5 507.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 399 406 411 403 390 373 351 339 336 327 319 Grasslands 508 523 535 545 548 554 562 570 583 601 621 641 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 4 5 6 7 21 32 39 39 38 Forest 1168 1145 1124 1104 1108 1114 1122 1125 1114 1090 1075 1061 Others 664 634 622 628 625 613 592 575 576 597 609 621 Total 2729 2701 2689 2693 2689 2677 2657 2642 2644 2663 2672 2680 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.27 2.48 2.66 3.19 4.08 5.10 6.27 7.59 8.59 9.65 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.17 0.18 0.10 0.07 0.09 0.03 0.02 0.08 0.04 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.44 2.66 2.76 3.27 4.17 5.13 6.29 7.67 8.63 9.64 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 129 128 131 133 136 139 146 159 168 176 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.7 3.9 4.3 4.9 5.5 6.1 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 31.5 30.8 32.3 36.0 41.9 43.4 43.8 43.1 40.1 37.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 11 18 27 38 54 77 100 130 167 204 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 11 15 20 25 32 42 49 56 64 67 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 16 20 27 34 43 49 55 62 67 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 495 Scenario A2-A1-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1494 1795 2136 2528 2926 3331 3673 4004 4323 4605 4896 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 3.9 5.2 7.0 9.9 13.9 20.8 29.6 40.2 54.8 71.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 4 6 8 9 10 11 12 15 17 20 Liquids 17 22 26 30 30 37 50 72 99 132 168 203 Gas 5 7 9 12 16 23 32 42 56 74 84 94 Electricity 3 6 9 13 19 27 38 60 86 117 162 207 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 38 49 60 73 96 130 184 253 337 431 525 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 8 10 14 18 22 27 34 42 52 61 Oil 20 23 27 30 31 38 51 75 104 138 175 212 Gas 7 10 14 20 27 38 53 75 102 135 157 178 Nuclear 0 2 4 5 7 11 16 25 35 45 69 93 Biomass 0 1 1 2 3 3 4 7 9 11 13 15 Other Renewables 5 6 8 11 14 16 19 25 32 40 51 63 Total 35 48 63 78 95 125 166 233 315 411 517 622 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.6 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.9 2.6 3.5 4.6 6.3 8.0 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 1.0 1.4 2.1 3.0 4.1 5.7 7.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 35.5 52.9 71.0 91.5 117.3 149.6 190.0 242.3 307.3 384.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 391 362 348 350 339 323 303 287 275 267 253 239 Grasslands 1510 1592 1660 1716 1703 1690 1676 1702 1775 1892 1969 2045 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 6 9 10 10 Forest 3641 3595 3539 3474 3495 3525 3565 3560 3498 3379 3306 3232 Others 1957 1887 1859 1872 1864 1830 1771 1725 1727 1775 1799 1822 4.1 5.7 7.2 1.4 17.8 35.5 52.9 71.0 91.5 117.3 149.6 190.0 242.3 307.3 384.4 391 362 348 350 339 323 303 287 275 267 253 239 1510 1592 1660 1716 1703 1690 1676 1702 1775 1892 1969 2045 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 6 9 10 10 3641 3595 3539 3474 3495 3525 3565 3560 3498 3379 3306 3232 1957 1887 1859 1872 1864 1830 1771 1725 1727 1775 1799 1822 7499 7436 7407 7413 7401 7368 7315 7277 7279 7323 7336 7349 0.72 1.01 1.17 1.35 1.57 1.95 2.50 3.33 4.41 5.71 6.96 8.33 0.73 0.82 0.54 0.42 0.28 0.29 0.43 0.21 0.13 0.21 0.11 0.02 1.45 1.83 1.71 1.77 1.85 2.24 2.92 3.54 4.54 5.92 7.07 8.35 77 85 87 91 96 104 113 123 140 164 176 187 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.1 2.4 2.7 3.1 3.7 4.5 5.3 6.1 10.5 12.8 14.1 13.7 14.7 16.4 18.9 20.6 22.4 24.4 25.7 27.0 0 2 19 32 49 69 98 139 181 233 295 336 4 4 8 12 16 21 26 34 39 45 50 52 3 5 7 10 13 18 23 29 32 37 41 43 4 9 6 Statistical Table Scenario Bl-AIM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 World Population Million GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 5204 6056 6741 7426 8112 8368 20.9 27.4 37.3 55.9 73.9 99.7 50 46 30 24 17 0 36 39 47 56 62 65 111 119 130 152 173 186 51 59 82 104 131 149 38 50 63 81 103 138 285 311 353 417 485 549 93 93 126 162 195 198 143 161 176 177 170 152 73 104 143 183 229 264 6 10 11 14 15 23 50 48 38 56 77 94 10 11 14 19 29 49 376 427 508 610 715 781 0.1 1.0 2.1 3.5 5.3 7.0 0.1 1.7 3.4 5.1 6.9 8.2 0.1 1.0 2.2 3.8 5.9 8.1 7.1 82.4 169.3 267.6 375.1 489.7 1459 1466 1464 1461 1458 1452 3389 3407 3432 3453 3474 3510 0 0 0 59 137 187 4296 4255 4231 4264 4335 4404 3805 3820 3822 3711 3545 3382 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 5.99 6.90 8.47 10.05 11.50 12.00 1.11 1.07 0.93 0.23 -0.29 -0.31 7.10 7.97 9.39 10.28 11.22 11.69 310 323 358 391 426 437 6.7 7.0 6.9 6.9 6.8 6.8 70.9 69.0 76.3 89.2 92.9 60.7 1672 883 784 291 257 298 32 25 29 32 33 37 38 40 36 37 47 58 879 877 968 981 1076 1146 139 141 157 177 176 171 31 32 35 38 41 41 8631 8465 8301 7957 7453 6982 134.5 165.9 204.8 245.7 286.6 334.3 0 0 0 0 0 0 67 52 41 31 24 18 200 202 204 204 200 196 170 161 152 137 117 100 186 228 279 314 324 334 623 652 683 688 668 648 204 168 138 113 92 75 137 125 115 108 106 103 308 288 270 241 204 172 38 36 33 30 27 25 117 133 150 162 166 171 87 138 220 290 316 344 892 887 926 944 911 890 9.3 10.8 12.5 13.9 14.9 16.0 9.9 11.0 12.3 13.5 14.5 15.7 11.3 13.7 16.6 19.3 21.5 23.8 609.9 725.8 828.4 917.8 994.1 1060.1 1447 1442 1437 1433 1431 1429 3547 3591 3635 3668 3688 3709 254 260 266 260 242 225 4475 4522 4570 4619 4668 4719 3226 3131 3039 2968 2917 2868 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12.59 11.12 9.86 8.29 7.27 6.40 -0.24 -0.28 -0.19 -0.09 -0.21 -0.26 12.35 10.84 9.67 8.20 7.06 6.15 449 429 410 364 300 248 6.8 6.7 6.6 6.5 6.3 6.2 42.3 33.1 26.3 22.8 21.4 20.1 338 337 333 327 315 299 42 47 45 43 46 45 68 71 62 46 43 43 1223 1241 1260 1278 1296 1314 167 141 119 97 76 58 40 36 31 28 26 24 Statistical Table 497 Scenario Bl-AIM OECD W Population Million GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 801 857 896 935 973 991 1008 1013 1018 1023 1029 1034 16.4 20.7 25.5 31.3 38.5 44.9 52.4 59.1 66.7 74.0 80.5 87.7 6.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 10 10 9 8 7 6 4 3 1 2 64 70 67 70 68 66 64 60 56 53 50 47 25 31 37 40 43 41 40 35 31 27 23 19 22 27 29 31 33 38 43 50 59 64 66 66 19 68 127 141 144 151 153 154 154 153 152 148 142 41 34 37 38 38 36 33 26 21 17 14 76 88 85 81 69 56 46 39 33 29 28 26 34 51 58 61 63 62 62 54 47 40 34 28 5 7 8 8 7 8 8 8 7 6 5 5 6 10 14 20 23 26 28 28 29 29 29 29 6 6 7 9 13 17 22 32 48 60 65 70 167 187 195 201 199 192 192 182 181 180 174 170 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.8 2.5 2.7 3.0 3.1 3.3 3.5 0.1 0.9 1.8 2.6 3.4 3.9 4.5 4.9 5.3 5.6 5.9 6.2 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.6 2.2 2.8 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.3 5.7 2.8 33.0 64.8 96.5 127.3 156.7 184.3 209.3 230.8 249.1 264.6 277.7 381 380 378 376 374 370 366 361 357 354 353 352 760 765 772 779 787 809 832 862 893 912 918 924 0 0 0 10 23 32 44 45 46 45 41 39 1050 1059 1074 1094 1117 1133 1149 1154 1159 1167 1179 1192 838 826 805 770 728 682 639 605 574 551 536 522 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.24 3.27 3.16 2.96 2.77 2.69 2.31 1.97 1.68 1.42 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.06 -0.12 -0.14 -0.11 -0.08 -0.03 0.01 0.00 -0.03 -0.06 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.18 3.15 3.02 2.85 2.69 2.66 2.31 1.97 1.68 1.36 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 69 66 60 54 50 46 43 41 38 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.0 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 10.4 7.8 7.5 7.2 6.9 6.2 5.5 4.9 4.3 3.8 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 116 117 117 119 120 120 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 7 7 7 7 6 6 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 CO MtCO 179 161 172 183 200 205 210 209 209 209 210 212 NMVOC Mt 42 36 34 31 28 23 18 17 16 15 14 13 NOx MtN 13 12 11 10 9 7 6 5 5 5 4 4 Statistical Table Scenario Bl-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) 413 419 424 430 435 429 423 406 391 374 356 339 1.1 0.8 1.2 1.8 2.5 3.9 5.9 7.8 10.2 12.9 15.7 19.1 2.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 19 6 9 5 7 5 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 4 2 3 2 3 1 3 1 2 19 13 16 17 18 21 26 23 21 17 13 10 8 9 9 9 9 12 17 21 25 27 27 27 58 42 37 36 35 42 51 51 52 50 45 40 18 13 13 12 11 12 13 11 9 7 6 5 22 12 9 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 1 13 26 22 25 26 25 29 33 30 26 22 17 1 1 1 2 1 2 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 4 0 3 8 12 17 19 22 24 24 25 1 1 1 2 2 4 8 13 20 25 26 28 71 54 50 51 53 63 79 78 82 82 76 73 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.2 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 1.3 12.3 21.5 29.6 35.8 40.9 45.3 48.6 51.0 51.3 50.1 49.0 268 266 266 266 265 265 264 264 263 263 263 262 25 26 28 71 54 50 51 53 63 79 78 82 82 76 73 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.2 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 1.3 12.3 21.5 29.6 35.8 40.9 45.3 48.6 51.0 51.3 50.1 49.0 268 266 266 266 265 265 264 264 263 263 263 262 341 362 364 366 368 370 372 374 376 378 380 382 0 0 0 9 20 27 37 38 39 38 35 33 966 951 934 933 934 953 973 983 993 1005 1018 1031 701 696 711 702 688 658 630 617 604 592 580 568 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.88 0.78 0.65 0.66 0.66 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.05 -0.10 -0.10 -0.19 -0.26 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.93 0.68 0.56 0.47 0.40 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 48 50 49 46 43 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.6 9.2 6.9 4.3 2.7 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 26 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 9 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 9 CO MtCO 69 41 36 34 33 33 33 NMVOC Mt 16 13 12 11 10 9 9 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 2 2 2 0.48 -0.20 0.28 34 0.6 2.2 27 10 9 32 7 2 0.35 -0.15 0.20 26 0.6 1.9 27 9 7 32 6 1 -0.11 -0.02 -0.14 20 0.5 1.7 27 8 6 31 4 1 -0.05 -0.07 -0.12 16 0.5 1.7 27 8 4 30 3 1 0.02 -0.11 -0.10 12 0.5 1.6 26 29 1 1 Statistical Table 499 Scenario B1-AIM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3556 3851 4147 4183 4220 4016 3822 3541 3194 2882 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.9 5.2 9.2 16.2 24.0 35.8 46.0 59.2 73.5 88.2 105.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 22 20 16 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 15 20 30 39 46 49 52 40 31 24 18 14 Liquids 11 15 26 35 45 51 58 59 60 60 58 57 Gas 2 4 10 18 24 28 33 32 31 28 24 20 Electricity 5 7 15 25 38 54 78 96 119 133 135 137 Others Total 61 69 101 134 162 189 220 232 244 246 236 227 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 39 66 95 122 119 116 94 76 61 49 38 Oil 17 29 39 42 44 40 35 31 28 25 24 23 Gas 4 9 21 37 52 67 87 81 76 67 55 45 Nuclear 0 1 2 3 4 8 16 15 14 13 12 10 Biomass 28 24 19 18 15 19 24 27 31 33 34 35 Other Renewables 1 2 2 4 7 16 34 56 92 122 131 141 Total 80 103 148 199 244 269 314 306 317 321 304 293 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.7 2.8 3.8 5.2 6.0 7.0 7.7 8.3 8.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.1 3.3 3.6 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.5 2.3 3.0 3.8 4.6 5.2 5.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 45.3 81.0 126.0 177.6 232.2 284.2 328.8 367.4 400.5 429.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 435 435 435 434 434 434 434 433 433 433 433 Grasslands 608 606 609 612 614 617 619 622 625 628 631 634 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 12 28 39 52 54 55 53 50 46 Forest 535 525 518 535 551 557 563 577 593 604 610 616 Others 583 598 602 571 536 516 496 477 458 446 441 436 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.87 3.99 4.97 5.19 5.42 4.74 4.15 3.57 3.03 2.57 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.29 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.22 0.03 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.08 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.16 3.99 5.02 5.29 5.63 4.77 4.15 3.58 3.05 2.66 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 142 160 183 196 209 205 200 177 143 114 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.5 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 40.0 56.5 58.2 31.2 16.7 11.4 7.8 6.0 5.3 4.7 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 CO MtCO 235 270 335 366 438 473 510 511 511 510 507 504 NMVOC Mt 33 37 51 63 59 60 61 51 42 33 24 17 NOx MtN 7 9 12 15 18 19 19 16 13 11 9 7 Statistical Table 500 Scenario B1-AIM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1865 2211 2557 2761 2980 3024 3067 3013 2866 2726 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 3.0 5.4 9.6 16.7 26.0 40.4 52.5 68.2 85.1 101.7 121.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 101.7 121.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 17 9 8 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 2 2 2 3 4 4 3 3 2 2 2 Liquids 17 24 31 41 55 64 75 79 84 88 89 90 Gas 4 10 19 29 46 57 71 70 69 65 57 50 Electricity 4 7 11 16 23 33 48 61 77 89 95 102 Others Total 40 60 71 97 135 163 198 215 235 245 244 244 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 7 11 16 24 31 41 36 32 28 24 21 Oil 27 33 44 47 51 51 52 52 52 52 53 54 Gas 9 22 39 59 89 106 126 123 121 112 98 86 Nuclear 0 0 1 1 2 5 10 9 9 9 8 8 Biomass 14 18 19 31 45 50 56 63 72 77 79 81 Other Renewables 2 2 3 5 7 13 23 37 61 82 93 105 Total 57 83 115 159 219 257 308 322 346 360 356 355 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.1 1.4 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.1 2.7 3.1 3.7 4.2 4.7 5.2 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.6 3.8 4.9 6.2 7.4 8.4 9.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.6 60.5 86.0 114.5 148.1 183.7 217.8 249.9 278.9 304.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 385 385 384 384 383 383 383 383 382 382 Grasslands 1680 1675 1686 1696 1705 1714 1723 1732 1741 1750 1760 1769 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 29 66 89 121 124 127 124 115 107 Forest 1745 1720 1704 1702 1732 1761 1790 1808 1825 1843 1861 1880 Others 1684 1700 1704 1669 1593 1526 1461 1432 1403 1379 1360 1342 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.48 2.02 2.73 3.20 3.75 3.56 3.39 3.14 2.84 2.56 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.65 0.44 -0.10 -0.11 -0.11 -0.08 -0.05 -0.07 -0.12 -0.17 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.13 2.46 2.63 3.08 3.63 3.48 3.34 3.08 2.72 2.39 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 97 112 128 135 143 141 138 124 101 84 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 12.2 12.6 17.3 15.0 13.1 10.3 8.1 7.2 7.1 7.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 16 28 42 64 98 102 102 101 96 89 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 11 11 12 12 SF6 MtC eq. 2 5 5 8 12 17 22 24 21 14 14 14 CO MtCO 396 404 425 398 405 436 470 489 508 528 548 569 NMVOC Mt 48 55 60 72 80 79 79 73 67 59 50 42 NOx MtN 7 8 9 10 12 12 13 13 12 12 11 11 Statistical Table 501 Scenario B1-ASF World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5264 6117 6827 7537 8039 8526 8704 8527 8444 8022 7282 7056 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.6 27.6 38.0 53.5 73.8 114.9 134.3 167.2 186.9 252.2 314.9 339.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 186.9 252.2 314.9 339.3 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 55 66 80 89 76 62 49 42 35 30 28 25 Solids Liquids 121 170 228 304 308 311 314 280 247 221 203 186 Gas 50 58 82 124 149 174 198 185 171 157 143 129 Electricity 42 55 77 104 149 195 241 283 325 343 339 334 Others Total 269 350 467 621 682 742 802 790 778 752 712 673 Primary Energy EJ Coal 97 119 149 191 262 332 403 354 305 259 215 172 Oil 139 198 272 354 289 225 160 103 46 14 8 2 Gas 74 83 118 179 231 283 335 303 272 242 213 184 Nuclear 7 10 8 7 9 11 13 11 10 9 8 8 Biomass 0 0 0 14 43 73 102 125 148 167 183 198 Other Renewables 10 14 23 30 46 61 77 135 192 223 226 229 Total 326 424 570 774 879 984 1090 1031 973 914 853 791 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.2 8 2 Gas 74 83 118 179 231 283 335 303 272 242 213 184 Nuclear 7 10 8 7 9 11 13 11 10 9 8 8 Biomass 0 0 0 14 43 73 102 125 148 167 183 198 Other Renewables 10 14 23 30 46 61 77 135 192 223 226 229 Total 326 424 570 774 879 984 1090 1031 973 914 853 791 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.2 2.5 4.2 6.5 9.5 13.2 16.9 20.2 23.0 25.3 27.2 Oil 0.0 1.8 4.2 7.3 10.5 13.0 14.9 16.1 16.8 17.0 17.1 17.2 Gas 0.0 0.9 1.9 3.3 5.4 8.0 11.1 14.3 17.1 19.7 21.9 23.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 176.1 302.2 458.8 631.1 810.7 978.8 1116.5 1227.0 1317.0 1389.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC -1.8 -2.0 -2.1 -2.3 -2.5 -2.7 -2.9 -3.1 -3.2 -3.3 -3.4 -3.4 Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 9.65 13.22 15.72 16.61 17.50 14.71 11.93 9.68 7.98 6.27 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.12 1.24 1.13 0.98 0.84 0.58 0.32 0.18 0.16 0.14 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 10.76 14.46 16.85 17.59 18.33 15.29 12.24 9.86 8.13 6.41 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 373 430 479 513 546 513 481 447 412 377 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.1 9.5 10.5 11.0 11.5 11.2 10.8 10.4 9.9 9.3 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 83.6 112.3 104.7 76.4 48.1 38.1 28.1 23.4 24.0 24.6 HFC MtC eq. 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 45 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 CO MtCO 879 877 1039 1162 1338 1316 1293 1199 1105 1029 971 913 NMVOC Mt 139 141 162 193 218 228 237 255 272 295 322 349 NOx MtN 31 32 44 59 70 71 72 62 52 45 40 35 502 Statistical Table Scenario B1-ASF OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 849 919 961 1003 1035 1069 1081 1085 1088 1096 1106 1110 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 15.5 19.2 23.4 27.7 32.4 40.4 43.5 49.7 53.0 64.7 78.7 84.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 12 13 12 12 12 11 11 9 8 7 7 6 Liquids 68 86 91 88 77 66 55 48 41 37 37 36 Gas 27 29 31 35 36 37 38 35 33 31 31 31 Electricity 24 27 33 37 40 43 46 54 63 69 74 79 Others Total 131 155 167 172 165 157 150 147 144 144 148 152 Primary Energy EJ Coal 33 32 34 39 52 66 79 66 52 44 40 36 Oil 77 97 106 102 75 47 20 12 5 1 1 0 Gas 35 38 42 50 54 59 63 57 51 47 45 43 Nuclear 6 8 6 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 3 Biomass 0 0 0 4 10 15 21 24 27 30 34 38 Other Renewables 6 7 10 11 13 15 16 27 38 46 50 55 Total 156 181 198 211 208 205 202 189 176 171 173 175 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.5 2.1 2.8 3.6 4.1 4.6 5.0 5.4 Oil 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 3.9 4.5 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.8 2.3 3.0 3.6 4.1 4.6 5.1 5.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.5 102.6 140.3 177.6 212.9 244.3 269.7 290.4 308.8 326.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.51 3.72 3.82 3.63 3.43 2.84 2.24 1.89 1.78 1.68 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.51 3.72 3.82 3.63 3.43 2.84 2.24 1.89 1.78 1.68 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 77 81 86 90 93 90 88 85 81 78 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.9 3.0 2.9 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.3 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 7.6 7.5 7.0 6.3 5.6 5.1 4.6 4.8 5.5 6.3 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 116 117 117 119 120 120 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 CO MtCO 179 161 165 154 135 100 66 54 42 35 34 32 NMVOC Mt 42 36 40 43 41 36 32 32 31 33 37 40 NOx MtN 13 12 13 14 14 13 11 9 7 6 6 5 503 Statistical Table Scenario B1-ASF REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 417 419 425 431 432 425 423 406 398 374 347 339 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.0 0.9 1.3 1.9 2.9 4.6 5.3 6.6 7.4 10.0 12.8 14.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 12.8 14.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 18 11 11 9 8 6 5 3 2 1 1 1 Liquids 16 11 12 13 12 11 11 9 8 7 7 7 Gas 16 12 15 18 17 17 16 14 11 9 8 6 Electricity 8 7 9 11 10 10 10 10 10 10 9 8 Others Total 57 42 47 51 48 44 41 36 32 28 25 21 Primary Energy EJ Coal 23 13 14 14 14 13 12 9 5 3 2 2 Oil 18 13 14 15 14 13 13 9 6 4 2 1 Gas 26 22 26 30 27 24 21 17 14 11 9 7 Nuclear 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 4 6 8 9 Other Renewables 1 2 3 3 3 3 3 5 6 7 6 6 Total 69 50 57 64 59 55 50 43 36 31 28 25 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.1 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.9 32.5 42.8 51.8 59.0 64.2 67.4 68.9 69.3 68.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.01 1.09 0.98 0.81 0.63 0.42 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.01 1.09 0.98 0.81 0.63 0.42 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 43 53 67 78 89 77 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.4 9.6 8.0 5.7 3.4 2.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 26 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 9 9 CO MtCO 69 41 41 38 41 38 35 31 NMVOC Mt 16 13 16 22 27 26 25 24 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 3 3 2 2 0.22 0.00 0.22 65 0.6 1.6 27 9 7 28 22 1 0.07 0.00 0.07 54 0.5 1.0 27 8 6 25 22 1 0.00 0.00 0.00 46 0.5 0.7 27 8 4 24 25 1 -0.08 0.00 -0.08 37 0.5 0.4 26 8 4 23 27 0 504 Statistical Table Scenario B1-ASF ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2780 3261 3572 3884 4073 4181 4220 4012 3913 3538 3033 2882 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.6 3.4 6.7 12.5 20.5 37.9 46.6 60.0 68.2 94.3 115.9 124.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 24 41 55 64 50 36 22 18 15 12 10 8 Liquids 15 36 67 114 124 134 144 130 116 104 93 83 Gas 3 8 19 41 55 70 85 78 71 63 56 48 Electricity 6 13 23 36 68 100 133 149 165 167 155 143 Others Total 47 97 163 255 298 340 383 375 366 346 314 282 Primary Energy EJ Coal 36 65 88 116 154 193 232 201 170 141 112 83 Oil 19 45 85 134 110 86 62 38 13 1 0 0 Gas 4 10 27 56 89 121 154 137 120 103 86 69 Nuclear 0 1 1 2 4 6 8 7 6 5 4 4 Biomass 0 0 0 5 18 30 43 54 65 72 76 80 Other Renewables 1 3 6 9 19 29 39 67 95 107 102 98 Total 61 124 207 323 395 466 537 504 470 429 381 333 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.3 2.3 3.7 5.5 7.6 9.7 11.6 13.1 14.4 15.3 Oil 0.0 0.3 1.0 2.1 3.3 4.3 5.0 5.5 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.7 1.4 2.5 3.8 5.3 6.6 7.7 8.6 9.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 48.1 96.8 166.3 249.5 341.8 431.8 508.5 572.7 626.1 669.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 3.38 5.63 7.54 8.51 9.48 8.21 6.93 5.81 4.83 3.86 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.34 0.39 0.33 0.26 0.19 0.13 0.07 0.03 0.01 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.72 6.02 7.87 8.77 9.67 8.34 7.00 5.84 4.85 3.86 CH4 total MtCH4 113 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 3.38 5.63 7.54 8.51 9.48 8.21 6.93 5.81 4.83 3.86 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.34 0.39 0.33 0.26 0.19 0.13 0.07 0.03 0.01 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.72 6.02 7.87 8.77 9.67 8.34 7.00 5.84 4.85 3.86 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 145 163 179 190 202 187 173 158 142 126 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 3.2 4.0 4.6 5.0 5.3 5.1 4.9 4.6 4.3 3.9 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 47.3 66.7 58.2 37.6 17.0 12.1 7.2 4.9 5.2 5.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 CO MtCO 235 270 363 438 537 549 561 521 482 445 411 376 NMVOC Mt 33 37 43 51 58 63 67 72 76 80 84 88 NOx MtN 7 9 16 25 31 33 35 30 25 20 17 14 Statistical Table 505 Scenario B1-ASF ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1218 1519 1869 2218 2500 2851 2980 3023 3044 3013 2795 2727 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 2.5 4.0 6.7 11.3 18.0 32.0 38.9 50.9 58.2 83.3 107.4 117.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 1 2 3 4 7 9 11 11 11 10 10 10 Solids 22 38 58 89 94 100 105 94 82 73 66 60 Liquids 5 9 17 31 40 50 60 58 56 53 49 44 Gas 4 7 12 20 31 42 54 71 88 98 101 103 Electricity Others Total 33 56 89 144 172 201 229 233 237 234 226 217 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 9 14 21 41 61 81 79 77 71 61 51 Oil 25 43 67 102 90 77 65 43 21 8 5 1 Gas 8 13 23 42 60 79 97 92 87 80 72 64 Nuclear 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Biomass 0 0 0 4 15 26 38 45 53 59 65 71 Other Renewables 2 3 5 7 10 14 18 35 53 63 67 71 Total 40 68 108 177 218 259 300 295 291 283 271 259 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.9 2.7 3.5 4.2 4.9 5.4 Oil 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.8 2.7 3.5 4.2 4.8 5.1 5.2 5.3 5.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.8 2.7 3.7 4.6 5.4 6.2 6.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 39.6 70.3 109.4 152.2 197.1 238.5 270.9 295.1 312.9 325.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.74 2.79 3.37 3.66 3.95 3.24 2.53 1.91 1.36 0.81 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.78 0.85 0.80 0.72 0.65 0.45 0.25 0.15 0.14 0.14 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.52 3.64 4.17 4.38 4.59 3.69 2.78 2.06 1.50 0.95 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 108 132 147 155 163 159 155 149 142 136 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.7 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.6 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 15.2 25.4 28.5 23.8 19.1 15.4 11.7 9.8 9.6 9.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 16 28 42 64 98 102 102 101 96 89 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 11 11 12 12 SF6 MtC eq. 2 5 5 8 12 17 22 24 21 14 14 14 CO MtCO 396 404 470 532 626 629 631 592 553 523 503 482 NMVOC Mt 48 55 63 77 92 103 113 128 143 159 176 193 NOx MtN 7 8 11 17 21 22 24 21 19 18 16 15 506 Statistical Table Marker Scenario B1-IMAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 World Population Million 5280 6122 6892 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 21.0 26.8 37.3 52.6 73.1 100.7 135.6 171.7 208.5 249.7 290.1 328.4 1990 US$/cap a 3971.0 4372.0 5416.0 6900.0 8916.0 11783.0 15569.0 19803.0 24577.0 30667.0 37856.0 46598.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 54 57 60 53 46 37 27 24 22 19 16 14 Solids 43 43 41 42 43 44 44 40 35 30 25 21 Liquids 106 117 137 152 156 151 135 115 102 93 84 75 Gas 46 52 66 70 71 74 79 82 83 82 80 76 Electricity 39 54 83 122 168 223 260 270 266 255 240 220 Others 2 4 10 23 38 52 64 70 69 65 59 52 Total 289 327 398 462 523 581 608 601 576 544 505 458 Primary Energy EJ Coal 105 109 120 134 163 181 167 133 101 76 58 44 Oil 129 141 176 206 230 236 228 199 167 143 119 99 Gas 62 71 108 138 153 166 173 168 154 136 121 103 Non-Fossil Electric 8 14 22 33 49 73 105 132 151 163 168 165 Biomass 3 4 11 29 54 77 95 102 99 90 79 67 Other Renewables 61 68 71 66 61 54 46 44 42 41 39 36 Total 368 407 508 606 710 788 813 778 715 650 584 514 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 1.1 2.2 3.5 4.9 6.7 8.5 10.0 11.1 12.0 12.7 13.2 Oil 0.0 1.3 2.9 4.8 7.0 9.3 11.6 13.8 15.6 17.2 18.5 19.6 Gas 0.0 0.6 1.5 2.8 4.2 5.8 7.5 9.2 10.8 12.3 13.6 14.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 168.7 268.2 376.9 491.0 606.1 711.2 800.8 875.1 935.2 983.0 Carbon Sequestration c GtC 2.1 1.7 2.8 3.8 4.5 4.3 4.2 3.9 3.6 3.5 3.7 3.5 Land Use Million ha Cropland d 1436 1371 1445 1499 1516 1486 1429 1360 1288 1209 1124 1038 Grasslands e 3435 3316 3424 3404 3292 3052 2785 2500 2293 2142 2023 1899 Energy Biomass f 8 10 24 68 134 209 268 294 287 262 227 194 Forest 4277 4261 4179 4258 4274 4375 4551 4711 4897 5130 5349 5543 Others 3916 4114 3999 3843 3853 3950 4038 4207 4305 4327 4348 4398 Total 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 13071 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.50 10.00 11.20 12.20 11.70 10.20 8.60 7.30 6.10 5.20 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 0.78 0.63 -0.09 -0.48 -0.41 -0.46 -0.42 -0.60 -0.78 -0.97 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.28 10.63 11.11 11.72 11.29 9.74 8.18 6.70 5.32 4.23 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 349 377 385 381 359 342 324 293 266 236 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.5 8.1 8.2 8.3 8.3 7.7 7.4 7.0 6.4 5.7 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 73.9 74.6 78.2 78.5 68.9 55.8 44.3 36.1 29.8 24.9 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 45 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 CO MtCO 879 877 789 751 603 531 471 459 456 426 399 363 NMVOC Mt 139 141 141 140 131 123 116 111 103 99 96 87 NOx MtN 31 32 36 40 42 43 39 34 30 26 22 19 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species. e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species". f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. Statistical Table 507 Marker Scenario B1-IMAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 799 849 890 932 965 990 1001 1005 1009 1020 1029 1032 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.5 20.2 25.9 32.4 38.2 43.9 49.9 55.4 59.8 66.3 73.8 82.3 1990 US$/cap a 20648.9 23841.8 29100.0 34761.7 39587.5 44382.4 49810.4 55070.9 59257.3 65005.4 71721.0 79765.3 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 5 5 5 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 Solids 8 7 7 6 6 6 6 5 5 5 4 4 Liquids 57 60 60 58 51 41 32 25 20 19 17 16 Gas 24 27 28 27 27 27 27 28 28 28 28 28 Electricity 24 36 47 54 58 58 57 55 52 51 50 49 Others 2 3 5 8 13 18 21 22 22 20 19 17 Total 120 137 152 159 159 153 146 138 130 125 121 116 Primary Energy EJ Coal 37 46 46 40 36 30 24 19 15 13 11 10 Oil 67 73 74 72 64 50 39 31 25 22 20 19 Gas 28 36 42 44 41 38 37 35 34 33 32 31 Non-Fossil Electric 7 12 18 24 29 32 35 37 37 37 37 37 Biomass 2 3 5 8 14 18 21 22 23 21 20 19 Other Renewables 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 9 Total 151 178 195 199 193 178 166 154 144 136 131 126 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.1 2.5 2.9 3.1 3.4 3.6 3.8 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.3 2.9 3.5 4.0 4.5 4.9 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.0 99.3 129.4 155.0 176.1 193.2 207.5 220.0 231.1 241.5 Carbon Sequestration c GtC 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.6 131 126 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.1 2.5 2.9 3.1 3.4 3.6 3.8 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.3 2.9 3.5 4.0 4.5 4.9 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.0 99.3 129.4 155.0 176.1 193.2 207.5 220.0 231.1 241.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.2 Land Use Million ha Cropland 379 354 344 349 348 349 352 351 347 345 343 339 Grasslands 785 704 619 553 498 459 428 418 408 402 396 389 Energy Biomass 3 1 2 8 16 27 36 42 42 37 31 26 Forest 1115 1165 1215 1259 1299 1328 1351 1361 1378 1401 1423 1451 Others 956 1015 1058 1069 1077 1076 1072 1065 1063 1054 1045 1033 Total 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 3238 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.30 3.20 2.80 2.40 2.00 1.90 1.60 1.40 1.30 1.20 1.10 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.06 -0.02 -0.07 -0.09 -0.08 -0.06 -0.06 -0.14 -0.12 -0.11 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.40 3.26 2.78 2.33 1.90 1.52 1.34 1.16 1.07 0.99 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 75 72 68 63 56 52 50 46 42 40 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.0 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 11.8 7.9 5.4 3.6 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.1 2.3 2.6 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 116 117 117 119 120 120 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 7 7 8 7 7 6 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 5 4 3 3 3 2 CO MtCO 179 161 153 137 116 100 85 72 64 63 59 56 NMVOC Mt 42 36 35 33 29 24 21 18 16 15 13 13 NOx MtN 13 12 12 10 8 6 5 4 3 3 3 2 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species, e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species", f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. Statistical Table 508 Marker Scenario B1-IMAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 412 429 437 443 445 443 432 419 401 384 365 347 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.0 0.7 1.0 1.7 2.8 4.3 6.2 8.2 10.3 12.8 15.4 18.1 1990 US$/cap 2307.2 1675.8 2335.2 3864.4 6258.7 9702.5 14328.5 19522.7 25650.8 33306.4 42087.4 52209.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Solids 14 10 6 5 4 4 4 3 3 3 2 2 Liquids 21 12 11 12 12 11 10 8 7 6 6 5 Gas 15 11 10 10 10 9 9 8 8 7 6 6 Electricity 9 5 7 11 14 18 20 20 19 18 17 16 Others 0 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 Total 62 40 37 40 42 46 46 45 41 38 35 32 Primary Energy EJ Coal 36 18 13 12 12 14 14 12 9 8 6 5 Oil 28 13 14 16 16 18 18 16 13 11 10 8 Gas 25 15 15 18 19 20 18 17 15 13 11 10 Non-Fossil Electric 1 1 1 2 4 5 6 7 8 8 8 8 Biomass 1 1 1 2 2 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 Other Renewables 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Total 95 52 48 52 56 63 64 60 54 48 43 39 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.0 Oil 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.9 2.3 2.8 3.2 3.5 3.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 20.9 29.0 36.0 41.8 47.4 52.3 55.4 57.2 58.3 59.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.4 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.3 1.2 Land Use Million ha Cropland 278 217 219 209 190 173 154 141 128 117 106 98 Grasslands 392 300 321 319 286 248 211 187 170 162 155 148 Energy Biomass 1 0 1 4 12 28 41 51 57 58 50 46 Forest 1146 1177 1175 1282 1295 1310 1350 1378 1410 1443 1459 1480 Others 461 583 562 463 495 519 521 521 512 498 507 506 Total 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 2278 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.81 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.81 0.61 0.51 0.41 0.41 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.01 -0.10 -0.31 -0.35 -0.36 -0.38 -0.41 -0.36 -0.34 -0.29 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.80 0.81 0.60 0.56 0.55 0.43 0.20 0.15 0.06 0.12 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 38 42 44 40 34 33 30 27 24 21 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 9.0 7.7 6.9 7.0 6.5 5.6 4.6 3.9 3.0 2.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 26 27 27 27 27 26 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 9 8 7 6 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 9 9 7 6 4 4 CO MtCO 69 41 28 23 20 19 19 17 15 13 12 9 NMVOC Mt 16 13 12 12 11 11 11 10 9 8 7 5 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species, e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species", f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. Statistical Table 509 Marker Scenario B1-IMAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2781 3246 3609 3929 4142 4235 4220 4088 3871 3594 3262 2886 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.4 2.7 4.8 8.7 15.1 24.9 37.9 51.4 64.8 78.7 91.7 103.1 1990 US$/cap 502.0 836.8 1336.1 2206.5 3651.1 5885.3 8980.9 12579.4 16732.0 21889.1 28118.6 35726.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 29 31 30 24 19 14 9 8 6 5 5 4 Solids 20 23 23 23 23 22 20 17 14 12 10 8 Liquids 12 22 29 34 38 39 35 30 26 24 21 19 Gas 2 6 13 17 19 20 22 23 23 23 21 20 Electricity 4 9 19 36 56 80 93 95 93 88 84 77 Others 0 1 3 9 16 23 27 28 26 24 21 18 Total 68 92 117 144 171 198 205 200 189 175 162 144 Primary Energy EJ Coal 28 41 51 58 67 74 64 48 35 24 17 11 Oil 16 27 39 51 63 61 56 49 40 33 27 21 Gas 4 11 25 42 56 63 59 52 45 38 31 25 Non-Fossil Electric 0 1 5 11 24 40 52 60 65 68 67 54 Biomass 0 1 3 11 23 34 40 38 37 31 26 22 Other Renewables 30 33 32 27 23 18 13 12 11 10 9 8 Total 79 113 153 195 244 273 272 251 227 200 178 154 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.2 2.7 3.2 3.5 3.7 3.8 3.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.6 74.7 111.6 152.8 193.4 228.9 258.2 281.7 299.6 311.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.2 -0.2 -0.1 0.2 0.4 Land Use Million ha Cropland 382 392 405 419 422 411 393 362 327 288 252 216 Grasslands 561 652 734 748 753 753 723 600 531 471 431 386 Energy Biomass 1 1 3 12 32 71 94 110 95 84 63 50 Forest 488 403 348 330 316 300 302 334 383 489 599 671 Others 544 528 486 468 454 441 464 570 640 645 631 653 Total 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 1976 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.58 3.18 3.78 4.08 3.68 3.08 2.48 1.98 1.58 1.28 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.24 0.22 0.21 0.19 0.18 0.16 0.15 0.11 -0.09 -0.35 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.82 3.40 3.98 4.27 3.85 3.24 2.62 2.09 1.49 0.93 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 136 148 154 161 157 149 141 128 118 105 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.3 3.0 2.7 2.5 2.1 1.9 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 29.0 29.1 29.2 27.6 21.4 15.3 10.7 7.7 5.8 4.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 CO MtCO 235 270 286 289 280 285 245 238 233 228 222 214 NMVOC Mt 33 37 40 40 40 40 37 36 33 32 32 29 NOx MtN 7 9 11 13 15 15 13 11 9 8 7 5 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species, e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species", f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. 33 37 40 40 40 40 37 36 33 32 32 29 NOx MtN 7 9 11 13 15 15 13 11 9 8 7 5 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species, e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species", f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. 510 Statistical Table Marker Scenario B1-IMAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1287 1597 1954 2315 2643 2879 3055 3159 3202 3145 3006 2783 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 2.1 3.1 5.6 9.8 16.9 27.6 41.6 56.7 73.6 92.0 109.1 124.9 1990 US$/cap 1653.4 1933.0 2839.5 4243.2 6406.6 9580.8 13623.6 17954.7 22996.3 29243.6 36311.8 44869.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 16 19 24 23 21 18 14 13 11 10 9 7 Solids 1 3 5 7 10 12 14 14 12 10 8 7 Liquids 15 23 36 48 55 60 58 53 48 45 40 35 Gas 4 8 15 16 16 17 21 23 25 25 25 23 Electricity 4 10 21 41 67 90 100 101 97 89 79 Others 0 0 1 4 8 9 13 17 18 18 17 15 Total 39 57 91 119 150 183 211 219 216 205 187 165 Primary Energy EJ Coal 3 4 10 24 48 64 65 54 42 32 24 18 Oil 17 27 48 68 87 107 114 103 89 77 62 51 Gas 6 10 25 33 36 45 59 64 60 52 47 37 Non-Fossil Electric 0 0 1 2 5 12 24 36 46 53 55 53 Biomass 0 0 2 7 14 23 29 36 33 33 28 22 Other Renewables 18 22 27 26 25 23 20 19 19 18 16 15 Total 43 64 113 160 216 273 312 313 290 265 232 196 Cumulative Resources Production ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.7 1.3 1.9 2.4 2.8 3.1 3.3 3.4 Oil 0.0 0.6 1.5 2.6 4.0 5.5 6.9 8.2 9.1 9.9 10.6 11.1 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.3 2.9 3.5 4.0 4.5 4.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 38.3 65.3 99.8 141.4 189.1 236.8 279.7 316.2 346.2 370.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1.2 1.1 1.7 2.1 2.1 1.7 1.3 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 Land Use Million ha Cropland 397 408 477 521 558 553 530 506 486 460 423 385 Grasslands 1697 1660 1750 1784 1755 1592 1424 1295 1184 1108 1041 975 Energy Biomass 2 7 18 44 74 84 96 90 94 84 83 74 Forest 1528 1517 1441 1386 1365 1437 1548 1639 1726 1798 1868 1940 Others 1955 1987 1893 1844 1827 1915 1981 2050 2090 2130 2165 2205 Total 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 5579 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.81 2.71 3.71 4.81 5.11 4.71 4.11 3.51 2.91 2.41 Other CO2 f GtC 0.73 0.82 0.45 0.45 0.04 -0.25 -0.13 -0.15 -0.10 -0.21 -0.22 -0.22 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.26 3.16 3.75 4.56 4.98 4.56 4.01 3.30 2.69 2.19 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 100 115 119 117 112 108 103 92 82 70 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.0 1.9 1.6 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 21.2 26.8 33.7 37.4 35.6 29.9 24.0 19.5 15.7 12.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 16 28 42 64 98 102 102 101 96 89 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 11 11 12 12 SF6 MtC eq. 2 5 5 8 12 17 22 24 21 14 14 14 CO MtCO 396 404 321 301 186 126 121 131 143 121 105 83 NMVOC Mt 48 55 54 55 51 48 47 47 45 42 40 36 NOx MtN 7 8 10 13 16 18 18 17 15 13 11 10 a: NOT ppp-corrected. b: NOT use but production c: Net Ecosystem Production (NEP). d: Arable land for crops excluding energy crops and grass & fodder species, e: Permanent pasture: FAO category "land for grass & fodder species", f: Approximate calculation from complex land-use module. Statistical Table 511 Scenario B1-MARIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 World Population Million 5262 6117 6888 7617 8048 8207 8704 8536 8372 8028 7527 7056 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 19.4 25.5 34.2 46.0 60.0 80.7 110.2 135.8 169.8 214.5 275.5 348.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 48 34 24 17 12 8 6 4 3 2 1 1 Solids 138 148 167 188 215 247 288 349 368 400 410 448 Liquids 56 54 79 111 142 171 197 175 173 165 185 177 Gas 35 46 53 61 70 80 98 105 115 131 150 164 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 278 282 323 377 438 507 590 633 658 697 747 791 Total Primary Energy EJ Coal 90 64 46 34 25 19 14 12 9 7 5 5 Oil 123 134 146 158 177 192 186 177 156 158 147 170 Gas 71 91 129 169 205 237 251 228 223 212 231 219 Nuclear 22 18 17 15 16 26 43 70 114 173 237 283 Biomass 28 30 37 55 75 104 136 198 231 257 276 291 Other Renewables 9 8 7 7 6 5 57 63 64 64 63 62 Total 343 345 382 438 504 583 687 747 797 873 959 1030 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.5 2.0 2.4 2.6 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 Oil 0.0 1.2 2.6 4.0 5.6 7.4 9.3 11.2 12.9 14.5 16.1 17.5 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.6 2.9 4.6 6.6 9.0 11.5 13.8 16.0 18.2 20.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 163.5 248.3 338.4 434.2 531.6 623.8 708.1 787.8 866.6 947.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1451 1451 1454 1689 1809 1821 1912 1713 1527 1363 1240 1145 Grasslands 3395 3395 3392 3160 3040 3029 2773 2609 2609 2609 2609 2609 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 164 528 713 877 1000 1095 Forest 4138 4142 4170 4199 4231 4265 4310 4361 4408 4412 4412 4412 Others 4061 4057 4029 3997 3965 3930 3886 3835 3788 3784 3784 3784 Total 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.25 7.80 8.49 9.13 9.11 8.49 7.94 7.77 7.79 8.06 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 0.99 0.91 0.82 0.72 0.53 0.31 0.12 0.11 0.12 0.13 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.25 8.71 9.31 9.85 9.64 8.80 8.05 7.88 7.90 8.19 CH4 total MtCH4 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 N2O total MtN2O-N 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 45 SOx total MtS 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 512 Statistical Table Scenario B1-MARIA OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 919 965 1007 1035 1046 1081 1085 1091 1096 1103 1110 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 15.6 19.6 24.7 31.0 36.4 43.3 50.6 55.3 60.3 66.5 72.2 78.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 12 8 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 Solids 71 74 66 60 59 58 57 78 72 66 62 59 Liquids 28 27 44 58 66 71 77 59 68 76 81 85 Gas 21 26 29 32 34 37 39 41 42 44 46 47 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 132 136 145 155 162 168 175 179 182 186 189 191 Total Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 28 21 16 12 10 8 7 6 5 4 4 Oil 71 74 66 60 59 58 57 78 72 66 61 57 Gas 34 47 72 94 107 117 115 99 106 112 116 117 Nuclear 18 15 12 11 13 15 19 21 26 32 40 48 Biomass 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 7 Other Renewables 5 5 4 4 3 3 14 14 16 17 16 16 Total 171 171 178 187 196 204 214 221 227 235 242 248 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.6 Oil 0.0 0.7 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.3 3.9 4.5 5.2 6.0 6.6 7.2 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.7 5.8 6.8 7.9 9.0 10.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.3 98.7 133.3 168.9 204.2 239.2 274.5 309.6 344.4 378.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 303 243 195 Grasslands 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7.9 9.0 10.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.3 98.7 133.3 168.9 204.2 239.2 274.5 309.6 344.4 378.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 303 243 195 Grasslands 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 75 134 182 Forest 756 756 756 756 756 756 768 780 780 780 780 780 Others 794 794 794 794 794 794 782 770 770 770 770 770 Total 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 CH4 total MtCH4 3.25 3.35 3.43 3.50 3.40 3.53 3.51 3.46 3.40 3.33 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.11 0.05 -0.01 0.01 0.04 0.07 0.09 SOx total MtS 3.27 3.40 3.51 3.61 3.46 3.55 3.52 3.50 3.46 3.43 HFC MtC eq. 19 18 24 PFC MtC eq. 58 13 23 SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO 108 103 109 112 116 117 117 119 120 120 NMVOC Mt 12 10 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 NOx MtN 16 5 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 Statistical Table 513 Scenario B1-MARIA REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 427 433 432 430 423 406 391 374 356 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 0.9 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.6 3.6 5.2 6.2 7.9 10.3 13.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 13.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 13 9 6 4 3 2 2 1 1 1 0 Liquids 17 12 11 10 10 10 10 10 9 9 12 Gas 21 20 23 25 30 35 40 41 43 46 45 Electricity 7 7 7 6 7 7 8 8 9 9 9 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 58 48 47 45 49 54 60 60 62 65 67 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 13 9 6 4 3 2 2 1 1 1 Oil 19 13 12 10 10 10 10 10 9 9 12 Gas 27 27 30 32 39 45 50 51 53 55 54 Nuclear 3 2 2 1 2 2 3 3 4 5 6 Biomass 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 3 3 3 Total 69 57 54 51 56 61 68 68 71 74 77 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.1 29.2 37.4 46.2 55.7 65.3 74.7 84.2 94.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Million ha Land Use Cropland 217 217 217 217 217 217 174 139 111 89 79 Grasslands 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 43 78 106 128 138 Forest 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 Others 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 Total 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.82 0.76 0.80 0.86 0.91 0.90 0.91 0.94 0.97 1.02 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.03 0.05 0.06 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.04 0.05 0.07 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.83 0.79 0.85 0.93 0.97 0.94 0.94 0.98 1.03 1.09 CH4 total MtCH4 217 217 217 217 217 217 217 174 139 111 89 79 N2O total MtN2O-N 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 SOx total MtS 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43 78 106 128 138 HFC MtC eq. 15 20 24 27 27 26 PFC MtC eq. 6 7 9 10 9 10 SF6 MtC eq. 7 8 9 8 7 8 CO MtCO 20 39 47 NMVOC Mt 10 8 8 8 9 9 NOx MtN 3 6 4 4 4 4 Statistical Table 514 Scenario B1-MARIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ASIA Population Million 2642 3080 3425 3728 3861 3895 4008 3814 3632 3368 3040 2744 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.2 2.0 3.4 5.9 10.1 17.0 28.8 39.0 52.6 70.5 97.3 126.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 20 14 10 7 5 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 20 14 10 7 5 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 Liquids 26 33 49 68 86 107 131 152 165 178 186 187 Gas 2 3 4 8 14 21 24 17 12 8 11 19 Electricity 4 7 8 11 13 16 23 24 29 35 42 45 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 52 57 72 93 118 147 180 194 207 221 240 251 Primary Energy EJ Coal 28 20 14 10 7 5 3 2 2 1 1 1 Oil 14 22 30 39 49 56 61 49 46 45 45 46 Gas 3 5 7 11 17 23 25 18 13 9 12 19 Nuclear 1 1 3 2 2 6 13 18 38 61 79 87 Biomass 13 20 27 41 55 72 85 114 127 138 145 144 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 20 20 20 20 20 Total 61 68 81 104 129 163 204 222 245 274 301 315 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 Oil 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.2 3.7 4.1 4.6 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 39.6 60.2 82.0 105.5 130.2 153.4 174.0 193.1 211.7 230.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 366 366 369 380 380 380 379 375 362 326 285 248 Grasslands 431 431 428 420 420 420 422 387 387 387 387 387 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 39 51 88 129 166 204 Forest 365 367 380 390 399 407 407 407 407 407 407 407 Others 458 456 444 430 421 414 414 414 414 414 414 414 Total 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 1.81 1.95 2.16 2.35 2.45 2.05 1.91 1.82 1.84 1.96 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 0.15 0.11 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.06 0.04 0.02 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.01 2.10 2.27 2.42 2.52 2.13 1.97 1.86 1.86 1.97 CH4 total MtCH4 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 N2O total MtN2O-N 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SOx total MtS 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 Statistical Table 515 Scenario B1-MARIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ALM Population Million 1348 1699 2071 2449 2720 2836 3231 3259 3190 3029 2864 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.7 2.7 4.6 7.2 10.9 16.8 25.6 35.3 49.0 67.1 93.0 127.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 24 29 41 51 61 73 90 110 122 148 150 182 Liquids 5 4 7 19 32 44 56 57 49 35 48 36 Gas 3 6 9 13 16 20 28 32 35 43 53 62 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 3 8 6 7 12 19 31 2 2 1 1 1 Total 35 40 60 84 110 138 175 199 207 225 252 280 Primary Energy EJ Coal 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 Oil 18 25 38 49 59 68 58 40 28 38 29 47 Gas 7 12 19 32 42 51 61 61 52 36 50 37 Nuclear 0 0 0 0 0 3 9 27 47 76 111 140 Biomass 8 6 7 12 19 31 51 83 102 116 126 139 Other Renewables 2 2 1 1 1 1 22 25 25 24 24 24 Total 41 48 69 95 123 155 202 236 254 290 339 386 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.6 3.2 3.6 3.8 4.2 4.5 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.6 2.3 2.9 3.4 3.7 4.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.6 60.3 85.8 113.7 141.5 165.9 185.0 200.8 216.3 232.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0 175 199 207 225 252 280 1 0 0 0 0 0 58 40 28 38 29 47 61 61 52 36 50 37 9 27 47 76 111 140 51 83 102 116 126 139 22 25 25 24 24 24 202 236 254 290 339 386 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 2.6 3.2 3.6 3.8 4.2 4.5 1.6 2.3 2.9 3.4 3.7 4.2 141.5 165.9 185.0 200.8 216.3 232.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 939 787 648 623 623 623 1482 1352 1352 1352 1352 1352 164 445 584 609 609 609 2321 2360 2407 2411 2411 2411 1967 1928 1881 1878 1878 1878 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 2.35 1.99 1.60 1.55 1.58 1.74 0.34 0.19 0.02 -0.01 -0.02 -0.04 2.69 2.18 1.62 1.54 1.55 1.70 98 102 102 101 96 89 9 11 11 11 12 12 22 24 21 14 14 14 516 Statistical Table Scenario B1-MESSAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 World Population Million 5262 6117 6888 7617 8182 8531 8704 8667 8463 8125 7658 7056 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.8 36.2 52.1 73.1 100.7 135.6 171.6 208.5 249.8 290.0 328.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 25.7 33.3 44.6 61.6 82.2 108.4 140.0 171.8 204.1 242.5 281.3 318.8 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 38 27 22 16 10 8 6 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 42 52 61 59 55 39 23 18 9 3 2 1 Liquids 111 123 155 185 214 239 243 220 190 153 131 114 Gas 41 47 61 71 74 73 63 53 47 45 39 31 Electricity 35 44 61 87 117 148 172 194 204 213 209 200 Others 8 10 18 33 52 75 98 123 136 144 138 124 Total 275 303 379 450 522 581 604 608 585 556 520 469 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 91 109 110 97 71 37 21 15 16 18 22 Oil 128 155 172 189 203 198 192 161 132 95 64 46 Gas 71 84 119 161 221 278 297 302 281 267 232 215 Nuclear 7 8 11 15 20 27 36 42 47 48 46 41 Biomass 46 45 55 70 89 111 121 129 150 174 215 235 Other Renewables 8 13 23 41 62 103 156 211 239 248 239 197 Total 352 395 488 586 692 788 837 865 865 848 813 755 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.8 2.9 4.0 5.0 5.7 6.1 6.3 6.4 6.6 6.8 Oil 0.0 1.4 3.0 4.7 6.6 8.6 10.6 12.5 14.1 15.4 16.4 17.0 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.6 2.8 4.4 6.6 9.4 12.3 15.3 18.2 20.8 23.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 167.5 258.6 350.7 443.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC 32.4 61.3 93.9 118.6 144.0 167.0 Land Use a Million ha Cropland 1459 1466 1464 1461 1458 1452 1447 1442 1437 1433 1431 1429 Grasslands 3389 3407 3432 3453 3474 3510 3547 3591 3635 3668 3688 3709 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 59 137 196 254 260 266 261 243 225 Forest 4296 4255 4231 4264 4335 4405 4475 4522 4570 4619 4669 4719 Others 3805 3820 3822 3711 3545 3386 3226 3133 3040 2968 2918 2868 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 a GtC 5.99 6.90 8.26 9.19 9.93 9.91 9.24 8.36 7.32 6.36 5.24 4.68 Other CO2 b GtC 1.11 1.07 0.79 -0.03 -0.65 -0.66 -0.67 -0.62 -0.57 -0.57 -0.61 -0.65 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.05 9.16 9.27 9.25 8.57 7.74 6.75 5.79 4.63 4.04 CH4 total c MtCH4 310 323 356 386 421 442 453 436 424 392 334 279 N2O total d MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.0 5.8 5.7 5.6 5.6 5.5 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.3 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 65.6 55.2 47.5 37.9 29.9 24.7 20.2 16.5 13.9 12.2 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 45 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 CO MtCO 879 877 1001 1120 1233 1326 1331 1268 1288 1307 1409 1436 NMVOC Mt 139 141 164 180 183 180 175 154 141 121 93 70 NOx MtN 31 32 38 44 47 46 40 33 27 23 20 17 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B1 land-use data, a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data), c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run), d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table 517 Scenario B1-MESSAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 919 965 1007 1043 1069 1081 1084 1089 1098 1108 1110 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.6 26.0 32.4 38.3 43.9 49.9 55.4 59.8 66.3 73.9 82.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 17.7 22.4 28.1 33.3 38.3 43.6 48.5 52.5 58.4 65.1 72.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 6 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 69 75 73 69 65 61 57 52 44 42 39 Gas 22 28 34 35 33 29 21 14 10 9 7 5 Electricity 22 28 35 43 49 53 54 56 57 60 61 62 Others 1 1 2 5 7 8 9 12 13 13 12 11 Total 124 136 152 159 159 154 146 139 131 126 123 117 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 33 36 37 31 14 5 4 2 1 1 0 Oil 72 85 83 73 62 53 44 36 29 21 15 12 Gas 33 45 57 68 80 87 84 75 73 77 76 78 Nuclear 6 7 8 10 11 14 21 25 27 24 20 15 Biomass 6 8 10 13 15 18 20 26 31 39 50 53 Other Renewables 4 5 8 13 17 22 24 27 29 31 32 32 Total 159 183 202 213 215 207 198 192 191 192 193 190 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.5 3.2 3.8 4.3 4.8 5.1 5.4 5.6 5.8 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.0 2.9 3.7 4.5 5.3 6.0 6.8 7.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.6 98.3 129.2 156.4 178.9 198.0 214.7 229.9 243.6 255.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC 1.84 -0.08 1.76 1.63 -0.04 1.58 1.50 -0.04 1.46 1.35 -0.08 1.27 1.31 -0.12 1.19 Land Use a Million ha Cropland 381 380 378 376 374 370 366 Grasslands 760 765 772 779 787 809 832 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 10 23 33 44 Forest 1050 1059 1074 1094 1117 1133 1149 Others 838 826 805 770 728 684 639 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 a GtC 2.83 3.20 3.40 3.35 3.13 2.60 2.16 Other CO2 b GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.07 -0.13 -0.16 -0.14 -0.12 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.32 3.22 2.97 2.46 2.04 CH4 total c MtCH4 73 74 73 70 67 62 57 N2O total d MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 8.9 2.3 0.6 -0.3 -0.6 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 116 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 7 CO MtCO 179 161 177 181 160 145 125 NMVOC Mt 42 36 38 36 31 27 23 NOx MtN 13 12 14 14 13 10 7 361 862 45 1154 607 3029 1.84 -0.08 1.76 54 2.2 -0.1 117 7 7 123 21 5 357 893 46 1159 574 3029 1.63 -0.04 1.58 52 2.2 0.3 117 7 8 121 21 3 354 912 45 1167 551 3029 1.50 -0.04 1.46 51 2.1 0.6 119 7 8 122 20 9 353 918 42 1179 537 3029 1.35 -0.08 1.27 50 2.1 0.9 120 7 8 139 14 1 352 924 39 1192 522 3029 1.31 -0.12 1.19 51 2.1 1.5 120 6 8 134 9 1 518 Statistical Table Scenario B1-MESSAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1.1 2.6 4.3 6.2 8.2 10.3 12.8 15.3 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 0.8 2.2 4.3 5.3 6.4 8.2 10.3 12.8 15.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 1.1 2.6 4.3 5.3 6.4 8.2 10.3 12.8 15.3 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 413 419 427 433 435 433 423 409 392 374 357 335 Solids 0.8 2.2 4.3 5.3 6.4 8.2 10.3 12.8 15.3 Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 a GtC 1.30 0.91 0.85 0.85 0.87 0.92 0.97 1.03 Other CO2 b GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 -0.11 -0.12 -0.20 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total d MtCH4 N2O total e MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 1.1 2.6 4.13 4.19 4.27 4.33 0.8 2.2 1.1 2.6 1.7 3.3 4.35 2.8 4.3 4.33 4.3 5.3 4.23 6.2 6.4 4.09 8.2 8.2 3.92 10.3 10.3 3.74 12.8 12.8 3.57 15.3 15.3 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.85 0.85 0.87 0.92 0.97 1.03 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 -0.11 -0.12 -0.20 -0.28 -0.23 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.89 0.73 0.75 0.72 0.69 0.81 CH4 total d MtCH4 47 39 40 40 41 43 43 39 N2O total e MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.1 4.6 3.0 2.0 1.5 1.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 26 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 9 9 CO MtCO 69 41 45 46 51 60 65 60 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 17 20 23 27 29 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 1.02 -0.17 0.85 37 0.6 1.3 27 9 7 50 31 3 0.90 -0.15 0.75 33 0.6 1.4 27 8 6 38 28 2 0.73 -0.14 0.59 30 0.6 1.5 27 8 4 34 21 1 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. 339 18.1 18.1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 5 3 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15 10 10 13 15 17 18 16 13 10 9 8 14 10 11 10 9 8 6 4 4 4 3 2 6 5 6 7 9 12 14 15 15 15 15 15 7 6 6 7 9 9 9 10 10 10 9 7 50 36 37 40 43 46 47 45 41 39 35 32 19 12 9 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 1 2 20 14 13 15 17 16 16 15 11 9 6 5 27 21 25 28 33 40 43 49 53 48 40 31 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 2 3 3 3 3 3 6 9 1 1 1 3 4 5 6 6 6 7 9 10 70 51 49 53 59 67 70 74 74 69 63 57 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.8 2.3 2.8 3.4 4.0 4.4 1.3 12.3 21.3 29.5 36.9 44.2 51.3 58.7 67.0 75.0 81.7 86.8 268 266 266 266 265 265 264 264 263 263 263 262 341 362 364 366 368 370 372 374 376 378 380 382 0 0 0 9 20 29 37 38 39 38 35 33 966 951 934 933 934 954 973 983 993 1005 1018 1031 701 696 711 702 688 659 630 617 604 592 580 568 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 0.56 -0.14 0.42 26 0.6 1.6 26 8 4 30 14 1 Statistical Table 519 Scenario B1 - MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3620 3937 4147 4238 4220 4085 3867 3589 3258 2882 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 4.8 8.7 15.1 24.9 37.9 51.4 64.8 78.7 91.7 103.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 8.2 12.0 17.3 24.6 34.1 46.1 57.4 67.7 79.3 91.7 103.1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 16 12 8 5 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 33 47 48 46 32 19 14 6 2 1 0 Liquids 13 22 35 50 65 82 87 78 68 55 45 38 Gas 2 3 7 11 11 14 11 10 10 10 10 10 Electricity 4 6 11 19 30 42 49 57 60 64 63 58 Others 1 2 6 11 18 27 34 45 49 52 50 45 Total 62 82 117 146 175 199 202 204 193 182 170 150 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 42 57 58 51 44 24 13 8 8 9 10 Oil 15 26 38 52 66 68 72 61 52 37 25 17 Gas 3 5 13 24 36 51 53 53 50 46 34 27 Nuclear 0 1 1 3 5 9 11 13 14 17 17 17 Biomass 24 22 26 30 39 49 54 61 63 67 72 73 Other Renewables 1 3 6 12 20 35 54 77 83 85 87 74 Total 74 98 141 178 217 256 268 278 270 260 244 218 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.3 1.9 2.4 2.8 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.3 2.0 2.7 3.4 4.0 4.5 4.9 5.1 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.8 2.2 2.6 3.0 3.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.3 71.2 100.9 132.5 163.1 189.1 210.1 227.1 240.4 251.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 435 435 435 434 434 434 434 433 433 433 433 Grasslands 608 606 609 612 614 617 619 622 625 628 631 634 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 12 28 40 52 54 55 54 50 46 Forest 535 525 518 535 551 557 563 578 593 604 610 616 Others 583 598 602 571 536 516 496 477 458 446 441 436 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.56 3.01 3.27 3.33 2.93 2.41 2.06 1.69 1.29 1.06 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 -0.17 -0.18 -0.10 -0.03 -0.10 -0.17 -0.18 -0.14 -0.10 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.75 2.84 3.09 3.23 2.90 2.31 1.89 1.51 1.15 0.96 CH4 total d MtCH4 113 125 145 164 183 196 201 194 189 172 141 109 N2O total e MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 31.8 29.9 26.3 19.3 13.1 9.3 6.7 4.4 3.1 2.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 CO MtCO 235 270 345 421 511 597 632 621 603 587 583 559 NMVOC Mt 33 37 48 56 58 59 57 46 40 32 25 20 NOx MtN 7 9 12 14 16 17 15 12 10 8 7 6 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. 520 Statistical Table Scenario B1 - MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million (192 1519 1875 2241 2557 2791 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 19 27 4 4 93 17 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 0 27 6 38 5 1 76 12 8 20 1 30 6 14 11 11 8 6 4 1 4 5 6 7 7 17 22 34 48 64 75 4 6 10 15 22 22 3 5 9 17 29 42 0 1 5 10 18 32 39 49 73 105 145 182 5 4 8 10 12 10 21 30 39 49 59 62 8 12 24 42 73 100 0 0 1 2 4 4 14 14 18 25 33 42 2 4 7 13 22 42 49 65 96 141 201 259 0 0 0 0 0 1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 2 0 3 0 4 0 0 0 3 0 6 0 9 1 4 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 5 0 9 1 6 1 4 17 8 37 4 59 6 83 7 1102 Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 385 385 384 384 Grasslands 1680 1675 1686 1696 1705 1714 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 29 66 93 Forest 1745 1720 1704 1702 1732 1761 Others 1684 1700 1704 1669 1593 1527 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.46 1.98 2.66 3.05 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.62 0.38 -0.19 -0.22 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.08 2.36 2.46 2.83 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 98 112 130 141 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 SOx total MtS 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5293 6100 6874 7618 8122 8484 8703 8623 8430 8126 7621 7137 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 37.5 51.0 73.0 100.7 134.1 172.7 211.9 251.8 289.9 330.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 50 55 60 66 66 61 43 32 25 24 22 Liquids 121 112 109 113 113 123 142 152 162 172 176 181 Gas 52 57 66 82 86 86 81 78 78 79 81 84 Electricity 35 46 63 85 113 147 185 219 247 270 272 273 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 264 294 341 378 421 469 493 518 546 553 561 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 98 107 113 131 136 127 93 68 51 49 47 Oil 131 120 116 119 115 123 144 156 167 177 183 188 Gas 70 76 100 144 162 169 165 160 155 148 149 151 Nuclear 24 22 24 29 41 49 54 51 46 38 40 41 Biomass 0 5 9 13 17 20 23 26 27 24 23 22 Other Renewables 24 24 28 33 44 76 129 185 234 277 257 238 Total 336 345 384 451 509 573 642 672 696 716 701 687 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.1 3.2 4.4 5.7 7.1 8.1 8.9 9.5 10.0 10.5 Oil 0.1 1.4 2.6 3.7 4.9 6.1 7.4 8.9 10.6 12.3 14.1 15.9 Gas 0.1 0.8 1.8 2.9 4.5 6.1 7.8 9.4 11.0 12.5 14.0 15.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 164.2 253.8 352.1 452.4 549.4 641.3 726.4 801.1 865.9 922.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1472 1467 1456 1439 1377 1287 1168 989 833 699 598 496 Grasslands 3209 3349 3590 3933 4240 4443 4544 4268 3976 3668 3522 3375 Energy Biomass 0 1 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 4173 4214 4144 3963 3737 3611 3584 4038 4428 4754 4796 4837 Others 4310 4133 3972 3828 3810 3823 3868 3870 3928 4043 4250 4458 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13165 13166 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.39 8.23 8.99 9.23 9.30 8.58 8.06 7.73 7.83 7.92 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.00 1.30 1.14 0.72 0.15 0.36 0.02 -0.86 -1.75 -2.64 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.38 9.53 10.13 9.94 9.45 8.94 8.08 6.87 6.07 5.28 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 351 399 439 483 512 506 505 510 535 561 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.1 9.5 11.1 13.0 14.8 15.4 16.1 16.8 18.5 20.2 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 69.0 69.0 65.6 57.1 43.7 30.4 21.6 17.3 16.9 16.6 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 45 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 CO MtC ONMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table OECD 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 838 908 965 1007 1024 1066 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 25.1 30.1 32.0 38.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 11 10 7 7 6 Liquids 72 63 55 48 43 34 Gas 27 31 36 41 39 35 Electricity 22 24 25 27 28 31 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 128 126 123 117 107 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 38 32 22 22 23 Oil 76 67 58 49 43 32 Gas 34 40 50 64 61 54 Nuclear 20 13 9 8 8 8 Biomass 0 2 3 3 3 3 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 10 14 Total 182 171 162 155 148 133 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0 0 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.2 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.4 1.9 2.1 2.7 Gas 0 0 0.4 0.9 1.4 1.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.6 2.8 3.3 4.0 6.4 7.7 95.3 124.5 150.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 410 407 399 386 343 Grasslands 796 821 867 933 960 1022 Energy Biomass 0 1 1 0 0 0 Forest 921 931 923 897 883 862 Others 998 959 925 894 893 896 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.04 2.83 2.71 2.43 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.16 0.13 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.14 2.99 2.84 2.43 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 82 93 100 119 N2O total MtN2O-N 26 26 28 31 32 38 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 12.2 6.8 5.8 4.9 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 CO MtC 1081 1084 1090 1098 1105 1112 ONMVOC Mt 44.6 50.3 56.5 63.2 71.0 79.3 NOx MtN na na na na na na 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1081 1084 1090 1098 1105 1112 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 44.6 50.3 56.5 63.2 71.0 79.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 6 5 4 3 3 3 Liquids 35 35 36 38 39 41 Gas 32 30 30 32 33 33 Electricity 35 38 42 46 47 47 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 108 108 112 118 122 126 Primary Energy EJ Coal 23 18 13 9 10 11 Oil 32 33 35 38 40 41 Gas 49 46 45 45 47 49 Nuclear 7 7 6 6 6 7 Biomass 3 3 4 3 3 3 Other Renewables 20 27 34 42 41 39 Total 134 134 137 143 147 150 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Oil 3.0 3.3 3.7 4.0 4.4 4.8 Gas 4.0 4.4 4.9 5.4 5.9 6.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 174.4 196.7 217.6 236.7 254.0 269.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 259 221 193 158 124 103 Grasslands 1037 988 939 891 850 809 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 873 968 1040 1090 1117 1145 Others 907 908 922 949 998 1046 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3124 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.37 2.23 2.13 2.08 2.16 2.24 Other CO2 GtC -0.09 -0.05 -0.11 -0.28 -0.51 -0.74 Total CO2 GtC 2.28 2.17 2.02 1.80 1.65 1.50 988 939 891 850 809 0 0 0 0 0 0 873 968 1040 1090 1117 1145 907 908 922 949 998 1046 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3124 2.37 2.23 2.13 2.08 2.16 2.24 -0.09 -0.05 -0.11 -0.28 -0.51 -0.74 2.28 2.17 2.02 1.80 1.65 1.50 132 140 143 143 155 167 4.1 4.3 4.4 4.7 4.9 5.1 4.2 3.7 3.4 3.4 3.6 3.8 116 117 117 119 120 120 7 7 7 7 7 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 Statistical Table 523 Scenario B1-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 426 433 434 431 423 408 392 374 357 340 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.0 3.0 4.1 5.3 7.1 9.2 11.5 13.4 15.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Liquids 13 10 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 2 2 1 Gas 18 12 8 8 8 8 7 7 7 6 6 6 Electricity 19 15 14 16 16 14 12 10 9 8 8 7 Others 6 8 11 15 17 19 21 22 23 22 21 20 Total 56 44 40 46 47 46 45 42 40 38 36 34 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 16 15 16 16 15 9 6 5 4 3 Oil 20 13 10 10 9 8 8 8 8 7 7 6 Gas 26 20 20 28 28 26 21 18 15 13 12 11 Nuclear 3 4 5 7 7 7 6 5 4 3 3 3 Biomass 0 1 1 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 2 2 Other Renewables 3 3 4 5 6 10 16 20 23 24 21 19 Total 70 57 56 66 68 69 69 63 58 54 49 44 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.3 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.2 30.6 40.8 50.6 59.2 66.6 72.9 77.4 80.0 81.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 294 300 304 295 278 251 205 166 133 117 101 Grasslands 395 410 452 522 587 627 643 564 493 430 428 426 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 1007 1016 997 948 893 867 869 994 1093 1167 1147 1127 Others 691 657 628 604 602 606 614 615 626 647 685 724 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.83 0.93 0.94 0.89 0.78 0.60 0.48 0.40 0.38 0.35 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.09 0.06 -0.01 0.10 0.08 -0.07 -0.17 -0.28 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.86 1.01 1.03 0.95 0.77 0.71 0.56 0.33 0.20 0.07 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 46 60 70 78 84 78 78 84 90 97 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.8 2.0 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 9.6 8.9 9.5 8.6 6.5 3.6 1.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 26 27 27 27 27 26 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 9 8 8 8 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 9 9 7 6 4 4 524 Statistical Table Scenario B1-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3226 3608 3937 4115 4210 4219 4062 3852 3589 3245 2919 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.4 11.5 21.7 34.1 48.6 63.3 77.6 91.5 103.9 117.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 27 34 42 46 46 41 29 20 16 14 13 Liquids 14 18 23 29 34 40 47 50 53 55 55 55 Gas 2 5 8 13 15 16 16 16 15 15 15 15 Electricity 4 10 19 32 47 63 81 95 105 113 111 109 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 59 84 115 141 165 185 189 194 200 196 193 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 39 53 68 79 79 68 47 33 25 22 20 Oil 16 19 25 32 35 41 49 53 56 57 58 58 Gas 3 8 18 33 44 51 54 52 48 44 43 42 Nuclear 1 3 7 11 18 23 26 24 21 17 17 17 Biomass 0 2 4 7 9 11 12 14 14 13 12 11 Other Renewables 3 4 5 7 12 28 54 79 100 117 105 94 Total 49 75 111 157 197 232 263 269 272 272 257 242 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.4 2.2 3.0 3.7 4.2 4.6 4.9 5.2 5.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.9 2.4 2.9 3.5 4.1 4.6 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.3 1.9 2.4 2.9 3.3 3.8 4.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 42.2 71.6 107.2 145.8 184.3 219.3 249.8 276.1 299.3 320.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 400 406 408 399 381 354 302 255 213 186 160 Grasslands 508 524 554 600 641 671 691 673 648 615 593 572 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 1168 1144 1108 1060 1027 1012 1017 1086 1159 1236 1283 1330 Others 664 633 606 584 583 587 596 597 608 628 665 701 Total 2729 2700 2674 2652 2650 2651 2657 2659 2671 2692 2728 2763 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.36 3.08 3.58 3.78 3.68 3.20 2.84 2.59 2.52 2.46 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.19 0.24 0.22 0.16 0.07 0.07 -0.01 -0.16 -0.30 -0.45 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.55 3.32 3.79 3.94 3.75 3.27 2.83 2.42 2.22 2.01 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 133 144 154 161 165 158 153 148 149 150 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 3.8 4.3 4.8 5.0 5.1 5.3 5.8 6.4 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 31.2 36.9 34.1 27.8 18.0 11.1 6.7 4.7 4.4 4.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 COM MtC CONMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 525 Scenario B1-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1541 1876 2241 2531 2778 2980 3068 3096 3064 2913 2766 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.6 7.4 14.4 23.7 35.6 52.0 68.6 85.6 101.5 118.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 4 5 7 8 9 7 6 5 5 5 Liquids 17 19 23 28 33 41 52 60 67 73 76 80 Gas 5 6 9 13 18 21 22 22 23 24 25 27 Electricity 3 5 8 12 21 33 48 63 77 89 93 96 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 33 43 57 79 103 131 153 172 190 199 207 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 5 6 8 14 18 21 18 15 13 13 13 Oil 20 20 23 29 33 42 54 62 69 75 79 83 Gas 7 8 13 20 30 38 42 44 46 46 48 49 Nuclear 0 2 3 4 8 11 14 15 14 13 14 14 Biomass 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 7 7 7 6 14 Other Renewables 5 6 8 11 15 24 39 59 77 94 89 85 Total 35 42 55 73 103 138 176 205 229 247 249 251 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.9 2.5 3.1 3.8 4.6 5.4 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.2 2.7 3.2 3.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.1 56.3 79.6 105.1 131.5 158.7 186.1 211.0 232.6 251.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 391 363 342 329 309 285 258 223 190 160 136 114 Grasslands 1510 1594 1717 1879 2025 2123 2174 2043 1897 1733 1651 1568 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 3641 3591 3493 3348 3218 3137 3105 3271 3453 3650 3756 3862 Others 1957 1884 1813 1746 1733 1734 1750 1749 1771 1818 1902 1987 Total 7499 7432 7366 7301 7285 7280 7286 7286 7311 7361 7445 7528 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 3756 3862 1957 1884 1813 1746 1733 1734 1750 1749 1771 1818 1902 1987 7499 7432 7366 7301 7285 7280 7286 7286 7311 7361 7445 7528 Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 SF6 MtC eq. 2 5 CO MtCO 1.15 0.68 1.83 90 1.7 13.0 16 5 5 NMVOC Mt 1.38 0.82 2.20 102 2.2 13.4 28 6 1.77 0.71 2.47 116 2.9 13.3 42 7 12 2.13 0.49 2.62 126 3.6 12.8 64 8 17 2.48 0.18 2.65 131 4.2 12.0 98 9 22 2.55 0.24 2.79 131 4.6 9.0 102 11 24 2.62 0.06 2.67 132 5.0 6.7 102 11 21 2.67 -0.35 2.31 135 5.3 5.2 101 11 14 2.77 -0.76 2.01 141 6.0 4.8 96 12 14 2.87 -1.17 1.70 147 6.6 4.4 89 12 14 526 Statistical Table Scenario B1T-MESSAGE World Population Million GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 5262 6117 6888 7617 8182 8531 8704 8667 8463 8125 7658 7056 20.9 26.8 36.2 52.1 73.1 100.7 135.6 171.6 208.5 249.8 290.0 328.4 25.7 33.3 44.6 61.6 82.2 108.4 140.0 171.8 204.1 242.5 281.3 318.8 38 27 22 16 10 8 6 0 0 0 0 0 42 51 58 52 47 38 21 16 6 2 1 1 111 123 158 192 224 250 261 244 215 191 156 131 41 47 63 73 87 101 97 92 76 52 41 33 35 44 62 89 120 151 174 196 204 208 203 193 8 10 16 27 36 47 57 68 84 96 103 95 275 303 379 449 524 593 616 616 586 548 503 452 91 91 109 109 98 77 39 19 7 4 2 2 128 155 172 189 203 197 190 159 124 96 68 48 71 84 119 159 212 258 258 258 234 210 183 166 7 8 11 16 27 43 48 42 24 17 18 21 46 45 53 68 86 107 123 138 148 148 138 128 8 13 24 43 62 97 161 230 303 347 372 348 352 395 488 583 687 779 819 846 840 822 780 714 0.0 0.9 1.8 2.9 4.0 5.0 5.8 6.1 6.3 6.4 6.4 6.5 0.0 1.4 3.0 4.7 6.6 8.6 10.6 12.5 14.1 15.3 16.3 16.9 0.0 0.7 1.6 2.8 4.3 6.5 9.0 11.6 14.2 16.5 18.6 20.5 7.1 82.4 167.6 258.2 349.2 439.5 523.3 595.5 655.3 703.8 742.3 772.5 Cropland 1459 1466 1464 1461 1458 1452 1447 1442 1437 1433 1431 1429 Grasslands 3389 3407 3432 3453 3474 3510 3547 3591 3635 3668 3688 3709 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 59 137 196 254 260 266 261 243 225 Forest 4296 4255 4231 4264 4335 4405 4475 4522 4570 4619 4669 4719 Others 3805 3820 3822 3711 3545 3386 3226 3133 3040 2968 2918 2868 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.26 9.11 9.77 9.61 8.48 7.26 5.92 4.92 3.96 3.33 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 0.79 -0.03 -0.65 -0.66 -0.67 -0.62 -0.57 -0.57 -0.61 -0.65 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.05 9.08 9.11 8.95 7.81 6.63 5.35 4.35 3.35 2.68 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 357 387 426 455 465 446 427 385 326 268 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.0 5.8 5.7 5.7 5.6 5.6 5.5 5.4 5.4 5.3 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 64.7 52.4 44.5 36.9 29.1 24.3 19.2 15.9 13.3 11.4 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 45 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 CO MtCO 879 877 1000 1129 1271 1414 1460 1426 1333 1192 1063 966 NMVOC Mt 139 141 164 183 192 199 194 171 143 114 87 68 NOx MtN 31 32 39 45 51 53 49 44 36 28 21 16 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B1 land-use data, a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data), c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run), d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table 527 Scenario B1T-MESSAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 OECD90 Population Million 859 919 965 1007 1043 1069 1081 1084 1089 1098 1108 1110 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.6 26.0 32.4 38.3 43.9 49.9 55.4 59.8 66.3 73.9 82.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 17.7 22.4 28.1 33.3 38.3 43.6 48.5 52.5 58.4 65.1 72.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 6 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 69 74 72 64 58 55 52 48 45 41 37 Gas 22 28 34 35 38 36 28 21 14 11 9 7 Electricity 22 28 36 44 50 53 56 57 59 61 63 63 Others 1 1 2 5 5 5 6 7 8 8 7 7 Total 124 136 151 158 158 153 145 137 129 124 120 114 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 33 35 35 30 14 5 3 1 1 0 0 Oil 72 84 81 71 56 45 36 30 24 18 14 10 Gas 33 45 58 67 76 75 73 70 74 71 62 53 Nuclear 6 7 8 10 15 27 30 23 8 3 6 8 Biomass 6 8 10 14 16 17 19 23 27 33 37 42 Other Renewables 4 5 9 14 17 22 31 41 55 61 64 64 Total 159 182 200 211 211 200 194 189 188 186 182 176 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.4 3.1 3.7 4.2 4.5 4.8 5.1 5.2 5.4 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.1 2.8 3.5 4.2 4.9 5.6 6.2 6.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.4 97.6 127.3 151.5 170.3 186.4 201.5 215.6 227.4 236.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 381 380 378 376 374 370 366 361 357 354 353 352 Grasslands 760 765 772 779 787 809 832 862 893 912 918 924 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 10 23 33 44 45 46 45 42 39 Forest 1050 1059 1074 1094 1117 1133 1149 1154 1159 1167 1179 1192 Others 838 826 805 770 728 684 639 607 574 551 537 522 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.37 3.28 2.93 2.22 1.80 1.61 1.54 1.36 1.12 0.90 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.07 -0.13 -0.16 -0.14 -0.12 -0.08 -0.04 -0.04 -0.08 -0.12 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.29 3.15 2.77 2.08 1.69 1.53 1.50 1.32 1.04 0.78 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 72 70 67 62 58 55 52 51 50 49 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.1 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 8.9 2.4 0.4 -0.5 -0.8 -0.2 0.1 0.5 1.1 1.6 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 116 117 117 119 120 120 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 CO MtCO 179 161 177 183 167 151 137 129 119 113 104 103 NMVOC Mt 42 36 38 37 32 27 24 22 20 18 14 10 NOx MtN 13 12 14 14 13 11 9 7 6 4 2 1 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B1 land-use data, a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data), c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run), d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. 528 Statistical Table Scenario B1T-MESSAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 419 427 433 435 433 423 409 392 374 357 339 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.1 1.7 2.8 4.3 6.2 8.2 10.3 12.8 15.3 18.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 2.2 2.6 3.3 4.3 5.3 6.4 8.2 10.3 12.8 15.3 18.1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 5 3 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 10 10 13 14 16 18 17 14 13 12 10 Gas 14 10 12 12 12 12 9 7 5 4 3 2 Electricity 6 5 6 7 9 12 14 15 15 15 15 15 Others 10.3 12.8 15.3 18.1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 5 3 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 10 10 13 14 16 18 17 14 13 12 10 Gas 14 10 12 12 12 12 9 7 5 4 3 2 Electricity 6 5 6 7 9 12 14 15 15 15 15 15 Others 7 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 6 6 5 5 Total 50 36 37 40 43 47 48 45 41 38 35 32 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 12 9 6 3 1 -1 0 0 0 0 0 Oil 20 14 13 15 16 16 18 16 11 9 7 5 Gas 27 21 25 28 33 39 39 38 39 39 34 30 Nuclear 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Biomass 2 1 1 1 1 2 4 6 7 8 9 9 Other Renewables 1 1 1 3 4 5 6 8 8 9 9 10 Total 70 51 50 53 58 65 67 68 66 64 59 54 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.5 3.0 3.4 3.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.4 29.5 36.8 43.8 50.0 55.9 62.0 67.9 73.3 77.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 268 266 266 266 265 265 264 264 263 263 263 262 Grasslands 341 362 364 366 368 370 372 374 376 378 380 382 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 9 20 29 37 38 39 38 35 33 Forest 966 951 934 933 934 954 973 983 993 1005 1018 1031 Others 701 696 711 702 688 659 630 617 604 592 580 568 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.86 0.84 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.83 0.78 0.73 0.62 0.52 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 -0.11 -0.12 -0.20 -0.28 -0.23 -0.17 -0.15 -0.14 -0.14 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.90 0.72 0.74 0.66 0.59 0.60 0.61 0.58 0.48 0.38 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 40 41 44 46 45 40 35 31 28 25 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.2 4.7 3.0 2.1 1.3 1.1 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 26 27 27 27 27 26 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 9 8 8 8 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 9 9 7 6 4 4 CO MtCO 69 41 46 50 58 72 81 72 54 48 35 25 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 18 21 25 28 27 26 25 19 14 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 3 2 2 1 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table 529 Scenario BIT-MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3620 3937 4147 4238 4220 4085 3867 3589 3258 2882 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 4.8 8.7 15.1 24.9 37.9 51.4 64.8 78.7 91.7 103.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 8.2 12.0 17.3 24.6 34.1 46.1 57.4 67.7 79.3 91.7 103.1 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 16 12 8 5 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 32 45 42 39 31 17 13 5 1 0 0 Liquids 13 22 37 55 73 94 99 92 82 74 62 50 Gas 2 3 7 11 13 17 20 25 23 15 10 8 Electricity 4 6 12 21 32 44 49 57 59 60 58 53 Others 1 2 5 9 12 15 16 20 24 27 30 28 Total 62 82 117 145 173 203 204 206 193 176 159 139 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 42 57 58 49 44 24 12 4 2 1 0 Oil 15 26 39 53 67 71 71 58 47 37 26 18 Gas 3 5 13 24 35 48 48 48 45 38 31 24 Nuclear 0 1 2 3 7 9 10 11 9 8 7 7 Biomass 24 22 25 30 39 50 53 61 61 62 59 50 Other Renewables 1 3 6 12 20 33 53 75 92 101 113 110 Total 74 98 142 179 217 255 258 266 259 249 237 208 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.3 1.9 2.4 2.8 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.3 3.3 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.0 2.7 3.4 4.0 4.5 4.9 5.1 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.8 2.3 2.7 3.1 3.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.4 71.5 100.9 131.8 161.0 184.6 202.3 215.4 225.4 232.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 438 435 435 435 434 434 434 434 433 433 433 433 Grasslands 608 606 609 612 614 617 619 622 625 628 631 634 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 12 28 40 52 54 55 54 50 46 Forest 535 525 518 535 551 557 563 578 593 604 610 616 Others 583 598 602 571 536 516 496 477 458 446 441 436 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.58 3.01 3.21 3.26 2.72 2.13 1.66 1.32 1.00 0.75 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 -0.17 -0.18 -0.10 -0.03 -0.10 -0.17 -0.18 -0.14 -0.10 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.78 2.84 3.04 3.16 2.69 2.03 1.49 1.14 0.86 0.65 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 146 163 183 196 203 197 192 172 138 105 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 30.9 27.3 22.9 18.2 12.4 9.0 6.3 4.6 3.2 2.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 19 18 16 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 CO MtCO 235 270 343 422 523 624 654 661 622 558 512 451 NMVOC Mt 33 37 48 56 60 64 61 53 43 30 21 16 NOx MtN 7 9 12 15 18 19 17 15 13 10 8 6 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. 530 Statistical Table Scenario BIT-MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1875 2241 2557 2791 2980 3089 3115 3064 2934 2727 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 4.4 9.3 17.0 27.6 41.6 56.7 73.6 92.0 109.1 124.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 3.8 5.1 7.6 12.8 20.1 30.6 44.0 57.8 73.6 92.0 109.1 124.8 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 11 11 8 6 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 4 4 5 7 6 4 3 1 1 0 1 Liquids 17 22 37 53 72 82 90 83 72 59 42 33 Gas 4 6 10 15 24 36 40 39 34 22 19 16 Electricity 3 5 9 18 29 42 55 68 71 72 68 62 Others 0 1 3 7 12 19 27 34 46 56 61 56 Total 39 49 73 106 149 190 219 228 224 210 190 168 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 4 8 11 15 18 11 5 2 2 1 2 Oil 21 30 40 50 64 65 66 55 42 32 22 15 Gas 8 12 23 39 68 96 98 101 76 62 56 60 Nuclear 0 0 1 2 4 5 7 8 8 6 5 7 Biomass 14 14 17 24 30 37 47 48 53 46 32 27 Other Renewables 2 4 7 14 21 37 70 106 148 176 186 165 Total 49 65 96 140 201 259 300 322 328 322 302 275 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.4 4.0 4.4 4.7 4.9 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.5 2.5 3.5 4.5 5.3 5.9 6.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.4 59.6 84.3 112.4 141.9 168.5 189.6 204.9 216.3 225.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use * Million ha Cropland 371 385 385 385 384 384 383 383 383 383 382 382 Grasslands 1680 1675 1686 1696 1705 1714 1723 1732 1741 1750 1760 1769 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 29 66 93 121 124 127 124 116 107 Forest 1745 1720 1704 1702 1732 1761 1790 1808 1825 1843 1880 1880 17.8 37.4 59.6 84.3 112.4 141.9 168.5 189.6 204.9 216.3 225.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 385 385 384 384 383 383 383 383 382 382 Grasslands 1680 1675 1686 1696 1705 1714 1723 1732 1741 1750 1760 1769 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 29 66 93 121 124 127 124 116 107 Forest 1745 1720 1704 1702 1732 1761 1790 1808 1825 1843 1862 1880 Others 1684 1700 1704 1669 1593 1527 1461 1432 1403 1379 1361 1342 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.46 1.98 2.76 3.27 3.09 2.69 1.94 1.50 1.22 1.16 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.62 0.38 -0.19 -0.22 -0.25 -0.22 -0.19 -0.20 -0.24 -0.29 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.08 2.36 2.57 3.05 2.85 2.47 1.75 1.31 0.97 0.87 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 98 112 133 151 159 154 148 132 110 89 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.8 15.0 15.2 14.1 13.1 11.4 9.0 7.1 5.4 4.1 HFC MtC eq. 16 28 42 64 98 102 102 101 96 89 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 11 11 12 12 SF6 MtC eq. 2 5 5 8 12 17 22 24 21 14 14 14 CO MtCO 396 404 434 475 522 568 588 564 538 473 412 387 NMVOC Mt 48 55 64 72 80 83 81 68 54 41 33 28 NOx MtN 7 8 10 13 16 19 19 18 14 11 10 8 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table 531 Scenario B1 High-MESSAGE World Population Million 1990 5262 2000 6117 2010 6888 2020 7617 2030 8182 2040 8531 2050 8704 2060 8667 2070 8463 2080 8125 2090 7658 2100 7056 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.9 26.8 36.7 56.5 88.5 126.0 166.0 212.3 253.8 290.1 322.7 350.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 25.7 33.3 45.7 66.9 96.0 130.3 166.8 208.9 246.1 281.7 313.4 340.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 38 25 20 16 10 8 6 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 42 52 54 58 58 44 29 24 14 11 2 1 Liquids 111 123 152 180 212 238 259 262 242 208 179 161 Gas 41 47 58 66 71 75 74 67 62 58 53 45 Electricity 35 44 57 83 116 152 186 231 264 291 307 313 Others 8 10 17 32 52 76 104 139 173 201 218 213 Total 275 302 359 434 519 593 659 723 755 768 758 732 Primary Energy EJ Coal 91 91 100 111 103 87 64 50 43 47 60 60 Oil 128 155 172 188 204 197 191 162 139 100 70 53 Gas 71 83 110 149 215 273 306 324 304 287 263 244 Nuclear 7 8 10 14 20 30 45 66 79 81 80 82 Biomass 46 44 47 60 79 101 123 159 203 245 280 316 Other Renewables 8 13 21 39 63 112 183 272 348 406 431 404 Total 352 393 460 560 682 798 911 1033 1117 1167 1184 1157 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.8 2.8 3.9 5.0 5.8 6.5 7.0 7.4 7.9 8.5 Oil 0.0 1.4 3.0 4.7 6.6 8.6 10.6 12.5 14.1 15.5 16.5 17.2 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.6 2.7 4.1 6.3 9.0 12.1 15.3 18.4 21.2 23.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 165.7 254.0 345.4 440.0 535.2 627.2 712.0 787.5 854.7 915.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1459 1466 1464 1461 1458 1452 1447 1442 1437 1433 1431 1429 Grasslands 3389 3407 3432 3453 3474 3510 3547 3591 3635 3668 3688 3709 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 59 137 196 254 260 266 261 243 225 Forest 4296 4255 4231 4264 4335 4405 4475 4522 4570 4619 4669 4719 Others 3805 3820 3822 3711 3545 3386 3226 3133 3040 2968 2918 2868 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.90 8.99 9.97 10.27 10.11 9.57 8.60 7.63 6.99 6.33 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 0.79 -0.03 -0.65 -0.66 -0.67 -0.62 -0.57 -0.57 -0.61 -0.65 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.69 8.96 9.32 9.61 9.44 8.94 8.03 7.06 6.38 5.68 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 351 385 423 449 468 452 441 411 359 302 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 6.0 5.8 5.7 5.7 5.6 5.5 5.5 5.4 5.4 5.4 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 62.0 53.8 48.1 39.7 32.4 26.9 24.1 20.6 17.8 15.5 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 43 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 CO MtCO 879 877 951 1065 1193 1323 1470 1549 1658 1731 1793 1871 NMVOC Mt 139 141 157 177 184 190 199 185 173 152 125 103 NOx MtN 31 32 37 42 47 47 45 40 35 29 26 23 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table 532 Scenario B1 High-MESSAGE OECD90 Population Million 1990 859 2000 919 2010 965 2020 1007 2030 1043 2040 1069 2050 1081 2060 1084 2070 1089 2080 1098 2090 1108 2100 1110 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.4 20.6 25.5 31.1 37.2 43.5 49.8 56.2 63.0 70.5 78.6 86.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 17.7 22.1 27.0 32.4 37.9 43.5 49.2 55.3 62.1 69.3 76.8 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 5 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 69 75 75 73 70 71 68 66 62 58 55 Gas 22 28 31 30 31 30 25 20 14 12 10 7 Electricity 22 28 34 42 50 58 64 70 76 83 88 92 Others 1 1 1 5 7 9 11 15 17 19 19 18 Total 124 136 146 155 162 168 171 173 174 175 175 173 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 33 34 35 30 14 7 7 4 1 1 1 Oil 72 84 83 75 64 55 48 38 31 24 18 14 Gas 33 45 53 62 81 91 95 86 90 104 114 116 Nuclear 6 7 8 9 11 16 27 42 50 47 38 32 Biomass 6 8 8 13 17 20 23 31 40 50 62 68 Other Renewables 4 5 8 13 17 27 34 37 37 39 41 43 Total 159 182 194 207 220 224 233 240 252 264 275 274 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.6 2.5 3.2 3.8 4.4 4.9 5.3 5.6 5.8 6.0 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.3 2.0 2.8 3.7 4.6 5.5 6.5 7.5 8.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.2 97.1 127.7 155.5 180.2 202.2 222.4 241.9 261.3 280.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 381 380 378 376 374 370 366 361 357 354 353 352 Grasslands 760 765 772 779 787 809 832 862 893 912 918 924 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 10 23 33 44 45 46 45 42 39 Forest 1050 1059 1074 1094 1117 1133 1149 1154 1159 1167 1179 1192 Others 838 826 805 770 728 684 639 607 574 551 537 522 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.32 3.27 3.14 2.73 2.46 2.16 2.00 1.99 2.01 1.96 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.07 -0.13 -0.16 -0.14 -0.12 -0.08 -0.04 -0.04 -0.08 -0.12 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.25 3.14 2.98 2.59 2.34 2.08 1.96 1.94 1.93 1.84 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 69 66 62 59 56 53 53 53 53 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.1 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 9.1 2.2 0.6 -0.1 -0.3 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.5 1.9 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 116 117 117 119 120 120 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 CO MtCO 179 161 166 170 163 162 157 164 171 177 180 166 NMVOC Mt 42 36 36 35 32 31 30 29 29 29 24 18 NOx MtN 13 12 13 13 13 11 9 7 6 4 7 7 6 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 CO MtCO 179 161 166 170 163 162 157 164 171 177 180 166 NMVOC Mt 42 36 36 35 32 31 30 29 29 29 24 18 NOx MtN 13 12 13 13 13 11 9 7 6 4 3 2 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table 533 Scenario B1High-MESSAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 REF Population Million 413 419 427 433 435 433 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 0.8 1.0 2.0 4.9 7.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 2.2 2.5 3.6 5.7 7.9 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 5 3 2 1 0 Liquids 15 10 11 14 17 17 Gas 14 10 11 11 11 10 Electricity 6 5 6 7 10 12 Others 7 6 6 7 9 9 Total 50 36 37 42 48 48 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 13 9 6 4 3 Oil 20 14 13 16 18 16 Gas 27 20 23 28 35 40 Nuclear 1 1 1 0 0 0 Biomass 2 1 1 1 2 3 Other Renewables 1 1 2 3 4 5 Total 70 50 48 55 64 68 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.3 29.4 37.4 45.3 Land Use Million ha Cropland 268 266 266 266 265 265 Grasslands 341 362 364 366 368 370 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 9 20 29 Forest 966 951 934 933 934 954 Others 701 696 711 702 688 659 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.84 0.87 0.96 0.95 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.04 -0.11 -0.12 -0.20 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.88 0.76 0.84 0.75 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 39 41 43 45 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.1 4.6 3.0 1.7 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 CO MtCO 69 41 44 49 58 63 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 18 21 23 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 4 4 Population Million 423 409 392 374 357 339 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 9.9 11.9 13.8 15.6 17.4 19.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 9.9 11.9 13.8 15.6 17.4 19.0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 15 14 14 12 11 10 Liquids 8 5 4 4 3 2 Gas 14 15 16 17 18 18 Electricity 9 10 11 11 10 8 Others 47 45 45 43 41 38 Total 3 3 4 5 5 4 Primary Energy EJ Coal 13 11 10 8 8 7 Oil 44 49 50 46 37 27 Gas 0 0 1 1 2 2 Nuclear 3 3 5 8 13 18 Biomass 6 8 9 11 12 13 Other Renewables 70 74 78 77 76 71 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 Oil 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 Gas 1.8 2.2 2.8 3.4 3.9 4.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 52.5 59.7 67.7 75.8 83.0 88.7 Land Use Million ha Cropland 264 264 263 263 263 262 Grasslands 372 374 376 378 380 382 Energy Biomass 37 38 39 38 35 33 Forest 973 983 993 1005 1018 1031 Others 630 617 604 592 580 568 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.96 0.98 1.01 0.93 0.79 0.62 Other CO2 GtC -0.28 -0.23 -0.17 -0.15 -0.14 -0.14 Total CO2 GtC 0.69 0.76 0.84 0.78 0.65 0.48 CH4 total MtCH4 46 41 38 36 32 27 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 2.0 1.9 2.7 3.2 3.4 2.8 HFC MtC eq. 26 27 27 27 27 26 PFC MtC eq. 9 10 9 8 8 8 SF6 MtC eq. 9 9 7 6 4 4 CO MtCO 60 53 49 40 35 33 NMVOC Mt 25 27 30 30 23 15 NOx MtN 4 3 2 2 1 1 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. 534 Statistical Table Scenario B1High-MESSAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3261 3620 3937 4147 4238 4220 4085 3867 3589 3258 2882 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.7 5.9 14.0 28.0 44.1 60.5 81.5 99.6 112.8 123.9 131.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 8.3 13.7 23.5 36.7 51.2 65.4 84.4 99.6 112.8 123.9 131.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 15 12 8 5 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 19 33 42 49 52 39 26 21 13 10 1 0 Liquids 13 22 37 55 74 94 111 113 106 85 68 58 Gas 2 3 7 11 13 16 18 17 17 16 17 16 Electricity 4 6 11 21 35 49 63 83 96 104 107 106 Others 1 2 6 11 21 31 44 59 75 86 95 91 Total 62 82 114 155 198 234 264 293 306 302 288 271 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 41 52 64 64 63 46 32 23 24 34 29 Oil 15 26 40 57 72 74 77 69 66 48 31 23 Gas 3 5 14 24 39 55 68 74 68 52 44 34 Nuclear 0 1 1 3 7 11 16 19 22 24 27 32 Biomass 24 22 25 31 41 53 64 75 82 95 98 99 Other Renewables 1 3 5 12 25 44 75 124 159 183 183 169 Total 74 98 138 191 247 300 346 393 419 425 417 386 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.3 1.9 2.5 3.2 3.6 3.9 4.2 4.4 4.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.4 2.1 2.9 3.7 4.3 5.0 5.5 5.8 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.4 2.9 3.3 3.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 42.9 72.0 105.6 143.1 181.7 217.4 248.4 274.1 296.0 314.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 435 435 435 434 434 434 434 433 433 433 433 Grasslands 608 606 609 612 614 617 619 622 625 628 631 634 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 12 28 40 52 54 55 54 50 46 Forest 535 525 518 535 551 557 563 578 593 604 610 616 Others 583 598 602 571 536 516 496 477 458 446 441 436 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.49 3.29 3.78 4.01 3.84 3.44 3.04 2.46 2.23 1.79 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 -0.17 -0.18 -0.10 -0.03 -0.10 -0.17 -0.18 -0.14 -0.10 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.69 3.12 3.60 3.90 3.81 3.33 2.87 2.28 2.09 1.70 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 144 166 188 203 212 203 197 180 152 118 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 30.2 31.5 29.6 23.3 16.1 11.5 9.4 6.3 4.0 3.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 CO MtCO 235 270 338 432 543 645 764 792 800 775 773 751 NMVOC Mt 33 37 47 60 65 68 75 69 61 48 40 34 NOx MtN 7 9 12 16 18 20 19 17 14 12 10 9 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B1 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table 535 Scenario B1High-MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1519 1875 2241 2557 2791 2980 3089 3115 3064 2934 2727 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 4.3 9.3 18.3 30.5 45.7 62.7 77.5 91.1 102.9 112.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 3.8 5.1 7.4 12.8 21.2 33.3 47.9 63.4 77.5 91.1 102.9 112.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 10 9 8 6 4 3 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 1 1 1 1 Liquids 17 22 28 36 49 57 63 66 57 49 43 39 Gas 4 6 9 13 17 18 22 24 27 26 23 19 Electricity 3 5 7 13 21 33 46 63 76 87 94 96 Others 0 1 4 8 15 27 40 55 70 85 94 96 Total 39 48 61 82 111 143 178 211 231 248 254 251 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 4 5 5 5 6 7 10 13 17 21 26 Oil 21 30 35 41 49 52 52 44 31 20 13 8 Gas 22 24 27 26 23 19 Electricity 3 5 7 13 21 33 46 63 76 87 94 96 Others 0 1 4 8 15 27 40 55 70 85 94 96 Total 39 48 61 82 111 143 178 211 231 248 254 251 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 4 5 5 5 6 7 10 13 17 21 26 Oil 21 30 35 41 49 52 52 44 31 20 13 8 Gas 8 12 20 34 60 87 100 114 96 86 68 67 Nuclear 0 0 0 1 2 2 3 5 7 10 13 16 Biomass 14 13 13 16 19 25 33 50 77 94 108 131 Other Renewables 2 4 7 11 17 35 67 103 143 174 194 179 Total 49 63 80 108 152 206 262 326 368 400 417 426 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.0 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.8 2.3 2.8 3.3 3.6 3.8 3.9 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.3 3.3 4.6 5.6 6.5 7.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.3 55.4 74.7 96.0 120.9 147.8 173.5 195.6 214.4 231.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 385 385 385 384 384 383 383 383 383 382 382 Grasslands 1680 1675 1686 1696 1705 1714 1723 1732 1741 1750 1760 1769 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 29 66 93 120 124 127 124 116 107 Forest 1745 1720 1704 1702 1732 1761 1790 1808 1825 1843 1862 1880 Others 1684 1700 1704 1669 1593 1527 1461 1432 1403 1379 1361 1342 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.25 1.56 2.10 2.58 2.85 2.99 2.55 2.26 1.96 1.96 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.62 0.38 -0.19 -0.22 -0.25 -0.22 -0.19 -0.20 -0.24 -0.29 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.87 1.95 1.90 2.36 2.60 2.77 2.36 2.06 1.71 1.67 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 97 109 125 138 151 153 153 143 122 104 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 12.7 12.5 12.0 11.8 11.6 10.4 8.5 7.2 5.9 4.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 16 28 42 64 98 102 102 101 96 89 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 11 11 12 12 SF6 MtC eq. 2 5 5 8 12 17 22 24 21 14 14 14 CO MtCO 396 404 403 414 429 453 489 540 638 738 806 922 NMVOC Mt 48 55 59 64 67 67 68 60 53 45 39 36 NOx MtN 7 8 9 10 12 12 13 13 12 12 11 11 Emissions (a: Land-use taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data), c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B1 emulation run), d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B1 emulation run. Statistical Table Scenario B1 High-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5293 6100 6874 7618 8122 8484 8703 8623 8430 8126 7621 7137 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 37.5 51.0 73.0 100.7 134.0 172.6 211.9 251.7 289.7 330.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 54 62 69 71 70 65 47 34 28 28 27 Liquids 121 118 117 119 113 118 132 152 170 187 197 208 Gas 52 59 64 67 64 58 50 55 59 63 65 67 Electricity 35 49 69 97 143 189 235 281 322 360 370 381 Others 0 0 16 47 73 107 148 167 182 194 201 209 Total 253 279 328 400 465 542 630 701 768 832 861 891 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 106 122 134 146 153 155 119 94 80 80 81 Oil 131 127 125 127 116 118 133 158 179 197 210 222 Gas 70 79 118 186 261 310 334 371 399 419 429 438 Nuclear 24 23 26 31 35 41 48 49 46 41 43 46 Biomass 0 5 11 20 36 54 74 81 81 75 75 74 Other Renewables 24 24 28 33 41 68 113 169 224 278 265 253 Total 336 365 430 532 635 743 857 946 1023 1089 1101 1114 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.3 3.5 5.0 6.4 7.1 8.0 9.2 10.3 11.2 12.0 Oil 0.1 1.4 2.7 3.9 5.1 6.3 7.5 9.1 10.8 12.6 14.7 16.7 Gas 0.1 0.8 1.9 3.3 5.8 8.6 11.7 15.4 19.2 23.3 27.5 31.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 14.2 736.9 859.7 979.5 1093.6 1201.1 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1472 1467 1455 1435 1373 1284 1167 992 833 691 592 493 Grasslands 3209 3349 3591 3935 4239 4439 4537 4270 3979 3665 3479 3293 Energy Biomass 0 0 6 18 47 83 125 125 109 79 70 61 Forest 4173 4215 4144 3963 3720 3568 3506 3931 4339 4731 4805 4879 Others 4310 4134 3968 3813 3785 3790 3829 3847 3904 3999 4219 4438 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.81 9.15 10.49 11.28 11.93 12.00 12.15 12.40 12.81 13.22 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.01 1.34 1.22 0.82 0.25 0.36 0.05 -0.66 -1.73 -2.79 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.82 10.48 11.70 12.09 12.18 12.35 12.21 11.74 11.08 10.43 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 352 398 443 489 521 524 529 536 558 579 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.1 9.5 11.0 12.9 14.6 15.3 16.1 16.8 18.2 19.7 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 73.4 75.6 67.0 56.1 42.8 29.8 21.4 17.6 17.7 17.9 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 784 291 257 298 338 337 333 327 315 299 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 29 32 33 37 42 47 45 43 46 45 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 36 37 47 58 68 71 62 46 43 43 Statistical Table OECD Total 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 838 908 965 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1007 1024 1066 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 10 7 6 4 Liquids 72 66 57 45 37 20 Gas 27 33 34 32 29 20 Electricity 22 25 27 26 25 24 Others 0 0 12 37 43 61 Total 130 136 141 146 140 129 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 41 36 23 23 22 Oil 76 71 61 47 38 18 Gas 34 42 60 87 89 91 Nuclear 20 14 10 7 6 4 Biomass 0 2 4 7 8 13 Other Renewables 12 11 11 10 10 10 Total 182 181 180 181 173 159 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.2 1.6 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.4 2.0 2.2 2.6 Gas 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.7 2.1 3.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.3 97.4 128.3 156.1 Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 411 406 394 382 340 Grasslands 796 822 866 929 955 1014 Energy Biomass 0 0 4 13 17 30 Forest 921 931 923 897 881 850 Others 998 959 924 890 888 888 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.15 2.99 2.85 2.54 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.11 0.18 0.15 0.03 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.26 3.17 3.01 2.57 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 82 91 96 114 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.7 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 12.1 5.1 3.6 2.6 HFC MtC eq. 19 58 108 103 109 112 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 12 10 8 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 16 5 6 6 1081 1084 1090 1098 1105 1112 44.6 50.2 56.4 63.1 71.0 79.3 na na na na na na 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 3 2 2 2 2 16 17 18 19 20 21 14 15 16 17 18 19 23 26 29 32 33 34 73 75 77 80 83 85 131 135 141 150 155 160 24 20 16 11 12 13 14 15 17 20 22 23 89 92 97 101 104 107 4 4 4 3 4 4 17 17 16 15 15 15 13 17 21 26 26 25 160 165 171 177 183 188 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.5 3.7 4.4 5.3 6.2 7.2 8.2 9.3 181.0 204.9 228.5 251.3 272.7 292.5 303 258 219 187 156 125 1028 983 937 890 841 793 42 38 34 28 27 26 853 941 1017 1079 1110 1140 897 902 916 938 989 1039 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 2.46 2.44 2.44 2.47 2.56 2.65 -0.07 -0.05 -0.11 -0.24 -0.50 -0.75 2.39 2.39 2.33 2.22 2.06 1.90 127 137 143 145 153 161 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.7 3.0 116 117 303 258 219 187 156 125 1028 983 937 890 841 793 42 38 34 28 27 26 853 941 1017 1079 1110 1140 897 902 916 938 989 1039 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 2.46 2.44 2.44 2.47 2.56 2.65 -0.07 -0.05 -0.11 -0.24 -0.50 -0.75 2.39 2.39 2.33 2.22 2.06 1.90 127 137 143 145 153 161 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.4 2.7 3.0 116 117 117 119 120 120 7 7 7 7 7 6 7 7 8 8 8 8 Statistical Table Scenario BlHigh-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 426 433 434 431 423 408 392 374 357 340 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.4 2.0 3.0 4.1 5.3 7.1 9.2 11.4 13.4 15.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 8 7 5 4 4 2 2 1 1 1 Liquids 18 11 8 8 8 7 7 7 6 6 6 6 Gas 19 15 13 13 11 9 7 6 6 5 5 5 Electricity 6 8 11 16 20 23 24 24 23 23 22 21 Others 0 0 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 Total 56 44 40 44 45 44 43 41 39 36 35 33 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 16 16 16 16 17 9 6 5 5 5 Oil 20 13 10 10 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 Gas 26 20 20 28 31 30 24 22 19 17 16 15 Nuclear 3 4 5 6 6 5 5 4 3 2 2 2 Biomass 0 1 1 2 4 4 5 4 4 3 3 3 Other Renewables 3 3 4 5 6 8 13 16 18 19 17 16 Total 70 57 56 67 69 70 69 62 57 53 50 46 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.3 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.0 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 30.2 30.7 41.0 51.1 60.1 67.9 74.8 80.0 83.5 85.2 Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 293 300 304 297 282 259 211 169 131 115 99 Grasslands 395 410 453 523 588 631 652 576 502 428 417 406 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 2 5 7 7 3 1 0 0 0 Forest 1007 1016 997 948 889 857 851 973 1081 1177 1163 1150 Others 691 657 628 602 598 600 609 613 624 642 682 722 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.84 0.95 0.95 0.91 0.82 0.65 0.53 0.46 0.44 0.43 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.09 0.07 0.00 0.11 0.09 -0.04 -0.19 -0.34 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.87 1.02 1.04 0.97 0.82 0.75 0.62 0.42 0.26 0.09 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 47 63 72 82 92 86 86 90 100 111 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.7 1.9 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 9.9 9.5 9.1 8.1 6.5 3.8 2.1 1.3 1.4 1.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 20 24 26 27 27 27 27 26 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 6 6 7 8 9 10 9 8 8 8 SF6 MtC eq. 8 6 4 7 7 8 9 9 7 6 4 4 Statistical Table 539 Scenario BlHigh-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3226 3608 3937 4115 4210 4219 4062 3852 3589 3245 2919 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.4 11.5 21.7 34.1 48.6 63.3 77.6 91.5 103.9 117.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 29 40 51 53 53 49 35 25 20 19 18 Liquids 14 19 25 33 39 47 54 60 66 70 73 75 Gas 2 5 8 11 13 13 13 14 15 16 16 16 Electricity 4 11 22 40 68 96 123 143 161 176 179 182 Others 0 0 2 6 12 21 33 38 41 43 43 44 Total 40 64 97 140 185 229 271 290 308 326 330 335 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 43 62 84 92 93 87 65 49 41 40 39 Oil 16 20 27 36 41 47 55 63 70 74 78 81 Gas 3 9 23 45 87 115 129 140 146 147 147 147 Nuclear 1 4 8 13 17 21 27 26 24 21 21 22 Biomass 0 2 5 9 16 24 32 35 34 31 30 29 Other Renewables 3 4 5 7 11 26 52 80 107 132 124 116 Total 49 81 129 194 264 327 381 408 430 446 440 434 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.6 2.6 3.5 4.4 5.1 5.6 6.1 6.5 6.9 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.6 2.1 2.7 3.4 4.1 4.9 5.6 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.6 1.3 2.3 3.5 4.9 6.3 7.8 9.2 10.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.3 76.5 119.4 169.3 222.3 274.3 323.6 370.4 415.4 459.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 389 399 406 408 395 373 343 296 254 215 186 158 Land Use Million ha Cropland 508 524 554 599 636 663 680 666 646 620 593 565 Grasslands 0 0 1 4 16 30 44 44 36 22 16 10 Energy Biomass 1168 1144 1107 1058 1020 999 995 1056 1126 1207 1268 1329 Forest 664 633 605 581 578 580 587 591 602 620 659 697 Others 2729 2700 2674 2650 2645 2645 2650 2653 2664 2683 2721 2759 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.58 3.61 4.51 5.06 5.24 5.27 4.99 4.79 4.68 4.71 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.19 0.24 0.23 0.18 0.08 0.07 0.01 -0.12 -0.27 -0.43 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.77 3.86 4.74 5.24 5.36 5.06 4.79 4.56 4.44 4.31 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 133 144 155 160 161 157 155 154 151 148 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.3 3.8 4.2 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.4 5.8 6.3 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 34.7 43.5 37.6 29.4 19.1 11.7 7.1 5.3 5.3 5.3 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 11 20 34 56 93 90 85 79 72 64 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 7 9 11 14 17 20 18 18 18 18 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 11 17 23 27 30 32 26 19 16 16 540 Statistical Table Scenario BlHigh-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1541 1876 2241 2531 2778 2980 3068 3096 3064 2913 2766 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.6 7.4 14.3 23.7 35.6 52.0 68.6 85.6 101.5 118.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 4 6 7 8 9 7 6 5 5 5 Liquids 17 21 26 33 37 44 55 68 80 91 99 106 Gas 5 7 9 12 15 17 16 19 22 25 26 27 Electricity 3 6 10 15 30 47 65 88 109 129 137 145 Others 0 0 1 4 11 24 40 52 63 70 75 79 Total 27 36 50 70 101 139 185 235 280 321 341 362 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 8 11 16 22 28 26 24 22 23 25 Oil 20 22 27 34 38 46 57 72 85 96 104 112 Gas 7 9 16 27 52 74 93 117 137 153 161 169 Nuclear 0 2 3 5 7 10 13 15 15 15 16 17 Biomass 0 1 2 3 7 13 20 25 27 26 27 27 Other Renewables 5 6 8 12 15 23 36 57 78 101 98 96 Total 35 46 65 91 136 188 246 311 366 413 429 446 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.1 2.8 3.6 4.4 5.5 6.5 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.5 2.3 3.5 4.7 6.1 7.7 9.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.6 58.4 85.1 116.3 150.9 189.8 232.8 277.7 322.0 364.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 391 363 342 329 311 289 263 226 191 157 134 111 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1510 1594 1719 1884 2033 2131 2177 2045 1895 1727 1628 1528 Grasslands 0 0 0 0 5 16 33 39 38 30 27 25 Energy Biomass 3641 3592 3492 3343 3203 3111 3065 3227 3415 3629 3753 3876 Forest 1957 1884 1812 1740 1724 1722 1736 1740 1762 1799 1890 1980 Others 7499 7432 7365 7296 7276 7269 7273 7277 7300 7343 7431 7520 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.24 1.59 2.18 2.78 3.38 3.92 4.40 4.79 5.09 191 157 134 111 1510 1594 1719 1884 2033 2131 2177 2045 1895 1727 1628 1528 0 0 0 0 5 16 33 39 38 30 27 25 3641 3592 3492 3343 3203 3111 3065 3227 3415 3629 3753 3876 1957 1884 1812 1740 1724 1722 1736 1740 1762 1799 1890 1980 7499 7432 7365 7296 7276 7269 7273 7277 7300 7343 7431 7520 0.72 1.01 1.24 1.59 2.18 2.78 3.38 3.92 4.40 4.79 5.09 5.40 0.73 0.82 0.68 0.84 0.74 0.54 0.23 0.23 0.06 -0.27 -0.77 -1.27 1.45 1.83 1.93 2.43 2.92 3.31 3.62 4.15 4.46 4.53 4.32 4.13 77 85 90 101 120 134 142 143 145 147 154 160 1.2 1.3 1.7 2.2 2.9 3.6 4.3 4.6 5.0 5.3 5.9 6.5 10.5 12.8 13.7 14.5 13.7 12.9 12.1 9.1 7.0 5.6 5.3 5.0 0 2 16 28 42 64 98 102 102 101 96 89 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 11 11 12 12 2 5 5 8 12 17 22 24 21 14 14 14 Statistical Table 541 Scenario B2-AIM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6091 6851 7612 8372 8855 9367 9638 9917 10129 10271 10414 GNP/GDP (tex) Trillion US$ 20.9 28.2 36.4 48.4 66.9 86.3 111.2 133.7 160.7 186.9 210.5 237.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 38 34 30 26 18 13 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 36 43 54 66 77 82 88 84 80 76 72 69 Liquids 111 118 132 146 168 191 217 225 234 241 246 251 Gas 51 54 74 97 123 148 179 193 209 221 228 236 Electricity 38 50 65 81 105 135 175 215 266 311 344 381 Others 311 381 Total 285 304 359 420 499 578 671 730 795 850 892 936 Primary Energy EJ Coal 93 105 141 180 214 242 278 272 268 262 254 247 Oil 143 160 175 185 188 178 173 154 139 126 113 102 Gas 73 93 123 153 187 226 277 297 320 337 344 352 Nuclear 6 9 13 19 29 35 46 53 63 72 79 88 Biomass 50 48 38 38 53 79 120 144 173 198 215 233 Other Renewables 10 11 13 16 22 32 48 79 132 186 222 264 Total 376 427 502 590 693 793 941 1000 1095 1181 1227 1285 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.3 3.9 5.9 8.0 10.8 13.1 15.9 18.7 21.2 24.0 Oil 0.1 1.6 3.3 5.1 7.0 8.6 10.6 12.0 13.5 14.9 16.1 17.3 Gas 0.1 0.9 2.0 3.4 5.1 7.0 9.7 12.2 15.4 18.8 22.0 25.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 169.4 268.9 380.8 507.1 649.8 801.2 951.5 1100.3 1246.1 1388.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1459 1481 1510 1540 1570 1598 1626 1656 1686 1718 1751 1784 Grasslands 3389 3409 3436 3454 3473 3508 3543 3577 3610 3641 3668 3696 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 14 92 163 288 312 337 341 324 307 Forest 4296 4252 4225 4251 4292 4322 4353 4380 4407 4441 4481 4522 Others 3805 3806 3778 3690 3522 3325 3139 3019 2904 2805 2721 2639 Total 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.51 10.21 11.83 13.24 14.96 14.82 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 0.92 0.26 0.07 0.12 0.24 0.24 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.43 10.47 11.90 13.36 15.20 15.07 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 358 391 429 453 482 485 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 7.1 7.1 7.3 7.4 7.5 7.6 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 78.3 77.6 69.8 51.9 44.2 38.4 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 786 299 272 315 346 413 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 42 55 70 88 107 120 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 48 55 60 76 79 80 CO MtCO 879 877 953 941 1002 1086 1180 1224 NMVOC Mt 139 141 161 179 186 191 197 181 NOx MtN 31 32 35 38 39 40 42 40 14.75 0.26 15.01 489 7.7 34.2 483 128 74 1272 167 38 14.56 0.19 14.76 485 7.8 32.8 548 130 63 1332 153 37 14.24 0.17 14.41 475 7.9 33.3 603 127 65 1407 141 36 Statistical Table Scenario B2-AIM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 916 942 968 994 985 976 964 952 943 935 928 GNP/GDP (tex) Trillion US$ 16.4 21.1 24.5 28.3 32.8 35.3 37.9 41.0 44.3 48.0 52.1 56.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 12 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 Liquids 64 71 70 71 72 70 67 62 58 55 54 52 Gas 25 30 36 41 45 46 47 45 44 43 43 43 Electricity 22 27 31 34 38 40 43 48 53 59 63 68 Others 127 141 148 157 166 166 166 164 163 163 165 168 Total 41 39 44 46 46 48 49 43 38 34 32 30 Primary Energy EJ Coal 76 88 84 82 73 58 47 38 31 27 25 24 Oil 34 48 55 59 62 64 66 63 60 58 58 57 Gas 5 7 8 11 13 12 11 11 12 13 14 15 Nuclear 6 1 0 1 6 11 23 27 33 37 40 44 Biomass 6 6 7 8 10 12 14 20 29 37 42 49 Other Renewables 167 189 198 206 210 204 208 202 202 206 212 219 Total 0.0 0.4 0.9 1.3 1.8 2.2 2.7 3.1 3.5 3.9 4.3 4.6 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 0.9 1.8 2.6 3.4 3.9 4.6 4.9 5.3 5.6 5.9 6.1 Oil 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.4 4.0 4.6 5.2 5.8 6.4 Gas 2.8 33.0 65.4 98.7 132.1 164.8 196.8 226.5 252.7 275.9 297.2 317.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 381 384 391 398 406 411 417 423 429 435 442 449 Carbon Sequestration GtC 760 764 770 773 776 787 798 811 826 838 849 860 Land Use Million ha Cropland 0 0 0 2 17 31 54 59 63 64 61 58 Grasslands 1050 1059 1069 1082 1095 1104 1113 1124 1136 1151 1171 1190 Energy Biomass 838 822 799 774 734 689 647 609 574 538 504 471 Forest 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Others Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.32 3.41 3.37 3.27 3.18 2.81 2.49 2.28 2.16 2.04 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.02 -0.05 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 -0.03 -0.05 -0.07 -0.11 -0.14 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.30 3.36 3.31 3.24 3.16 2.78 2.45 2.21 2.05 1.90 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 71 67 64 59 54 52 51 49 48 47 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 10.3 7.4 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.0 6.6 6.4 6.2 6.0 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 11 10 10 CO MtCO 179 161 174 186 203 210 216 215 214 216 221 227 NMVOC Mt 42 36 34 32 29 25 21 15 10 7 5 5 NOx MtN 13 12 11 10 6 6 5 5 5 5 5 5 Statistical Table 543 Scenario B2-AIM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 415 416 416 416 411 GNP/GDP (tex) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.0 1.4 1.9 2.7 4.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 2 3 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 7 7 7 6 6 Liquids 19 10 9 8 8 9 Gas 19 13 18 22 25 30 Electricity 8 9 11 12 14 17 Others 58 42 45 49 53 61 Total 18 15 17 19 19 19 Primary Energy EJ Coal 22 15 13 11 10 9 Oil 26 22 28 31 33 38 Gas 1 1 2 3 4 5 Nuclear 2 4 0 0 2 4 Biomass 1 1 1 2 2 3 Other Renewables 71 58 61 65 69 78 Total 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 Gas 1.3 12.3 21.9 31.4 40.5 50.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 268 269 274 280 285 291 Carbon Sequestration GtC 341 362 366 368 370 373 Land Use Million ha Cropland 0 0 0 1 6 10 Grasslands 966 951 939 944 947 944 Energy Biomass 701 693 697 683 668 656 Forest 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Others Total 1.30 0.91 1.01 1.05 1.06 1.11 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 -0.16 -0.12 -0.09 Other CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.01 0.89 0.94 1.02 Total CO2 GtC 47 39 47 48 47 48 CH4 total MtCH4 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 N2O total MtN2O-N 17.0 11.0 11.7 9.7 6.9 3.4 SOx total MtS 0 4 9 15 21 25 HFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 19 PFC MtC eq. 7 6 5 7 9 12 SF6 MtC eq. 69 41 40 40 42 45 CO MtCO 16 13 13 13 12 12 NMVOC Mt 5 3 3 3 3 3 NOx MtN 406 398 390 385 382 379 6.5 8.0 10.0 11.7 12.9 14.3 -0.16 -0.12 -0.09 1.30 0.91 1.01 0.89 0.94 1.02 47 39 47 48 47 48 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 17.0 11.0 11.7 9.7 6.9 3.4 0 4 9 15 21 25 7 4 8 10 14 19 7 6 5 7 9 12 69 41 40 40 42 45 16 13 13 13 12 12 5 3 3 3 3 3 406 398 390 385 382 379 6.5 8.0 10.0 11.7 12.9 14.3 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 4 4 3 3 2 10 10 10 10 10 9 36 36 37 37 35 34 20 24 28 31 32 33 71 75 80 81 80 79 20 19 19 18 16 15 8 7 6 5 4 3 44 44 44 43 41 39 6 6 7 7 7 8 8 9 11 12 14 15 6 9 14 19 21 23 91 95 102 105 103 102 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.8 2.0 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.9 2.3 2.7 3.2 3.6 4.0 61.1 72.3 83.2 93.4 102.6 111.1 296 302 308 314 320 327 377 380 383 386 389 392 18 20 21 22 20 19 941 940 939 941 945 949 644 634 624 613 601 589 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 1.17 1.13 1.09 1.02 0.91 0.82 -0.03 -0.02 -0.02 -0.07 -0.02 -0.02 1.14 1.10 1.08 0.95 0.89 0.80 48 44 40 36 32 28 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 1.6 1.8 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.6 25 26 26 26 27 27 25 28 30 30 28 27 15 16 15 14 14 14 48 50 51 53 55 57 12 11 10 9 9 8 2 2 2 2 1 1 544 Statistical Table Scenario B2-AIM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2798 3248 3603 3958 4312 4500 4696 4768 4842 4897 4932 4968 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.5 3.5 6.5 12.1 22.7 31.8 44.5 54.4 66.4 78.3 89.2 101.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 78.3 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 18 17 14 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 15 23 33 44 54 59 65 63 60 58 56 54 Liquids 11 17 27 37 51 62 74 76 79 81 82 83 Gas 2 4 8 17 31 41 55 62 71 79 85 91 Electricity 5 8 15 25 40 54 75 94 118 140 157 176 Others Total 61 69 100 137 184 222 268 298 330 358 381 404 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 44 69 98 125 142 161 157 154 151 147 144 Oil 17 26 41 53 63 61 59 48 39 33 29 25 Gas 4 8 17 33 56 76 103 115 128 138 145 153 Nuclear 0 1 2 4 9 14 20 24 29 33 37 41 Biomass 28 24 19 15 11 17 27 33 39 45 48 53 Other Renewables 1 2 2 3 6 10 18 31 56 82 99 120 Total 80 104 150 206 269 319 388 408 444 481 506 536 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.8 2.9 4.1 5.8 7.1 8.7 10.3 11.8 13.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.6 1.0 1.6 2.1 2.8 3.2 3.7 4.1 4.4 4.7 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.9 1.5 2.5 3.4 4.6 6.0 7.4 9.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 45.1 80.6 127.3 185.2 253.4 327.3 401.4 475.5 549.2 622.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 438 439 448 457 466 475 484 494 503 514 524 535 Grasslands 608 607 611 615 618 623 627 631 636 640 644 647 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 21 37 65 70 76 77 73 69 Forest 535 525 518 533 548 553 558 563 567 571 575 580 Others 583 593 587 557 512 469 430 405 381 362 347 333 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.82 4.00 5.26 6.13 7.13 7.15 7.17 7.15 7.09 7.03 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.29 0.01 0.06 0.13 0.25 0.25 0.24 0.25 0.25 0.26 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.11 4.00 5.33 6.26 7.38 7.40 7.42 7.40 7.35 7.29 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 148 176 209 224 240 241 243 239 230 221 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.3 3.4 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 40.1 44.9 36.2 19.0 9.8 10.0 10.3 10.5 10.6 10.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 21 40 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 14 22 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 18 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 CO MtCO 235 270 332 356 412 455 503 521 538 563 594 627 NMVOC Mt 33 37 50 66 72 77 83 78 74 69 62 56 NOx MtN 7 9 12 15 18 18 19 17 16 15 14 14 Statistical Table 545 Scenario B2-AIM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1511 1891 2270 2649 2952 3289 3502 3729 3904 4020 4139 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 4.1 6.0 8.6 13.9 22.3 29.7 39.6 48.9 56.2 64.4 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 17 18 16 18 15 13 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 1 2 3 4 6 7 9 9 9 9 9 8 Liquids 17 20 25 29 36 49 66 75 86 95 100 106 Gas 4 7 12 17 22 30 42 49 56 62 65 68 Electricity 4 6 8 10 14 23 36 49 65 81 91 103 Others Total 40 52 66 77 96 126 166 191 221 246 265 285 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 7 11 17 24 34 48 52 57 59 58 58 Oil 27 32 37 39 43 50 59 61 63 61 55 49 Gas 9 15 23 31 37 49 64 76 89 97 100 103 Nuclear 0 0 0 1 2 4 9 12 15 19 21 24 Biomass 14 18 19 22 35 47 63 76 91 104 112 122 Other Renewables 2 3 3 5 7 11 19 33 49 59 72 Total 57 75 94 113 145 191 254 295 348 388 406 428 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.2 2.8 3.3 3.7 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.5 3.0 3.7 4.3 4.8 5.3 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.9 2.6 3.4 4.3 5.3 6.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 37.0 58.2 80.9 106.7 138.5 175.0 214.2 255.6 297.1 337.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 371 389 397 405 413 421 429 437 446 455 464 474 Grasslands 1680 1676 1689 1699 1709 1725 1741 1754 1766 1777 1787 1797 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 7 48 85 151 163 176 179 170 161 Forest 1745 1717 1699 1692 1701 1721 1740 1752 1765 1777 1790 1803 Others 1684 1698 1695 1676 1608 1510 1419 1371 1325 1291 1268 1246 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.36 1.76 2.14 2.73 3.48 3.73 3.99 4.10 4.07 4.04 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.65 0.46 0.18 0.12 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.08 0.04 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.01 2.22 2.32 2.84 3.52 3.78 4.07 4.20 4.12 4.04 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 93 100 108 123 139 147 156 162 165 168 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 13.2 12.6 16.4 19.2 22.4 16.6 12.3 10.7 11.0 11.3 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 12 20 32 54 84 120 157 190 211 223 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 7 10 14 20 27 33 37 39 39 37 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 5 7 9 20 16 17 15 11 13 14 CO MtCO 396 404 408 359 345 376 413 439 468 501 536 576 NMVOC Mt 48 55 64 69 72 77 81 77 73 68 64 60 NOx MtN 7 8 9 9 10 12 14 15 16 16 15 15 546 Statistical Table Scenario B2-ASF World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5256 6091 6870 7650 8277 9072 9367 9632 9771 10132 10341 10414 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 20.3 26.1 33.8 43.3 54.8 76.3 85.7 104.8 116.3 158.9 214.6 237.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 53 55 66 71 64 57 49 49 48 48 48 48 Liquids 118 156 194 254 271 288 305 317 329 353 391 428 Gas 49 55 70 98 121 144 167 177 187 190 186 183 Electricity 41 50 67 89 116 144 171 185 199 216 234 253 Others Total 261 316 397 512 572 632 692 727 763 807 859 912 Primary Energy EJ Coal 94 99 124 146 197 247 297 363 430 489 541 594 Oil 136 181 232 305 273 240 207 136 65 24 13 2 Gas 73 78 99 140 180 220 260 268 276 273 258 243 Nuclear 8 11 10 9 12 15 17 19 21 22 24 25 Biomass 0 0 4 8 28 49 69 88 108 125 141 156 Other Renewables 8 11 16 24 31 39 46 52 58 70 86 103 Total 319 380 486 633 721 809 897 927 957 1002 1062 1122 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.0 2.2 3.5 5.3 7.5 10.2 13.5 17.5 22.1 27.3 33.0 Oil 0.0 1.7 3.8 6.5 9.4 11.9 14.1 15.8 16.7 17.1 17.2 17.3 Gas 0.0 0.8 1.7 2.9 Biomass 0 0 4 8 28 49 69 88 108 125 141 156 Other Renewables 8 11 16 24 31 39 46 52 58 70 86 103 Total 319 380 486 633 721 809 897 927 957 1002 1062 1122 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.0 2.2 3.5 5.3 7.5 10.2 13.5 17.5 22.1 27.3 33.0 Oil 0.0 1.7 3.8 6.5 9.4 11.9 14.1 15.8 16.7 17.1 17.2 17.3 Gas 0.0 0.8 1.7 2.9 4.5 6.5 8.9 11.6 14.3 17.1 19.7 22.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 172.2 285.7 423.0 574.4 733.3 897.2 1063.8 1234.4 1412.4 1599.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC -1.8 -1.8 -1.8 -1.9 -1.9 -1.6 -2.0 -1.6 -2.0 -1.9 -1.5 -1.8 Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.85 11.48 13.60 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.12 1.25 1.15 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.97 12.73 14.75 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 367 414 459 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.5 10.5 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 77.2 101.3 108.1 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 786 299 272 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 42 55 70 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 48 55 60 CO MtCO 879 877 984 1077 1233 NMVOC Mt 139 141 157 180 199 NOx MtN 31 32 41 52 61 14.51 1.00 15.51 493 11.0 97.4 315 88 76 1275 205 64 15.42 0.85 16.27 527 11.5 86.8 346 107 79 1318 211 66 15.93 0.60 16.52 545 11.7 68.1 413 120 80 1361 221 66 16.43 0.35 16.78 563 11.8 49.4 483 128 74 1405 230 66 17.13 0.22 17.35 579 11.9 38.7 548 130 63 1485 248 72 18.03 0.21 18.24 593 12.0 36.0 603 127 65 1600 276 77 18.93 0.20 19.13 607 12.0 33.3 649 121 69 1716 304 77 Statistical Table 547 Scenario B2-ASF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 OECD90 Population Million 848 916 947 978 990 979 976 963 957 941 930 928 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 15.4 19.1 23.1 27.0 30.9 37.0 39.4 43.8 46.2 54.3 64.2 68.0 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 12 12 12 12 13 13 13 13 12 12 12 12 Liquids 68 86 92 97 91 85 78 75 72 73 77 82 Gas 27 30 32 35 38 40 43 45 47 48 46 45 Electricity 23 27 33 39 41 43 45 47 49 53 58 62 Others Total 130 156 168 183 182 181 180 180 181 185 194 202 Primary Energy EJ Coal 33 30 34 39 54 68 83 92 102 109 116 122 Oil 77 97 108 117 94 71 47 29 11 2 1 0 Gas 35 38 41 48 55 61 68 69 69 68 64 60 Nuclear 6 9 8 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 8 8 Biomass 0 0 1 2 8 13 18 19 21 23 25 28 Other Renewables 5 6 8 10 11 12 13 14 15 17 21 25 Total 156 180 200 223 234 229 225 226 235 244 248 259 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.0 1.5 2.1 2.9 3.8 4.7 5.8 6.9 8.1 Oil 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.1 4.2 5.0 5.5 5.9 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 Gas 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.8 2.3 3.0 3.7 4.4 5.0 5.7 6.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 0.0 6.6 13.3 20.0 27.2 34.9 43.1 51.7 60.7 70.1 79.8 89.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.57 3.99 4.30 4.26 4.22 4.09 3.97 3.94 4.02 4.10 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.57 3.99 4.30 4.26 4.22 4.09 3.97 3.94 4.02 4.10 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 77 81 85 87 89 90 91 93 96 99 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.7 3.0 3.1 3.0 2.9 2.8 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.5 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 8.0 8.5 8.7 8.5 8.3 7.5 6.8 6.7 7.4 8.1 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 11 10 10 CO MtCO 179 161 167 170 161 135 110 105 100 102 110 119 NMVOC Mt 42 36 40 43 43 39 36 35 34 35 37 40 NOx MtN 13 12 14 16 16 15 14 13 12 12 12 13 548 Statistical Table Scenario B2-ASF REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 416 415 416 417 415 408 406 398 394 385 380 379 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.0 0.9 1.1 1.6 2.3 3.5 4.1 5.1 5.7 7.9 10.8 11.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 18 11 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 4 3 Liquids 16 11 11 13 14 14 15 15 15 16 18 19 Gas 15 11 14 17 19 21 23 22 21 20 18 16 Electricity 8 7 9 11 11 11 11 11 11 10 10 10 Others Total 56 39 44 51 52 54 55 53 52 50 50 49 Primary Energy EJ Coal 23 12 14 15 16 16 16 14 11 12 15 19 Oil 18 12 13 16 16 17 17 14 10 6 3 0 Gas 26 21 24 30 30 29 29 27 25 23 21 18 Nuclear 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Biomass 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 5 9 12 13 15 Other Renewables 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 Total 68 48 55 64 65 66 67 63 59 57 57 58 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.6 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 22.0 33.0 45.0 56.7 67.7 77.8 87.0 95.3 103.4 111.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.03 1.17 1.21 1.14 1.06 0.96 0.86 0.81 0.81 0.81 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 1.03 1.17 1.21 1.14 1.06 0.96 0.86 0.81 0.81 0.81 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 41 46 55 63 71 76 82 87 91 95 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.9 10.9 9.6 7.5 5.3 4.5 3.6 2.8 1.9 1.0 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 SF6 MtC eq. 7 6 5 7 9 12 15 16 15 14 14 14 CO MtCO 69 41 40 39 45 46 48 49 51 55 61 67 NMVOC Mt 16 13 15 20 25 26 27 25 22 22 25 27 NOx MtN 5 3 3 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 Statistical Table 549 Scenario B2-ASF ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2776 3248 3617 3986 4270 4584 4696 4769 4806 4899 4951 4968 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.5 2.5 4.1 6.6 9.7 16.5 19.7 26.3 30.4 46.2 67.6 76.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 22 31 41 46 38 29 21 20 19 19 18 17 Liquids 14 26 43 72 83 95 106 115 124 138 156 174 Gas 2 5 10 22 32 42 51 55 60 61 59 57 Electricity 6 10 16 24 43 62 81 86 92 97 103 108 Others Total 43 72 110 163 195 227 259 277 295 314 335 356 Primary Energy EJ Coal 33 49 65 77 101 126 151 184 218 245 265 286 Oil 17 34 55 88 79 71 63 38 14 1 1 0 Gas 4 7 15 29 50 71 92 96 100 97 89 80 Nuclear 0 1 1 2 4 6 9 9 10 11 11 11 Biomass 0 0 1 3 7 12 17 18 20 22 24 26 Other Renewables 1 2 4 6 11 15 19 22 24 29 35 42 Total 55 92 140 205 253 302 351 368 386 404 425 445 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.7 2.6 3.8 5.2 6.9 8.9 11.2 13.8 16.5 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.4 2.3 3.0 3.7 4.2 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.4 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.4 2.2 3.2 4.1 5.1 6.1 6.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 19.3 44.9 81.9 130.7 188.3 252.6 322.3 395.8 473.1 554.2 639.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Million ha Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.73 3.94 5.08 5.84 6.59 7.03 7.47 7.89 8.27 8.66 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.35 0.40 0.34 0.26 0.18 0.13 0.07 0.04 0.02 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.07 4.34 5.42 6.10 6.77 7.16 7.54 7.92 8.30 8.67 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 144 159 176 191 206 212 217 220 221 221 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 3.2 4.0 4.5 4.9 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.6 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 39.6 56.4 59.3 52.1 45.0 31.7 18.4 11.0 9.3 7.7 HFC MtC eq. 0 0.01 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 3.07 4.34 5.42 6.10 6.77 7.16 7.54 7.92 8.30 8.67 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 144 159 176 191 206 212 217 220 221 221 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 3.2 4.0 4.5 4.9 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.6 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 39.6 56.4 59.3 52.1 45.0 31.7 18.4 11.0 9.3 7.7 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 21 40 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 14 22 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 18 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 CO MtCO 235 270 326 369 438 470 502 533 563 611 672 734 NMVOC Mt 33 37 41 46 50 52 54 57 60 64 70 76 NOx MtN 7 9 13 18 22 24 27 27 28 29 30 32 550 Statistical Table Scenario B2-ASF ALM Population Million 1990 1216 2000 1511 2010 1890 2020 2269 2030 2603 2040 3100 2050 3289 2060 3502 2070 3615 2080 3908 2090 4080 2100 4139 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 2.4 3.6 5.4 8.2 11.8 19.2 22.6 29.7 34.0 50.5 72.1 81.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 1 1 2 3 5 7 9 10 11 13 14 15 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 21 33 47 72 83 94 106 112 117 127 139 152 Solids 5 8 14 25 33 41 49 54 59 62 63 65 Liquids 4 6 10 16 22 28 35 41 48 55 64 73 Gas 31 49 74 115 143 171 198 217 235 257 281 305 Electricity 4 7 10 15 26 37 48 73 99 123 145 167 Others 25 38 56 85 83 81 79 54 30 14 8 1 Total 8 12 19 32 45 58 71 77 82 84 84 84 Primary Energy EJ Coal 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 Oil 0 0 2 3 13 23 34 46 58 69 79 88 Gas 1 39 2 4 5 7 9 12 14 16 20 26 31 Nuclear 1 39 60 91 141 176 210 245 267 288 314 345 375 Biomass 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.8 2.7 3.8 5.2 6.7 Other Renewables 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.5 2.4 3.2 4.0 4.6 5.0 5.2 5.3 5.4 Total 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.9 1.4 2.1 2.8 3.6 4.5 5.3 6.1 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 1.4 17.8 38.5 66.1 101.3 140.4 181.6 224.2 267.8 313.2 362.2 415.5 Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.52 2.38 3.00 3.28 3.55 3.84 4.13 4.50 4.93 5.36 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.78 0.85 0.82 0.74 0.66 0.47 0.28 0.18 0.19 0.19 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.30 3.22 3.82 4.02 4.21 4.31 4.41 4.68 5.12 5.55 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 105 128 143 151 160 166 173 179 185 191 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.3 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 15.6 22.5 27.5 26.3 25.2 21.4 17.5 15.2 14.4 13.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 12 20 32 54 84 120 157 190 211 223 PFC MtC eq. 4 7 5 7 9 20 27 33 37 39 39 37 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 5 7 9 20 16 17 15 11 13 14 CO MtCO 396 404 451 499 590 624 658 674 689 717 757 797 NMVOC Mt 48 55 61 71 81 88 95 104 114 127 143 160 NOx MtN 7 10 14 18 22 20 22 23 24 25 27 29 Statistical Table 551 Scenario B2-IMAGE World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5297 7869 9875 7869 10360 846 964.0 1076.4 1183.5 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 21.0 41.2 75.7 41.2 198.7 17.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0 0 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 50 35 15 9 9 8 9 10 11 12 12 12 Solids 40 36 46 73 128 73 Liquids 98 106 124 128 160 128 Gas 50 102 143 160 355 160 Electricity 35 99 177 355 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 272 377 504 272 726 322 Primary Energy EJ Coal 82 113 197 82 168 Oil 116 130 1.33 212 86 Gas 78 182 212 187 Nuclear 1 6 34 76 9 Biomass 6 35 15 9 Non-commercial 5 6 90 322 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 17 35 679 846 Total 344 506 679 322 846 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 3.1 8.0 3.1 17.9 Oil 0.1 3.3 7.3 12.3 Gas 0.1 3.5 9.6 19.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 168.2 266.2 373.5 487.3 607.7 729.7 7869 964.0 1076.4 1183.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0 0 Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.47 9.39 10.31 11.23 10.84 10.46 10.07 9.68 9.30 Other CO2 GtC 1.07 1.50 1.67 1.40 1.13 1.20 1.26 1.33 1.39 1.46 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.19 11.06 11.71 12.36 12.04 11.72 11.40 11.07 10.75 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 396 469 491 514 536 540 544 548 551 555 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 9.3 11.5 11.8 12.2 12.5 12.5 12.6 12.6 12.7 12.7 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 52.6 47.7 42.4 44.8 41.7 42.5 43.3 41.7 37.9 34.0 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 786 299 272 315 346 413 483 548 603 649 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 42 55 70 88 107 120 128 130 127 121 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 48 39 43 47 51 49 46 44 44 43 CO MtCO 879 877 786 632 615 597 580 596 612 629 645 661 NMVOC Mt 139 141 147 152 151 149 147 149 151 154 156 158 NOx MtN 31 32 36 39 43 47 51 49 46 44 44 43 552 Statistical Table Scenario B2-IMAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 801 993 1022 1005 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 16.5 27.9 39.2 65.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 6 5 2 1 Solids 7 6 6 8 Liquids 51 40 38 25 Gas 34 53 64 78 Electricity 21 48 57 68 Others Total 119 152 166 179 Primary Energy EJ Coal 24 22 27 17 Oil 55 45 39 20 Gas 51 96 97 88 Nuclear Biomass 1 6 10 Non-commercial 6 5 2 1 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 10 25 35 62 Total 147 195 206 197 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.6 2.6 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.7 2.5 Gas 0.1 1.8 4.6 9.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.1 101.4 138.2 175.6 213.5 251.2 288.0 323.9 358.9 392.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.30 3.40 3.40 3.40 3.40 3.25 3.10 2.96 2.81 2.66 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.13 0.25 0.31 0.36 0.42 0.47 0.53 0.58 0.64 0.69 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.42 3.65 3.71 3.76 3.82 3.73 3.63 3.54 3.45 3.35 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 87 101 101 102 103 102 100 99 98 97 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 10.2 7.5 6.5 5.6 4.8 4.3 3.8 3.4 3.1 2.8 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 11 10 10 CO MtCO 179 161 119 77 79 80 82 83 84 84 85 86 NMVOC Mt 42 36 36 36 36 36 35 35 35 34 34 33 NOx MtN 13 12 11 9 9 9 9 8 8 8 8 7 Statistical Table 553 Scenario B2-IMAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 413 432 435 407 Solids 1.0 2.1 3.5 5.7 Liquids 2 1 0 0 Gas 11 4 3 3 Electricity 18 15 10 7 Others 12 9 9 9 Total 7 13 14 13 36 31 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 16 13 Oil 26 21 6 Gas 21 19 13 Nuclear 0 0 3 Biomass 2 1 3 Non-commercial 2 5 0 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 78 63 8 Total 0.0 0.6 1.1 1.6 1.0 1.5 1.1 2.0 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 36.8 38.9 40.7 42.3 43.6 44.6 Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 13.3 12.3 20.4 26.2 30.6 34.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.68 0.46 0.34 0.23 0.12 0.06 -0.01 -0.07 -0.13 -0.20 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.08 0.10 0.14 0.18 0.21 0.25 0.29 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.69 0.48 0.39 0.31 0.22 0.20 0.17 0.14 0.12 0.09 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 45 50 48 45 42 41 39 38 36 34 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 5.0 3.6 2.7 1.8 1.5 1.2 0.9 0.7 0.4 0.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 45 42 41 39 38 36 34 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 5.0 3.6 2.7 1.8 1.5 1.2 0.9 0.7 0.4 0.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 SF6 MtC eq. 7 6 5 7 9 12 15 16 15 14 14 14 CO MtCO 69 41 26 10 8 6 3 2 1 -1 -2 -3 NMVOC Mt 16 13 12 10 10 9 9 9 8 8 8 8 NOx MtN 5 3 4 4 3 3 2 1 1 1 0 0 Statistical Table 554 Scenario B2-IMAGE ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 4123 4956 4783 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.4 5.7 17.7 70.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 28 21 7 3 Solids 20 22 26 39 Liquids 14 26 32 28 Gas 2 34 59 48 Electricity 4 31 79 164 Others 0 31 79 164 Total 68 134 203 282 Primary Energy EJ Coal 29 63 120 64 Oil 17 32 22 3 Gas 3 60 82 48 Nuclear- 0 3 19 28 Biomass 28 21 7 3 Non-commercial 28 21 7 3 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 2 7 34 163 Total 79 185 284 309 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 1.4 4.3 9.4 Oil 0.0 0.7 1.5 1.9 Gas 0.0 0.9 3.1 5.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.2 73.9 111.3 154.6 204.1 254.3 299.7 340.6 376.7 408.1 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.51 3.24 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.22 0.19 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.73 3.43 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 153 180 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 3.0 3.4 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 20.5 18.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 21 40 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 14 22 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 18 CO MtCO 235 270 247 225 NMVOC Mt 33 37 39 41 NOx MtN 7 9 12 16 3.80 4.36 4.92 4.46 4.00 3.54 3.08 2.62 0.24 0.28 0.33 0.32 0.31 0.31 0.30 0.29 4.03 4.64 5.25 4.78 4.31 3.85 3.38 2.91 194 209 224 225 226 227 228 229 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 17.6 17.1 15.3 15.2 15.0 14.0 12.1 10.2 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 237 249 262 262 263 263 264 264 43 45 46 46 46 46 46 46 19 22 25 22 20 17 15 13 Statistical Table 555 Scenario B2-IMAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1293 2321 3462 4165 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 2.1 5.5 15.3 56.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 8 6 4 Solids 2 4 10 24 Liquids 15 25 45 68 Gas 3 6 11 25 Electricity 2 7 26 111 Others Total 35 51 99 233 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 12 38 80 Oil 18 31 59 55 Gas 3 8 17 38 Nuclear 0 1 5 36 Biomass 14 8 6 4 Non-commercial 14 8 6 4 NTE (Nuclear/Solar) & Hydro 3 4 12 86 Total 41 64 137 300 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 1.0 4.4 Oil 0.0 1.2 3.0 6.4 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.8 2.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 38.7 64.6 93.4 123.0 153.3 185.3 220.0 257.3 297.3 339.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.19 1.37 1.84 2.32 2.79 3.07 3.36 3.64 3.93 4.21 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 1.15 1.47 1.08 0.68 0.28 0.26 0.24 0.22 0.20 0.19 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 2.34 2.85 2.92 2.99 3.07 3.33 3.60 3.86 4.13 4.40 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 111 138 148 158 168 173 179 184 189 195 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 3.0 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.1 5.1 5.2 5.2 5.3 5.4 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.1 15.6 12.8 17.2 17.1 18.8 20.5 20.7 19.2 17.8 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 12 20 32 54 84 120 157 190 211 223 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 7 10 14 20 27 33 37 39 39 37 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 5 7 9 20 16 17 15 11 13 14 CO MtCO 396 404 362 320 291 262 233 249 265 282 298 315 NMVOC Mt 48 55 60 64 62 59 56 59 62 65 68 71 NOx MtN 7 8 9 10 12 14 15 17 18 20 21 23 Statistical Table 556 Scenario B2-MARIA World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6091 6891 7672 8372 8930 9367 9704 9960 10159 10306 10414 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 19.5 27.2 37.0 49.7 64.0 83.1 108.0 130.5 156.3 182.0 206.2 232.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 48 40 45 55 80 124 174 234 287 328 333 264 Liquids 138 159 180 204 229 261 292 308 301 317 348 375 Gas 56 56 87 119 141 144 132 118 115 96 86 148 Electricity 35 49 60 71 84 95 116 125 141 152 158 159 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 278 305 371 449 535 625 714 784 844 893 925 946 Primary Energy EJ Coal 90 71 68 72 93 135 182 239 291 331 335 265 Oil 123 140 150 167 172 181 197 189 152 131 141 185 Gas 71 99 147 190 222 248 217 196 188 164 147 202 Nuclear 22 21 28 26 27 44 69 112 180 228 264 233 Biomass 28 32 40 62 97 107 114 132 159 192 212 225 Other Renewables 9 8 7 7 6 6 58 62 61 60 59 58 Total 343 372 441 523 617 721 837 931 1031 1107 1159 1169 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.6 2.3 3.0 3.9 5.3 7.1 9.5 12.4 15.7 19.1 Oil 0.0 1.2 2.6 4.1 5.8 7.5 9.3 11.3 13.2 14.7 16.0 17.4 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.7 3.2 5.1 7.3 9.8 11.9 13.9 15.8 17.4 18.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 166.5 260.4 365.3 484.0 616.0 757.3 904.8 1055.4 1207.2 1358.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1451 1451 1457 1743 1937 2049 2079 1999 1868 1701 1578 1500 Grasslands 3395 3395 3392 3114 2944 2904 2904 2904 2904 2904 2904 2904 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 81 219 396 519 597 Forest 4138 4138 4138 4138 4138 4122 4124 4138 4138 4138 4138 4138 Others 4061 4061 4058 4051 4027 3970 3937 3924 3916 3907 3907 3907 Total 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.75 8.85 10.00 11.66 12.74 13.72 14.19 14.46 14.49 14.42 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.09 1.08 1.05 1.04 0.96 0.83 0.77 0.70 0.71 0.73 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.84 9.93 11.05 12.70 13.70 14.55 14.96 15.16 15.20 15.15 CH4 total MtCH4 1672 883 786 299 272 315 346 413 483 548 603 649 N2O total MtN2O-N 32 25 42 55 70 88 107 120 128 130 127 121 SOx total MtS 38 40 48 55 60 76 79 80 74 63 65 69 Statistical Table 557 Scenario B2-MARIA OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 917 953 982 994 988 976 965 952 941 934 928 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 15.6 20.7 26.1 30.2 33.4 37.1 41.1 43.8 47.9 52.9 57.7 62.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 52.9 57.7 62.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 12 8 6 4 13 29 50 65 76 83 89 75 Liquids 71 80 74 67 62 58 55 52 51 50 50 50 Gas 28 26 45 61 62 53 37 26 18 13 9 20 Electricity 21 28 32 35 37 38 40 41 43 44 45 46 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 132 142 157 167 174 178 182 184 188 190 194 192 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 28 20 15 22 36 56 69 79 85 90 76 Oil 71 80 74 67 62 58 55 52 51 50 50 50 Gas 34 49 79 102 107 100 75 63 55 49 43 51 Nuclear 18 15 12 13 16 20 24 30 38 45 54 65 Biomass 6 4 3 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 Other Renewables 5 5 4 4 3 3 15 14 14 14 14 13 Total 171 180 193 202 212 218 225 230 237 244 252 255 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.6 2.2 2.8 3.6 4.5 5.4 Oil 0.0 0.7 1.5 2.3 2.9 3.5 4.1 4.7 5.2 5.7 6.2 6.7 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.6 2.6 3.7 4.7 5.5 6.1 6.6 7.1 7.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.9 100.1 135.8 173.1 211.3 250.1 290.3 331.4 373.3 414.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 378 378 378 2.9 3.5 4.1 4.7 5.2 5.7 6.2 6.7 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.6 2.6 3.7 4.7 5.5 6.1 6.6 7.1 7.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.9 100.1 135.8 173.1 211.3 250.1 290.3 331.4 373.3 414.3 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 303 243 Grasslands 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 75 134 Forest 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 Others 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 Total 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.36 3.42 3.59 3.76 3.81 3.93 4.04 4.09 4.13 3.86 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.05 0.07 0.04 0.02 0.01 0.04 0.06 0.09 0.12 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.38 3.47 3.66 3.80 3.83 3.95 4.07 4.16 4.22 3.98 CH4 total MtCH4 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 N2O total MtN2O-N 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SOx total MtS 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 11 10 10 Statistical Table 558 Scenario B2-1 MARIA REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 415 417 418 416 411 406 396 389 384 381 379 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.7 2.6 4.1 6.7 8.1 10.0 11.5 12.9 14.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 1.7 2.6 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 13 9 6 4 9 16 27 45 58 66 72 68 Liquids 17 13 12 11 12 13 14 14 14 14 14 14 Gas 21 24 30 36 40 43 44 31 22 15 11 12 Electricity 7 8 8 9 10 12 15 16 17 17 17 17 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 58 54 56 60 71 84 100 105 110 112 113 111 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 13 9 6 10 17 28 45 58 67 72 68 Oil 19 14 12 11 12 13 14 14 14 14 14 14 Gas 27 33 40 47 55 62 65 53 44 37 31 32 Nuclear 3 2 2 2 3 3 4 5 7 8 10 13 Biomass 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 Total 69 64 64 68 81 96 114 120 126 129 130 130 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 1.0 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.5 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.6 3.3 3.8 4.2 4.6 4.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.4 30.4 40.6 53.3 69.0 87.4 107.7 129.2 151.1 173.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 217 217 217 217 217 217 217 174 139 111 89 89 Grasslands 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43 78 106 128 128 Forest 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 Others 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 Total 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 CH4 total MtCH4 0.91 0.88 0.90 1.14 1.44 1.78 2.04 1.73 1.95 2.25 2.12 2.36 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.00 0.02 0.01 -0.01 -0.03 -0.05 -0.09 -0.13 -0.19 -0.18 -0.16 -0.16 SOx total MtS 0.91 0.90 0.91 1.13 1.41 1.78 2.04 2.12 2.36 2.40 2.32 2.16 HFC MtC eq. 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 PFC MtC eq. 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 SF6 MtC eq. 6 5 7 9 12 15 16 15 14 14 14 Statistical Table 559 Scenario B2-MARIA ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2642 3062 3450 3796 4089 4316 4479 4613 4720 4813 4851 4888 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.2 2.9 6.3 13.0 19.9 28.1 37.8 46.9 57.0 67.2 77.1 87.9 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 20 20 31 43 51 68 79 93 102 111 96 67 Liquids 26 39 66 93 109 125 139 148 146 148 162 176 Gas 2 2 4 7 15 15 14 15 23 27 38 64 Electricity 4 8 12 18 24 27 35 37 43 47 49 48 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 52 70 113 160 198 236 266 293 314 333 345 355 Primary Energy EJ Coal 28 26 36 46 54 70 80 94 102 111 96 67 Oil 14 23 38 57 54 58 69 72 52 43 42 65 Gas 3 5 8 14 21 29 23 22 27 30 40 65 Nuclear 1 5 14 11 9 21 35 49 76 94 105 81 Biomass 13 22 33 53 85 89 85 86 101 110 124 128 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 20 20 20 20 19 Total 61 82 130 181 222 266 309 343 379 408 426 427 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.9 1.4 1.9 2.6 3.4 4.3 5.3 6.5 7.4 Oil 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.4 3.1 3.9 4.4 4.8 5.2 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 42.5 72.1 106.3 144.9 188.4 235.8 284.6 333.2 380.8 427.5 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 366 366 373 380 380 380 380 380 380 380 361 343 Grasslands 431 431 428 425 426 426 426 426 426 426 426 426 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 19 37 Forest 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 Others 458 458 455 451 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 Total 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.03 2.36 2.61 3.07 3.31 3.55 4.15 4.55 4.94 4.82 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.25 0.23 0.22 0.21 0.21 0.19 0.16 0.14 0.12 0.11 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.36 2.61 3.07 3.33 3.52 3.74 4.31 4.69 5.10 4.93 CH4 total MtCH4 5 21 40 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 N2O total MtN2O-N 3 5 14 22 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 SOx total MtS 4 7 12 18 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 Statistical Table 560 Scenario B2-MARIA ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 Population Million 1348 1697 2071 2476 2873 3214 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.9 8.1 13.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 3 2 2 4 7 11 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 24 27 28 34 47 65 Liquids 5 4 7 15 24 32 Gas 3 6 8 10 14 18 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 35 38 45 63 91 127 Total 35 38 45 63 91 127 Primary Energy EJ Coal 6 4 3 4 7 12 Oil 18 23 26 32 44 53 Gas 7 12 19 28 40 58 Nuclear 0 0 0 0 0 0 Biomass 8 6 4 7 11 17 Other Renewables 2 2 1 1 1 2 Total 41 46 53 72 103 141 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.4 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.8 57.8 82.6 112.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 490 490 490 768 963 1075 Grasslands 2095 2095 2095 1820 1648 1609 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 2202 2202 2202 2202 2202 2186 Others 2086 2086 2086 2083 2060 2004 Total 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.16 1.46 1.95 2.52 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.80 0.79 0.77 0.81 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.96 2.24 2.72 3.33 CH4 total MtCH4 0 2 12 20 32 54 N2O total MtN2O-N 4 4 7 10 14 20 SOx total MtS 3 5 5 7 9 20 Population Million 3506 3730 3900 4021 4141 4220 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 22.4 31.6 41.4 50.4 58.5 67.8 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 19 31 51 68 76 54 Liquids 85 94 91 105 122 135 Gas 37 46 52 41 29 51 Electricity 26 31 39 44 47 48 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 167 202 233 258 274 288 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 31 51 68 76 54 Oil 60 50 35 25 35 57 Gas 55 58 61 47 33 54 10 14 20 3 5 5 7 9 20 3506 3730 3900 4021 4141 4220 22.4 31.6 41.4 50.4 58.5 67.8 19 31 51 68 76 54 85 94 91 105 122 135 37 46 52 41 29 51 26 31 39 44 47 48 0 0 0 0 0 0 167 202 233 258 274 288 19 31 51 68 76 54 60 50 35 25 35 57 55 58 61 47 33 54 5 27 59 81 95 74 28 46 57 82 88 96 23 25 24 24 23 23 190 238 288 326 350 357 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.4 2.1 2.8 1.9 2.5 3.0 3.4 3.6 4.0 1.6 2.2 2.8 3.4 3.9 4.2 147.4 184.0 222.2 261.6 302.0 344.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1105 1067 972 832 825 825 1609 1609 1609 1609 1609 1609 0 37 141 290 297 297 2188 2202 2202 2202 2202 2202 1971 1958 1950 1941 1941 1941 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 2.81 2.99 3.24 3.25 3.46 3.63 0.78 0.72 0.70 0.69 0.67 0.66 3.60 3.71 3.94 3.94 4.14 4.29 84 120 157 190 211 223 27 33 37 39 39 37 16 17 15 11 13 14 Statistical Table 561 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 5262 6091 6891 7672 8372 8930 9367 9704 9960 10158 10306 10414 20.9 28.3 38.6 50.7 66.0 85.5 109.5 134.8 161.5 186.3 210.3 234.9 25.7 34.8 46.9 60.2 75.5 93.2 113.9 136.8 160.7 183.8 207.4 231.8 38 27 27 24 18 14 11 10 9 8 7 7 42 47 40 36 29 30 19 17 16 16 13 7 111 134 167 200 236 255 268 273 267 270 289 294 41 46 50 59 70 86 105 119 130 130 118 111 35 47 62 85 113 150 188 227 272 321 366 409 8 11 17 25 41 51 63 78 90 104 116 123 275 311 362 429 507 586 654 723 783 848 909 951 91 91 98 98 96 93 86 91 119 170 231 300 128 168 195 214 240 238 227 201 146 101 72 52 71 84 107 150 194 251 297 356 390 402 385 336 7 8 11 16 23 32 48 61 83 99 120 142 46 43 46 53 61 79 105 136 184 236 280 315 8 14 22 34 54 80 107 131 153 176 197 212 352 408 479 566 667 773 869 976 1074 1184 1285 1357 0.0 0.9 1.8 2.8 3.8 4.7 5.7 6.5 7.4 8.6 10.3 12.6 0.0 1.4 3.1 5.1 7.2 9.6 12.0 14.3 16.3 17.7 18.7 19.5 0.0 0.7 1.6 2.7 4.2 6.1 8.6 11.6 15.1 19.0 23.1 26.9 7.1 82.4 166.2 255.4 350.1 453.1 561.5 674.1 789.6 908.5 1033.2 1163.8 1459 1481 1510 1540 1570 1598 1626 1656 1687 1718 1751 1784 3389 3409 3436 3454 3473 3508 3543 3577 3611 3641 3668 3696 0 0 0 14 92 190 288 313 338 342 325 307 4296 4252 4225 4251 4292 4323 4353 4380 4407 4441 4482 4522 3805 3806 3778 3690 3522 3330 3139 3023 2907 2807 2723 2639 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 12949 Marker Scenario B2-MESSAGE World Population Million GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC Other CO2 c GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total d MtCH4 N2O total e MtN2O-N SOx total MtS CFC/HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 5.99 6.90 7.99 9.02 10.15 10.93 1.11 1.07 0.80 0.03 -0.25 -0.24 7.10 7.97 8.78 9.05 9.90 10.69 310 323 349 384 426 466 6.7 7.0 6.2 6.1 6.1 6.2 70.9 69.0 65.9 61.3 60.3 59.0 1672 883 786 299 272 315 32 25 42 55 70 88 38 40 48 55 60 76 879 877 935 1022 1111 1220 139 141 159 180 199 214 31 32 37 43 49 53 11.23 11.74 11.87 12.46 13.20 13.82 -0.23 -0.24 -0.25 -0.31 -0.41 -0.50 11.01 11.49 11.62 12.15 12.79 13.32 504 522 544 566 579 597 6.3 6.4 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 55.7 53.8 50.9 50.0 49.0 47.9 346 413 483 548 603 649 107 120 128 130 127 121 79 80 74 63 65 69 1319 1423 1570 1742 1886 2002 217 214 202 192 178 170 54 56 56 59 61 61 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B2 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B2 run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B2 run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. 562 Statistical Table Marker Scenario B2-MESSAGE OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 916 953 982 994 988 976 965 951 941 934 928 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.4 21.1 26.5 30.3 33.1 35.8 38.3 40.9 44.4 47.9 52.0 56.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 14.1 18.3 23.0 26.3 28.8 31.3 33.5 35.9 39.2 42.4 46.1 50.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 9 4 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 66 71 79 86 92 88 76 68 64 60 60 58 Gas 22 24 26 25 27 31 35 38 34 29 24 17 Electricity 22 29 36 44 50 56 61 65 71 76 83 89 Others 1 1 2 4 7 8 10 12 14 16 17 18 Total 124 133 146 162 177 183 182 183 183 182 184 182 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 34 36 39 33 24 20 19 23 26 29 34 Oil 72 86 91 90 90 81 65 54 42 30 23 17 Gas 33 41 50 61 71 86 99 114 113 123 127 121 Nuclear 6 7 9 11 13 15 17 16 21 21 25 29 Biomass 6 7 6 7 8 9 12 15 22 28 31 33 Other Renewables 4 5 8 11 15 20 25 29 33 36 39 41 Total 159 180 200 219 230 234 236 248 253 265 273 274 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.3 Oil 0.0 0.8 1.7 2.6 3.5 4.4 5.2 5.8 6.4 6.8 7.1 7.3 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.8 1.3 1.9 2.6 3.4 4.3 5.4 6.6 7.8 9.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.3 101.9 138.3 173.6 206.9 239.0 269.9 299.8 329.6 359.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland 381 384 391 398 406 411 417 423 429 435 442 449 Grasslands 760 764 770 773 776 787 798 812 826 838 849 860 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 2 17 36 54 59 64 64 61 58 Forest 1050 1059 1069 1082 1095 1104 1113 1125 1136 1151 1171 1190 Others 838 822 799 774 734 691 647 611 575 540 506 471 Total 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 3029 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 2.83 3.20 3.50 3.71 3.70 3.51 3.26 3.25 3.08 3.10 3.14 3.10 Other CO2 c GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.02 -0.06 -0.08 -0.06 -0.05 -0.06 -0.08 -0.11 -0.15 -0.19 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.48 3.64 3.62 3.45 3.22 3.19 2.99 2.99 2.98 2.91 CH4 total d MtCH4 73 74 72 71 68 67 69 69 70 72 75 78 N2O total e MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.6 2.6 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 11.3 6.7 5.7 4.9 4.1 3.7 3.4 3.3 3.3 3.5 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 11 10 10 CO MtCO 179 161 163 173 180 187 185 185 195 213 207 197 NMVOC Mt 42 36 37 39 42 45 43 41 38 36 33 30 NOx MtN 13 12 13 15 16 16 15 15 14 13 12 11 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B2 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B2 run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B2 run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. Statistical Table 563 Marker Scenario B2-MESSAGE REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 413 415 417 418 416 411 406 396 389 384 381 379 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.0 1.2 1.8 2.8 4.5 6.6 8.6 10.5 11.9 13.2 14.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 2.6 2.4 2.7 3.3 4.3 5.6 7.2 9.5 11.6 13.3 14.8 16.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 5 3 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 14 17 17 17 19 19 18 18 19 20 22 Gas 14 14 12 15 18 19 19 18 16 15 12 10 Electricity 6 6 6 7 9 13 3.3 4.3 5.6 7.2 9.5 11.6 13.3 14.8 16.2 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 9 5 3 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 Liquids 15 14 17 17 17 19 19 18 18 19 20 22 Gas 14 14 12 15 18 19 19 18 16 15 12 10 Electricity 6 6 6 7 9 13 18 21 24 27 30 32 Others 7 6 6 7 10 11 12 14 15 16 16 15 Total 50 45 44 49 55 63 68 71 73 76 78 79 Primary Energy EJ Coal 19 15 11 7 9 10 12 8 11 15 21 29 Oil 20 18 20 19 18 18 20 16 7 5 4 0 Gas 27 26 24 31 38 49 51 59 66 63 52 43 Nuclear 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 6 7 9 Biomass 2 1 1 1 2 2 4 6 10 13 16 22 Other Renewables 1 1 2 3 4 6 8 10 12 16 19 21 Total 70 62 57 62 73 86 97 102 111 117 119 125 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.2 3.9 4.6 5.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 20.8 28.0 35.1 44.2 55.3 67.0 78.7 90.7 102.5 114.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland 268 269 274 280 285 291 296 302 308 314 320 327 Grasslands 341 362 366 368 370 373 377 380 383 386 389 392 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 1 6 12 18 20 21 22 20 19 Forest 966 951 939 944 947 944 941 940 939 941 945 949 Others 701 693 697 683 668 656 644 634 624 613 601 589 Total 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 2276 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 1.30 0.91 0.80 0.81 0.94 1.11 1.24 1.18 1.22 1.24 1.21 1.18 Other CO2 c GtC 0.00 0.00 -0.01 -0.18 -0.14 -0.09 -0.04 -0.04 -0.03 -0.03 -0.04 -0.04 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.79 0.63 0.80 1.02 1.20 1.15 1.19 1.21 1.17 1.14 CH4 total d MtCH4 47 39 36 40 45 50 53 50 47 47 46 47 N2O total e MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 7.1 3.5 1.6 1.3 2.9 2.8 2.9 3.1 3.4 3.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 SF6 MtC eq. 7 6 5 7 9 12 15 16 15 14 14 14 CO MtCO 69 41 43 48 59 69 74 73 68 72 70 79 NMVOC Mt 16 13 14 16 21 28 32 31 30 30 27 26 NOx MtN 5 3 3 3 4 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B2 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B2 run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B2 run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. Statistical Table 564 Marker Scenario B2-MESSAGE 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ASIA Population Million 2798 3248 3649 4008 4312 4538 4696 4790 4856 4902 4938 4968 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.5 3.5 7.2 13.2 21.3 30.7 41.8 52.7 64.1 75.0 85.8 97.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 5.3 9.3 15.1 22.4 30.7 39.3 49.3 59.0 68.7 78.5 89.2 100.4 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 24 16 16 13 11 9 7 6 5 5 5 4 Solids 19 30 29 28 24 25 17 14 12 12 9 2 Liquids 13 26 41 60 81 96 112 117 109 107 114 122 Gas 2 3 5 9 13 18 22 30 38 37 34 33 Electricity 4 8 14 24 37 53 70 87 108 131 151 169 Others 1 3 7 10 16 20 25 31 35 43 51 55 Total 62 86 111 144 181 220 252 284 308 335 363 385 Primary Energy EJ Coal 30 38 47 47 48 53 48 56 71 105 144 180 Oil 15 32 45 63 82 88 93 82 61 41 27 21 Gas 3 6 16 31 43 55 61 72 79 66 51 39 Nuclear 0 1 2 4 7 13 21 29 38 47 56 65 Biomass 24 22 25 28 32 41 54 68 88 109 123 129 Other Renewables 1 4 7 12 21 31 43 52 61 71 81 88 Total 74 103 141 185 233 281 319 359 397 439 482 521 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.1 2.7 3.1 3.7 4.3 5.3 6.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.6 2.4 3.3 4.2 5.0 5.6 6.1 6.3 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.4 4.0 4.5 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 42.6 70.0 101.7 138.9 179.3 220.9 263.3 307.3 355.0 408.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland 438 439 448 457 466 475 484 494 504 514 524 535 Grasslands 608 607 611 615 618 623 627 632 636 640 644 647 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 3 21 43 65 70 76 77 73 69 Forest 535 525 518 533 548 553 558 563 567 571 575 580 Others 583 593 587 557 512 471 430 406 382 362 348 333 Total 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 2164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 b GtC 1.15 1.78 2.42 3.02 3.62 4.07 4.12 4.26 4.30 4.57 5.07 5.69 Other CO2 c GtC 0.37 0.26 0.20 -0.15 -0.16 -0.09 -0.03 -0.03 -0.04 -0.05 -0.05 -0.06 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.62 2.87 3.46 3.98 4.10 4.22 4.26 4.53 5.01 5.63 CH4 total d MtCH4 113 125 146 171 201 219 234 241 251 260 265 272 N2O total e MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.9 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 30.1 32.9 33.3 32.0 26.4 24.3 22.1 21.5 21.3 20.6 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 21 40 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 14 22 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 18 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 CO MtCO 235 270 314 375 428 472 518 549 579 598 617 651 NMVOC Mt 33 37 44 53 59 60 59 56 52 45 41 39 NOx MtN 7 9 12 15 18 20 19 20 20 22 24 26 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM-B2 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B2 run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B2 run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. Statistical Table 565 Marker Scenario B2-MESSAGE ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1192 1511 1872 2263 2649 2992 3289 3554 3764 3931 4053 4139 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.7 3.7 5.5 8.8 14.6 22.8 32.6 42.6 51.4 59.3 66.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 3.8 4.9 6.2 8.2 11.7 17.0 23.9 32.4 41.2 49.6 57.2 64.9 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 14 10 11 11 7 5 4 4 3 3 3 3 Solids 1 4 3 3 3 3 2 3 4 4 4 5 Liquids 17 23 30 37 46 53 61 71 76 83 95 93 Gas 4 5 8 10 14 19 28 34 42 48 48 52 Electricity 3 5 7 11 16 28 40 54 70 86 102 119 Others 0 1 3 4 8 12 17 21 25 30 32 35 Total 39 47 61 75 95 120 152 186 219 255 284 306 Primary Energy EJ Coal 5 5 4 5 6 6 6 7 14 24 37 58 Oil 21 32 40 42 50 51 50 50 36 25 18 14 Gas 8 11 18 27 41 62 87 111 132 150 155 133 Nuclear 0 0 0 0 1 3 8 13 20 26 32 39 Biomass 14 13 14 17 20 28 36 46 64 86 111 132 Other Renewables 2 3 6 8 13 23 32 40 47 53 58 62 Total 49 63 81 100 131 172 217 267 314 364 411 437 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 1.1 Oil 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.9 2.4 2.9 3.4 3.8 4.0 4.2 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 1.1 1.7 2.7 3.9 5.2 6.6 8.1 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.5 55.5 75.0 96.3 120.0 147.2 177.7 210.7 246.0 282.4 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use a Million ha Cropland 371 389 397 405 413 421 429 438 446 455 464 474 Grasslands 1680 1676 1689 1699 1709 1725 1741 1754 1766 1777 1787 1797 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 7 48 100 151 164 177 179 170 161 Forest 1745 1717 1699 1692 1701 1721 1740 1752 1765 1777 1790 1803 Others 1684 1698 1695 1676 1608 1513 1419 1372 1326 1292 1269 1246 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 397 405 413 421 429 438 446 455 464 474 Grasslands 1680 1676 1689 1699 1709 1725 1741 1754 1766 1777 1787 1797 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 7 48 100 151 164 177 179 170 161 Forest 1745 1717 1699 1692 1701 1721 1740 1752 1765 1777 1790 1803 Others 1684 1698 1695 1676 1608 1513 1419 1372 1326 1292 1269 1246 Total 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 5480 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.26 1.48 1.88 2.24 2.60 3.04 3.27 3.55 3.79 3.84 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.63 0.42 0.12 0.01 -0.11 -0.11 -0.10 -0.12 -0.16 -0.20 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.90 1.90 2.01 2.25 2.49 2.94 3.17 3.43 3.63 3.64 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 94 102 112 129 149 162 175 187 193 200 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.4 15.2 16.7 17.8 19.4 20.0 19.6 19.1 18.0 17.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 12 20 32 54 84 120 157 190 211 223 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 7 10 14 20 27 33 37 39 39 37 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 5 7 9 20 16 17 15 11 13 14 CO MtCO 396 404 416 427 445 492 542 616 728 860 992 1075 NMVOC Mt 48 55 65 72 78 81 83 86 82 80 77 75 NOx MtN 7 8 9 10 11 13 15 16 17 19 20 20 Emissions correlated to land-use change and deforestation were calculated by using AIM B2 land-use data. a: Land-use taken from AIM-B2 run. b: CO2 emissions from fossil fuel and industrial processes (MESSAGE data). c: CO2 emissions from land-use changes (AIM-B2 run). d: Non-energy related CH4 emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. e: Non-energy related N2O emissions were taken from AIM-B2 run. Statistical Table Scenario B2-MiniCAM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5293 6147 7009 7880 9304 9874 10216 10453 10585 10501 10418 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 36.3 47.4 62.1 80.3 102.0 127.9 156.0 186.3 219.2 255.1 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 55 67 79 90 97 103 85 75 73 73 72 Liquids 121 121 127 140 138 156 192 228 264 300 327 355 Gas 52 60 73 91 101 107 109 118 132 152 157 162 Electricity 35 51 73 102 137 181 234 292 352 413 470 527 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 286 339 411 465 541 637 723 823 937 1027 1117 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 110 128 143 176 201 218 191 175 170 169 167 Oil 131 130 134 145 134 147 185 228 270 309 338 367 Gas 70 81 111 159 186 209 229 260 292 325 330 335 Nuclear 24 24 28 34 46 62 82 93 105 120 150 181 Biomass 0 5 10 15 19 24 28 38 43 45 44 43 Other Renewables 24 24 32 47 65 88 116 155 195 234 255 275 Total 336 375 443 542 626 731 858 965 1080 1203 1286 1370 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.1 2.3 3.7 5.3 7.2 9.3 11.2 13.1 14.8 16.5 18.2 Oil 0.1 1.4 2.8 4.1 5.5 7.0 8.6 10.8 13.3 16.1 19.4 22.7 Gas 0.1 0.9 1.9 3.1 4.9 6.9 9.1 11.6 14.4 17.4 20.7 24.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 166.7 263.6 373.5 492.4 619.7 754.8 895.8 1040.8 1187.8 1335.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 1472 1473 1491 1526 1525 1493 1431 1295 1175 1070 988 906 Grasslands 3209 3347 3572 3885 4175 4393 4540 4391 4245 4101 4067 4033 Energy Biomass 0 2 4 6 6 7 8 22 25 16 10 4 Forest 4173 4214 4140 3952 3705 3547 3480 3818 4092 4304 4278 4252 Others 4310 4128 3956 3795 3753 3724 3706 3639 3628 3673 3821 3970 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 7.86 9.11 10.24 11.35 12.73 13.29 13.18 13.85 14.11 14.34 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.03 1.38 1.27 0.92 0.45 0.56 0.23 -0.53 -1.13 -1.72 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 8.88 10.48 11.51 12.27 13.18 13.85 14.34 14.67 14.73 14.82 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 350 391 430 469 498 499 509 528 548 569 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.1 10.4 11.9 13.2 13.7 14.4 15.3 16.7 18.1 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 76.6 80.6 85.2 87.1 86.4 71.9 59.0 47.7 41.1 34.6 CFC/HFC/HCFC MtC eq. 1672 883 786 299 272 315 346 413 483 548 603 649 PFC MtC eq. 32 25 42 55 70 88 107 120 128 130 127 121 SF6 MtC eq. 38 40 48 55 60 76 79 74 63 65 69 69 Statistical Table Scenario B2-MiniCAM OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 838 907 958 993 1003 1024 1023 1013 1006 1002 1003 1004 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 24.5 28.5 29.5 33.2 36.3 38.4 40.9 43.7 47.4 51.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 12 11 11 11 11 8 7 6 6 6 Liquids 72 69 66 63 57 47 49 49 50 52 53 55 Gas 27 34 42 50 50 48 45 44 45 49 49 49 Electricity 22 26 31 36 38 44 50 52 54 56 59 63 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 141 151 160 156 149 154 153 156 163 168 173 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 43 40 31 32 35 37 33 30 29 28 27 Oil 76 73 69 64 56 42 44 44 45 47 49 51 Gas 34 43 59 79 79 76 73 72 72 75 74 73 Nuclear 20 15 12 11 11 11 12 12 12 13 16 20 Biomass 0 2 3 3 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 Other Renewables 12 11 12 15 15 18 19 22 25 28 30 32 Total 182 188 194 203 197 187 190 189 191 197 201 206 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.9 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.5 3.8 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.5 2.2 2.5 3.2 3.6 4.1 4.5 5.0 5.4 5.9 Gas 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.6 2.0 3.2 3.9 4.6 5.4 6.1 6.8 7.6 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 65.9 100.1 134.0 165.9 196.2 226.0 254.8 282.2 308.3 333.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 412 417 423 419 399 375 339 309 286 261 236 Grasslands 796 820 861 918 942 1002 1025 998 974 955 945 935 Energy Biomass 0 2 3 3 3 4 4 8 8 6 3 1 Forest 921 931 922 894 878 847 850 926 980 1014 1016 1018 Others 998 958 920 885 881 871 868 853 851 862 897 932 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.28 3.26 3.16 2.98 3.02 2.90 2.86 2.88 2.90 2.91 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.19 0.17 0.07 0.00 0.03 -0.03 -0.21 -0.35 -0.49 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.39 3.45 3.33 3.05 3.02 2.94 2.82 2.68 2.55 2.42 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 82 92 95 106 114 120 128 138 148 158 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.5 3.8 3.9 4.0 4.2 4.5 4.8 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 13.2 7.0 6.2 5.6 5.0 4.5 4.3 4.5 4.9 5.3 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 11 10 10 Statistical Table Scenario B2-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 427 435 438 438 435 429 423 418 412 407 GNP/GDP (mer) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.8 2.3 2.9 3.4 4.5 5.7 7.0 8.3 9.8 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 8 7 6 5 5 4 3 3 3 3 Liquids 18 12 8 8 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 9 Gas 19 15 13 13 13 12 11 10 11 12 12 12 Electricity 6 8 10 14 15 17 19 20 22 25 27 29 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 44 39 42 42 41 41 41 43 47 50 52 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 16 15 20 22 22 16 13 12 10 9 Oil 20 13 10 9 6 4 5 6 8 9 9 10 Gas 26 20 19 23 23 22 19 19 20 21 21 20 Nuclear 3 4 5 6 6 6 7 6 6 7 8 9 Biomass 0 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 Other Renewables 3 3 4 52 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 16 15 20 22 22 16 13 12 10 9 Oil 20 13 10 9 6 4 5 6 8 9 9 10 Gas 26 20 19 23 23 22 19 19 20 21 21 20 Nuclear 3 4 5 6 6 6 7 6 6 7 8 9 Biomass 0 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 Other Renewables 3 3 4 7 8 10 11 13 15 16 17 17 Total 70 57 54 61 64 66 66 63 63 67 67 68 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.1 29.8 39.3 48.8 57.8 66.2 74.2 81.3 87.5 93.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 295 308 324 330 326 303 277 245 217 203 189 Grasslands 395 410 448 511 572 615 640 592 553 520 529 539 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Forest 1007 1016 996 945 885 850 841 935 1008 1060 1038 1017 Others 691 656 625 597 591 587 584 573 571 580 607 633 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.80 0.84 0.87 0.87 0.85 0.74 0.70 0.72 0.71 0.70 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.10 0.07 0.01 0.08 0.06 -0.06 -0.12 -0.18 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.84 0.92 0.97 0.94 0.85 0.83 0.76 0.66 0.59 0.52 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 46 60 69 76 81 80 81 84 87 91 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.9 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.2 9.6 10.5 11.0 11.1 8.8 6.7 5.0 4.1 3.2 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 SF6 MtC eq. 7 6 5 7 9 12 15 16 15 14 14 14 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 569 Scenario B2-MiniCAM ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2790 3261 3707 4127 4463 4739 4953 5037 5070 5052 4932 4814 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.0 10.3 17.5 25.9 35.6 46.6 58.4 71.0 84.5 99.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 30 42 55 64 69 72 59 52 50 50 50 Liquids 14 19 26 35 41 50 64 78 91 103 111 119 Gas 2 5 9 13 17 19 22 25 30 35 35 36 Electricity 4 11 22 37 55 77 102 131 160 189 215 241 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 66 99 140 176 216 260 293 332 377 411 445 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 44 64 86 104 116 121 103 92 88 88 87 Oil 16 21 28 37 39 48 62 80 95 109 117 126 Gas 3 9 19 35 48 62 75 90 103 114 114 114 Nuclear 1 4 8 12 20 29 40 45 51 57 71 84 Biomass 0 2 5 8 10 13 15 20 23 24 24 24 Other Renewables 3 4 7 12 21 33 48 67 86 105 114 123 Total 49 83 130 190 243 300 361 405 450 498 528 558 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 1.0 1.7 2.7 3.8 5.0 6.0 7.0 7.9 8.8 9.7 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.1 2.9 3.8 4.8 5.9 7.1 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.5 2.1 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.2 7.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.2 75.6 116.4 163.7 216.2 271.4 327.4 385.2 444.2 503.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 401 413 425 430 428 417 381 349 321 300 279 Grasslands 508 523 550 589 625 655 679 674 666 655 649 643 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 3 3 3 3 10 12 8 6 4 Forest 1168 1143 1104 1052 1010 981 965 1000 1039 1082 1110 1139 Others 664 632 603 577 572 568 566 555 554 562 588 614 Total 2729 2699 2671 2646 2639 2634 2630 2620 2619 2628 2653 2678 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.55 3.48 4.18 4.82 5.39 5.45 5.64 5.96 6.11 6.26 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.19 0.25 0.25 0.20 0.10 0.09 0.03 -0.08 -0.19 -0.29 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.74 3.73 4.43 5.02 5.49 5.54 5.67 5.88 5.92 5.96 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 133 142 154 163 171 164 160 160 163 167 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.6 4.0 4.4 4.5 4.7 5.0 5.4 5.8 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 35.9 45.6 48.5 48.2 44.7 34.6 26.2 19.4 16.0 12.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 21 40 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 14 22 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 18 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 Statistical Table 570 Scenario B2-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1554 1917 2326 2725 3104 3463 3737 3953 4113 4153 4192 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.4 6.8 11.8 18.4 26.8 38.5 51.1 64.6 78.9 94.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 4 6 9 12 15 14 14 14 14 14 Liquids 17 21 27 34 40 52 73 94 116 138 155 173 Gas 5 7 10 14 21 27 31 38 46 56 61 65 Electricity 3 6 9 15 27 43 63 89 116 143 169 195 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 36 50 69 97 134 182 235 292 351 399 448 Primary Energy EJ Coal 4 6 8 11 19 28 37 39 40 42 43 45 Oil 20 23 28 35 40 53 75 98 122 145 163 181 Gas 7 9 14 22 36 50 62 80 98 115 122 129 Nuclear 0 4 5 9 16 23 29 36 43 55 68 84 Biomass 0 1 1 2 3 5 7 10 12 13 13 13 Other Renewables 5 6 9 13 20 28 37 53 68 84 94 103 Total 35 46 64 88 128 179 241 309 376 441 490 538 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.7 2.1 2.6 3.0 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.7 2.3 3.2 4.3 5.6 7.2 8.8 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.5 3.3 4.4 5.6 6.8 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.5 58.0 83.8 114.1 149.5 191.3 239.4 292.1 347.8 405.7 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 391 365 353 355 351 341 326 299 272 246 224 202 Grasslands 1510 1594 1713 1867 2012 2121 2197 2127 2052 1970 1943 1916 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 4 2 1 -1 Forest 3641 3589 3487 3334 3190 3085 3018 3114 3218 3330 3379 3428 Others 1957 1882 1808 1735 1714 1698 1688 1658 1651 1669 1730 1791 Total 7499 7430 7361 7291 7266 7246 7229 7201 7197 7217 7276 7336 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.22 1.53 2.03 2.68 3.47 4.19 4.92 5.64 6.14 6.67 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.69 0.85 0.75 0.58 0.34 0.35 0.17 -0.18 -0.47 -0.76 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.91 2.38 2.78 3.26 3.82 4.54 5.09 5.46 5.67 5.91 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 89 97 112 123 131 135 140 146 149 153 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.6 2.0 2.6 3.1 3.7 3.9 4.3 4.6 5.1 5.7 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 14.2 15.3 16.9 19.3 22.6 21.0 18.7 15.8 13.2 10.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 12 20 32 54 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 7 10 14 20 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 5 7 9 20 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 571 Scenario B2C-MARIA World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5262 6091 6891 7672 8372 8930 9367 9704 9960 10159 10306 10414 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 19.5 27.2 37.0 49.8 64.1 83.2 108.1 130.5 156.2 181.5 205.4 231.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) 181.5 205.4 231.7 Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 48 48 67 107 161 221 277 322 356 381 394 395 Liquids 138 148 158 187 217 251 248 284 291 325 354 377 Gas 56 61 88 87 75 60 79 58 67 47 33 23 Electricity 35 49 60 71 84 97 114 124 134 143 147 153 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 278 305 373 451 537 629 718 788 847 895 928 949 Primary Energy EJ Coal 90 79 90 124 175 232 287 331 363 387 399 400 Oil 123 134 141 158 191 197 162 178 163 172 185 206 Gas 71 105 151 170 183 193 198 197 124 134 143 147 153 Electricity 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Others 278 305 373 451 537 629 718 788 847 895 928 949 Total Primary Energy EJ Coal 90 79 90 124 175 232 287 331 363 387 399 400 Oil 123 134 141 158 191 197 162 178 163 172 185 206 Gas 71 105 151 170 183 193 198 197 223 223 223 228 Nuclear 22 19 16 13 11 10 8 7 12 10 9 8 Biomass 28 27 34 47 47 76 101 117 136 158 172 173 Other Renewables 9 8 7 7 6 5 58 63 66 66 64 62 Total 343 372 438 519 613 714 815 893 962 1015 1052 1077 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.9 1.7 2.6 3.8 5.6 7.9 10.8 14.1 17.7 21.6 25.6 Oil 0.0 1.2 2.6 4.0 5.6 7.5 9.4 11.1 12.8 14.5 16.2 18.0 Gas 0.0 0.7 1.8 3.3 5.0 6.8 8.7 10.7 12.7 14.9 17.2 19.4 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 167.9 266.9 384.5 522.5 673.8 835.5 1008.2 1189.8 1378.5 1572.8 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 1451 1451 1458 1744 1940 2051 2079 2013 1906 1777 1691 1691 Grasslands 3395 3395 3392 3113 2925 2904 2904 2904 2904 2904 2904 2904 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 66 173 302 388 388 Forest 4138 4138 4138 4138 4138 4100 4099 4131 4138 4138 4138 4138 Others 4061 4061 4058 4051 4043 3990 3963 3931 3924 3924 3924 3924 Total 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 13045 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.03 9.56 11.73 13.49 14.28 15.73 16.65 17.46 18.04 18.57 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.09 1.11 1.12 1.26 1.23 1.09 1.09 1.11 1.12 1.14 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.12 10.67 12.85 14.76 15.51 16.81 17.74 18.57 19.16 19.71 CH4 total MtCH4 1672 883 786 299 272 315 346 413 483 548 603 649 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC/HFC MtC eq. 32 25 42 55 70 88 107 120 128 130 127 121 PFC MtC eq. 38 40 48 55 60 76 79 80 74 63 65 69 SF6 MtC eq. CO MtC NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 572 Statistical Table Scenario B2C-MARIA OECD90 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 859 917 953 982 994 988 976 965 952 941 934 928 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 13.6 20.7 26.1 30.2 33.4 37.1 41.2 43.8 47.9 52.8 57.5 62.5 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 96 Solids 12 8 6 21 44 62 73 81 88 92 96 96 Liquids 71 74 68 63 59 56 53 51 50 50 50 50 Gas 28 32 51 48 34 24 17 12 8 6 4 3 Electricity 21 28 32 35 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 132 142 157 167 175 180 183 185 189 191 194 194 Primary Energy EJ Coal 38 28 21 33 53 70 81 88 94 98 101 100 Oil 71 74 68 63 59 55 50 47 42 36 27 34 Gas 34 34 55 85 91 84 78 63 61 58 59 61 Nuclear 18 15 12 11 9 8 7 6 6 5 5 5 Biomass 6 4 3 2 1 2 4 5 9 14 23 16 Other Renewables 5 5 4 4 3 3 14 14 17 16 15 15 Total 171 180 193 203 210 216 219 221 225 229 232 233 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.4 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.1 5.1 6.0 7.0 Oil 0.0 0.7 1.5 2.1 2.8 3.4 3.9 4.4 4.9 5.3 5.7 5.9 Gas 0.0 0.3 0.9 1.7 2.6 3.5 4.2 4.9 5.5 6.1 6.7 7.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 0.0 33.0 65.8 101.2 140.0 182.2 225.4 268.7 312.5 356.6 400.6 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 378 378 378 378 378 378 378 354 312 251 202 202 Grasslands 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 736 756 756 756 756 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 23 65 127 176 176 Forest 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 756 Others 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 794 Total 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 2684 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.35 3.64 3.99 4.25 4.21 4.29 4.32 4.31 4.24 4.39 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.05 0.08 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.09 0.12 0.14 0.17 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.38 3.69 4.07 4.36 4.29 4.36 4.40 4.42 4.39 4.56 CH4 total MtCH4 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 N2O total MtN2O-N 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SOx total MtS 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 11 10 10 Statistical Table 573 Scenario B2C-MARIA REF Population Million GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids Liquids Gas Electricity Others Total Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtC NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 413 415 417 418 416 411 406 396 389 384 381 379 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.7 2.6 4.2 6.8 8.2 10.0 11.5 12.9 14.5 13 9 7 15 26 43 61 68 75 78 80 81 17 13 12 11 12 12 9 7 5 7 9 11 21 24 29 26 24 17 17 15 15 10 7 5 7 8 8 9 10 12 15 16 16 16 16 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 58 54 56 60 72 85 101 106 111 113 113 113 19 13 10 17 27 44 61 69 75 79 81 81 19 14 12 11 12 12 9 6 4 7 9 11 27 33 39 38 40 38 40 40 40 36 33 32 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 69 64 65 68 81 96 114 119 124 126 126 126 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.9 2.6 3.3 4.1 4.9 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.2 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.1 2.5 2.9 3.3 3.7 4.0 1.3 12.3 21.4 31.2 43.4 59.3 79.5 102.7 127.5 153.5 180.2 207.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 217 217 217 217 217 217 217 174 139 111 103 103 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 114 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 43 78 106 114 114 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 815 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 722 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1868 1.30 0.91 0.89 1.02 1.33 1.74 2.16 2.30 2.44 2.52 2.56 2.58 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.03 0.05 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.11 0.13 0.15 0.16 1.30 0.91 0.91 1.05 1.38 1.81 2.24 2.40 2.55 2.65 2.70 2.74 0 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 7 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 7 6 5 7 9 12 15 16 15 14 14 14 574 Statistical Table Scenario B2C-MARIA ASIA 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 2642 3062 3450 3796 4089 4316 4479 4613 4720 4813 4851 4888 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.2 2.9 6.3 12.9 19.9 28.1 37.8 46.8 56.9 67.0 76.7 87.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial Solids 20 28 48 61 75 89 98 109 116 123 126 126 Liquids 26 34 54 82 100 119 135 148 158 167 176 183 Gas 2 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 Electricity 4 8 12 16 23 27 34 36 40 42 44 46 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 52 71 115 161 199 237 267 294 314 333 346 355 Primary Energy EJ Coal 28 34 52 64 77 91 99 110 116 123 126 126 Oil 14 23 38 55 76 70 58 58 56 56 74 101 Gas 3 5 8 14 21 28 29 35 41 49 54 59 Nuclear 1 2 1 1 1 1 0 0 6 4 3 3 Biomass 13 17 26 42 43 70 91 100 110 116 105 85 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 20 20 21 20 20 Total 61 82 127 176 219 260 295 324 349 369 383 393 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.8 2.6 3.5 4.4 5.5 6.7 7.9 9.2 Oil 41 49 54 59 Nuclear 1 2 1 1 1 1 0 0 6 4 3 3 Biomass 13 17 26 42 43 70 91 100 110 116 105 85 Other Renewables 1 1 1 1 1 1 17 20 20 21 20 20 Total 61 82 127 176 219 260 295 324 349 369 383 393 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.8 2.6 3.5 4.4 5.5 6.7 7.9 9.2 Oil 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.8 1.3 2.1 2.8 3.3 3.9 4.5 5.0 5.8 Gas 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.8 2.3 2.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 43.8 75.8 115.8 161.7 209.1 258.1 310.0 364.5 422.9 486.9 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Million ha Land Use Cropland Grasslands Energy Biomass Forest Others Total Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC Other CO2 GtC Total CO2 GtC CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. PFC MtC eq. SF6 MtC eq. CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 366 366 373 380 380 380 380 380 380 379 350 350 431 431 428 425 426 426 426 426 426 426 426 426 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 30 30 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 365 449 458 458 455 451 449 449 449 449 449 449 449 365 449 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1621 1.15 1.78 2.61 3.33 4.21 4.54 4.53 4.90 5.11 5.43 5.94 6.54 0.37 0.26 0.25 0.23 0.22 0.21 0.19 0.18 0.15 0.17 0.15 0.14 1.53 2.03 2.85 3.56 4.43 4.75 4.72 5.08 5.29 5.61 6.09 6.69 5 21 40 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 5 14 22 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 7 12 18 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 Statistical Table 575 Scenario B2C-MARIA ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1348 1697 2071 2476 2873 3214 3506 3730 3900 4021 4141 4220 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.9 8.1 13.9 22.3 31.7 41.4 50.2 58.2 67.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 3 2 5 10 17 28 46 64 77 87 92 94 Solids 24 26 25 31 45 63 51 77 77 100 118 133 Liquids 5 4 7 12 16 18 45 31 43 30 21 15 Gas 3 6 8 10 14 18 25 31 36 41 43 46 Electricity Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 35 38 45 63 91 127 167 203 234 258 275 287 Primary Energy EJ Coal 6 4 7 11 17 28 46 64 77 87 92 94 Oil 18 23 22 30 44 60 45 68 61 73 74 61 Gas 7 12 19 28 39 50 67 62 84 78 75 74 Nuclear 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Biomass 8 6 4 3 2 4 6 10 17 27 44 72 Other Renewables 2 2 1 1 1 1 24 25 26 26 25 24 Total 41 46 53 73 103 142 188 228 264 291 310 325 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.6 3.5 4.4 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.4 2.0 2.4 3.1 3.7 4.4 5.2 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.1 1.6 2.2 2.8 3.7 4.5 5.2 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.4 17.8 36.9 58.6 85.2 119.3 159.8 206.0 258.3 315.3 374.6 433.2 Carbon Sequestration GtC 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Land Use Million ha Cropland 490 490 490 769 965 1076 1104 1104 1075 1036 1036 1036 Grasslands 2095 2095 2095 1818 1630 1609 1609 1609 1609 1609 1609 1609 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 30 68 68 68 Forest 2202 2202 2202 2202 2202 2164 2163 2195 2202 2202 2202 2202 Others 2086 2086 2086 2084 2076 2024 1997 1965 1958 1958 1958 1958 Total 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 6873 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.18 1.57 2.19 2.96 3.39 4.23 4.78 5.20 5.30 5.07 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.80 0.79 0.77 0.88 0.87 0.75 0.71 0.69 0.68 0.66 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.98 2.36 2.96 3.84 4.26 4.98 5.49 5.90 5.98 5.73 CH4 total MtCH4 N2O total MtN2O-N SOx total MtS HFC MtC eq. 0 2 12 20 32 54 84 120 157 190 211 223 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 7 10 14 20 27 33 37 39 39 37 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 5 7 9 20 16 17 15 11 13 14 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 576 Statistical Table Scenario B2High-MiniCAM World 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 5293 6147 7009 7880 8640 9304 9874 10216 10453 10585 10501 10418 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 20.7 27.4 36.3 47.3 61.8 79.8 101.1 126.5 154.0 183.6 215.7 250.7 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 45 57 72 89 104 118 131 119 111 108 105 102 Liquids 121 124 131 143 143 159 193 225 258 292 318 344 Gas 52 62 72 84 81 74 62 58 57 60 52 44 Electricity 35 53 80 116 159 209 268 339 415 497 574 651 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 253 295 355 433 486 560 654 740 841 957 1049 1141 Primary Energy EJ Coal 88 115 145 178 263 362 474 540 592 630 700 771 Oil 131 133 139 149 114 91 80 74 77 88 72 57 Gas 70 83 115 165 180 185 181 183 191 206 173 140 Nuclear 24 25 31 42 60 79 100 108 121 142 161 180 Biomass 0 6 12 17 27 40 56 86 110 128 150 172 Other Renewables 24 24 27 32 40 55 75 115 158 202 254 305 Total 336 386 468 582 684 812 966 1105 1248 1395 1510 1625 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.1 1.2 2.5 4.1 6.5 9.7 13.7 19.0 24.6 30.6 37.5 44.4 Oil 0.1 1.5 2.8 4.3 5.5 6.5 7.4 8.1 8.9 9.7 10.5 11.2 Gas 0.1 0.9 1.9 3.2 5.0 6.8 8.6 10.5 12.4 14.3 16.1 17.9 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 7.1 82.4 168.5 271.1 392.9 532.5 691.9 870.2 1062.5 1263.9 1471.7 1686.1 Carbon Sequestration GtC Million ha Land Use Cropland 1472 1473 1491 1526 1522 1488 1423 1284 1163 1060 975 890 Grasslands 3209 3347 3570 3880 4164 4370 4501 4326 4168 4027 3957 3886 Energy Biomass 0 3 8 13 36 74 128 233 308 352 430 507 Forest 4173 4214 4140 3952 3701 3531 3441 3733 3962 4129 4093 4058 Others 4310 4127 3955 3794 3742 3701 3672 3588 3562 3596 3710 3824 Total 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 13164 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 5.99 6.90 8.20 9.92 11.77 13.87 16.44 18.03 19.52 20.92 21.97 23.10 Other CO2 GtC 1.11 1.07 1.03 1.38 1.29 0.99 0.57 0.62 0.28 -0.44 -0.88 -1.32 Total CO2 GtC 7.10 7.97 9.23 11.30 13.06 14.86 17.02 18.65 19.80 20.47 21.09 21.78 CH4 total MtCH4 310 323 353 397 439 483 520 533 549 567 590 613 N2O total MtN2O-N 6.7 7.0 8.0 9.2 10.4 11.9 13.2 13.7 14.3 15.2 16.3 17.5 SOx total MtS 70.9 69.0 81.6 86.9 97.7 104.4 107.0 86.4 69.1 55.0 45.6 36.2 CO MtCO 1672 883 786 299 272 315 346 413 483 548 603 649 NMVOC Mt 32 25 42 55 70 88 107 120 128 130 127 121 NOx MtN 38 40 48 55 60 76 79 80 74 63 65 69 Statistical Table 577 Scenario B1High-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 OECD90 Population Million 838 907 958 993 1003 1024 1023 1013 1006 1002 1003 1004 GNP/GDP (mex) Trillion US$ 16.3 20.5 24.5 28.4 29.4 32.9 35.9 38.0 40.4 43.0 46.6 50.3 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 10 12 13 13 13 13 14 12 11 10 10 9 Liquids 72 71 69 65 59 47 47 46 45 46 47 47 Gas 27 35 42 47 44 34 26 22 20 20 17 14 Electricity 22 28 34 42 44 52 58 61 64 67 72 76 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 130 146 158 166 160 146 146 140 139 143 145 146 Primary Energy EJ Coal 40 45 46 41 47 67 82 93 104 113 136 159 Oil 76 76 72 66 53 23 13 7 4 3 3 2 Gas 34 45 61 82 79 67 57 50 46 44 36 27 Nuclear 20 15 13 13 14 15 15 14 14 15 17 18 Biomass 0 2 4 4 5 8 10 14 16 18 21 24 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 10 11 13 16 20 24 29 34 Total 182 Gas 34 45 61 82 79 67 57 50 46 44 36 27 Nuclear 20 15 13 13 14 15 15 14 14 15 17 18 Biomass 0 2 4 4 5 8 10 14 16 18 21 24 Other Renewables 12 11 10 10 10 11 13 16 20 24 29 34 Total 182 195 206 216 208 190 189 194 203 217 241 265 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.4 1.6 2.5 3.2 4.1 5.1 6.1 7.5 8.8 Oil 0.1 0.8 1.6 2.3 2.5 3.1 3.3 3.3 3.4 3.4 3.5 3.5 Gas 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.7 2.1 3.2 3.8 4.3 4.8 5.3 5.6 6.0 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 2.8 33.0 66.5 102.2 138.3 173.0 207.2 241.8 276.3 310.1 343.9 378.9 Land Use Million ha Cropland 408 412 416 417 422 427 422 417 412 407 402 397 Grasslands 796 819 859 894 885 879 877 879 893 915 938 960 Energy Biomass 0 3 6 11 18 24 31 39 47 56 65 71 Forest 921 931 922 915 907 898 889 880 871 862 853 843 Others 998 958 920 886 874 869 849 825 800 783 770 758 Total 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 3123 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.39 3.46 3.39 3.30 3.42 3.41 3.44 3.52 3.73 3.95 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.19 0.17 0.09 0.03 0.05 -0.02 -0.18 -0.29 -0.40 Total CO2 GtC 2.83 3.20 3.50 3.65 3.56 3.39 3.45 3.47 3.43 3.33 3.44 3.55 CH4 total MtCH4 73 74 82 91 95 105 113 117 123 130 141 152 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.6 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.5 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.1 4.4 4.6 SOx total MtS 22.7 17.0 14.8 6.7 5.5 4.8 4.4 3.5 3.2 3.7 4.3 5.0 HFC MtC eq. 19 57 105 99 102 101 102 101 100 98 98 97 PFC MtC eq. 18 13 14 13 12 11 10 8 7 7 7 7 SF6 MtC eq. 24 23 25 23 17 13 13 11 10 10 10 10 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 578 Statistical Table Scenario B2High-MiniCAM REF 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 428 425 427 435 438 438 435 429 423 418 412 407 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.8 2.3 2.8 3.4 4.4 5.6 6.9 8.2 9.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 13 10 8 7 6 6 6 5 5 4 4 4 Liquids 18 11 8 8 7 6 6 7 7 8 8 8 Gas 19 14 12 11 10 8 5 5 5 5 4 3 Electricity 6 8 11 15 16 18 19 22 26 29 31 33 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 56 44 38 41 39 38 37 39 42 45 46 47 Primary Energy EJ Coal 18 17 17 18 38 61 86 113 147 188 236 283 Oil 20 13 10 9 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Gas 26 20 18 22 20 17 13 12 11 12 9 6 Nuclear 3 4 5 7 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 Biomass 0 1 1 2 3 3 5 7 9 10 12 13 Other Renewables 3 3 3 4 5 6 7 9 12 14 16 18 Total 70 57 55 62 76 94 117 149 187 231 280 328 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.9 1.4 2.1 3.1 4.5 6.1 8.3 10.6 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 Gas 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.3 12.3 21.2 30.3 41.4 54.8 70.7 90.0 113.6 141.8 175.3 215.0 Carbon Sequestration GtC Land Use Million ha Cropland 284 295 308 324 331 328 317 281 250 225 211 198 Grasslands 395 410 448 510 569 611 636 588 551 524 529 534 Energy Biomass 0 0 1 2 5 9 15 28 36 38 43 47 Forest 1007 1016 996 945 884 846 831 915 979 1023 1005 987 Others 691 656 625 597 589 583 578 564 561 568 590 612 Total 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 2377 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.83 0.90 1.13 1.39 1.69 2.06 2.53 3.11 3.75 4.45 Other CO2 GtC 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.08 0.10 0.08 0.02 0.08 0.05 -0.06 -0.11 -0.16 Total CO2 GtC 1.30 0.91 0.86 0.98 1.22 1.47 1.71 2.14 2.59 3.06 3.64 4.29 CH4 total MtCH4 47 39 47 61 75 88 99 108 123 144 162 179 N2O total MtN2O-N 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.9 SOx total MtS 17.0 11.0 10.3 10.3 12.6 14.3 15.3 12.8 10.3 7.7 5.9 4.1 HFC MtC eq. 0 4 9 15 21 25 25 26 26 26 27 27 PFC MtC eq. 7 4 8 10 14 19 25 28 30 30 28 27 SF6 MtC eq. 7 6 5 7 9 12 15 16 15 14 14 14 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN Statistical Table 579 Scenario B1High-MiniCAM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 ASIA Population Million 2790 3261 3707 4127 4463 4739 4953 5037 5070 5052 4932 4814 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.4 3.1 6.0 10.3 17.4 25.6 35.2 45.9 57.4 69.7 82.9 97.2 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 20 32 46 62 74 83 91 81 75 73 70 68 Liquids 14 20 27 36 43 53 67 79 91 104 112 119 Gas 2 5 9 13 13 13 12 12 13 14 12 11 Electricity 4 11 24 43 64 88 115 147 182 220 253 287 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 40 68 106 153 193 237 284 319 361 410 447 484 Primary Energy EJ Coal 26 47 72 104 142 182 224 251 254 234 226 218 Oil 16 22 29 39 33 28 25 21 21 25 19 12 Gas 3 9 20 37 48 56 61 63 68 75 62 49 Nuclear 1 4 9 15 25 36 47 50 56 65 73 81 Biomass 0 2 5 9 14 20 27 38 48 55 63 71 Other Renewables 3 4 5 6 10 17 27 45 65 86 109 132 Total 49 87 141 210 272 339 411 470 513 540 551 562 Cumulative Resources Use ZJ Coal 0.0 0.5 1.1 1.9 3.2 4.9 6.8 9.3 11.8 14.2 16.5 18.8 Oil 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 Gas 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.7 3.3 4.0 4.7 5.3 Cumulative CO2 Emissions GtC 1.5 19.3 44.1 79.6 126.6 184.0 251.8 327.7 408.1 489.7 569.9 648.2 Land Use Million ha Cropland 389 401 413 425 426 418 403 365 332 304 278 252 Grasslands 508 523 550 588 621 647 668 662 654 642 628 615 Energy Biomass 0 0 2 5 15 28 43 67 84 95 117 139 Forest 1168 1143 1104 1052 1007 973 951 972 997 1026 1043 1060 Others 664 632 603 577 569 563 559 545 541 547 565 584 Total 2729 2699 2671 2646 2637 2630 2611 2608 2614 2632 2650 2650 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 1.15 1.78 2.72 3.92 4.97 6.05 7.14 7.80 8.14 8.18 8.04 7.90 Other CO2 GtC 0.37 0.26 0.19 0.26 0.26 0.22 0.14 0.11 0.04 -0.05 -0.11 -0.17 Total CO2 GtC 1.53 2.03 2.92 4.18 5.23 6.26 7.28 7.90 8.19 8.12 7.93 7.73 CH4 total MtCH4 113 125 134 145 155 166 178 183 179 166 160 154 N2O total MtN2O-N 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.2 3.6 4.0 4.4 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.2 5.4 SOx total MtS 17.7 25.3 38.4 50.6 57.0 59.1 56.9 43.7 32.8 24.3 19.4 14.4 HFC MtC eq. 0 5 21 40 66 95 130 164 199 233 267 302 PFC MtC eq. 3 5 14 22 30 38 46 51 54 54 53 51 SF6 MtC eq. 4 7 12 18 25 32 36 36 33 27 29 30 580 Statistical Table Scenario B2High-MiniCAM ALM 1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 Population Million 1236 1554 1917 2326 2725 3104 3463 3737 3953 4113 4153 4192 GNP/GDP (merx) Trillion US$ 1.9 2.8 4.4 6.8 11.8 18.4 26.6 38.2 50.6 63.9 78.0 93.6 GNP/GDP (ppp) Trillion (1990 prices) na na na na na na na na na na na na Final Energy EJ Non-commercial 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Solids 2 3 5 7 11 15 20 20 20 21 21 21 Liquids 17 22 27 35 41 54 73 94 114 135 152 170 Gas 5 7 10 13 17 19 19 19 20 22 20 17 Electricity 3 6 10 17 32 51 76 109 144 181 218 255 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 37 52 72 101 139 188 242 299 359 411 463 Primary Energy EJ Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions Carbon Sequestration Land 19 20 22 20 17 Electricity 3 6 10 17 32 51 76 109 144 181 218 255 Others 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Total 27 37 52 72 101 139 188 242 299 359 411 463 Primary Energy Coal Oil Gas Nuclear Biomass Other Renewables Total Cumulative Resources Use Coal Oil Gas Cumulative CO2 Emissions Carbon Sequestration Land Use EJ 4 6 10 14 30 53 83 82 86 96 103 110 20 23 28 36 37 40 42 46 52 59 51 43 7 10 15 24 36 45 50 58 66 75 66 58 0 2 4 7 14 22 31 37 44 54 64 73 0 1 1 3 5 9 15 27 37 44 55 65 GtC GtC Million ha 5 6 8 11 15 21 28 44 61 79 100 122 35 47 67 95 137 189 249 293 345 407 439 471 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 1.0 1.6 2.4 3.3 4.2 5.2 6.2 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.4 2.9 3.5 4.0 4.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.6 2.2 2.8 3.5 4.2 4.9 1.4 17.8 36.7 59.0 86.7 120.6 162.2 210.8 264.5 322.3 382.5 444.0 Cropland 391 365 353 355 353 Grasslands 1510 1594 1713 1867 2013 Energy Biomass 0 0 0 0 1 Forest 3641 3589 3487 3333 3186 Others 1957 1882 1808 1735 1710 Total 7499 7430 7361 7290 7263 Anthropogenic Emissions (standardized) Fossil Fuel CO2 GtC 0.72 1.01 1.27 1.64 2.28 Other CO2 GtC 0.73 0.82 0.69 0.85 0.77 Total CO2 GtC 1.45 1.83 1.96 2.49 3.05 CH4 total MtCH4 77 85 90 99 114 N2O total MtN2O-N 1.2 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.6 SOx total MtS 10.5 12.8 15.1 16.2 19.5 HFC MtC eq. 0 2 12 20 32 PFC MtC eq. 4 4 7 10 14 SF6 MtC eq. 3 5 5 7 9 CO MtCO NMVOC Mt NOx MtN 344 330 301 274 247 226 205 2118 2183 2091 2004 1921 1875 1829 12 34 85 123 148 186 223 3074 2996 3067 3147 3234 3263 3292 1690 1675 1636 1623 1635 1681 1727 7239 7217 7182 7171 7185 7230 7275 3.13 0.61 3.74 124 3.1 23.3 54 20 20 4.18 0.39 4.58 129 3.7 27.5 84 27 16 4.76 0.38 5.14 125 4.0 23.4 120 33 17 5.40 0.20 5.60 124 4.3 19.7 157 37 15 6.11 -0.15 5.96 127 4.6 16.4 190 39 11 6.45 -0.37 6.08 127 5.1 13.1 211 39 13 6.81 -0.59 6.22 128 5.6 9.7 223 37 14 VIII Acronyms and Abbreviations 582 Acronyms and Abbreviations Acronyms and Abbreviations DMSP Defense Meteorological Satellite Program DOE Department of Energy A1 SRES scenario family A1 EBC/UDO Energy Balance Climate/Upwelling Diffusion Ocean model A1B Scenario group within the A1 scenario family (balanced energy supply mix) A1C Scenario group within A1 scenario family (emphasis on coal) A1FI Scenario group within the A1 scenario family (fossil-intensive, combination of A1C and A1G) A1G Scenario group within A1 scenario family (emphasis on oil and gas) A1T Scenario group within A1 scenario family (emphasis on non-fossils) A2 SRES scenario family AAGR Average Annual Growth Rate AEEI Autonomous Energy Efficiency Improvement (rate) AFEAS Alternative Fluorocarbons Environmental Acceptability Study AFR Sub-Saharan Africa (see Appendix III) AGC/MLO Atmospheric General Circulation/Mixed Layer Ocean model AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome AIM Asian Integrated Model (see Appendix IV) ALM SRES region - Africa, Latin America and Middle East (see Appendix III) A/O GCM Atmosphere/Ocean General Circulation Model AOS Atmosphere-Ocean System (IMAGE model) ASF Atmospheric Stabilization Framework model ASIA SRES region - Asia excluding the Middle East (see Appendix III) B1 SRES scenario family B2 SRES scenario family BGF Biomass based gaseous fuels (IMAGE model) BLF Biomass based liquid fuels (IMAGE model) BLS Basic Linked System of National Agricultural Models (see Appendix IV) BP British Petroleum CCGT combined cycle gas turbine CES constant elasticity of substitution CETA Carbon Emissions Trajectory Assessment model CIESIN Center for International Earth Science Information Network CO2DB Carbon Dioxide Database COP Conference of the Parties CORINAIR Coordination of Information on the Environment - Air CPA Centrally Planned Asia and China (see Appendix III) CPB Central Planning Bureau (the Netherlands) CRP Current Reduction Plans DEV Developing countries DICE Dynamic Integrated Climate Economy model ECN Netherlands Energy Research Foundation EEA European Environmental Agency EEU Central and Eastern Europe EIA Energy Information Administration (US) EIS Energy-Industry System (IMAGE model) EJ Exajoules (10^18 J) ENDS Environmental Data Services EMEP European Monitoring and Evaluation Programme (for air pollutants) EMF Energy Modeling Forum (Stanford University) EPA Environmental Protection Agency (US) ERB Edmonds, Reilly and Barns model ESD Emissions Scenario Database ETSAP Energy Technology Systems Analysis Programme (IEA) EU European Union FAO UN Food and Agriculture Organization FBC Fluidized Bed Combustion FETC Federal Energy Technology Center (US) FGD Flue Gas Desulfurization FSU Former Soviet Union (see Appendix III) FUND Climate Framework for Uncertainty Negotiation and Distribution model GCM General Circulation Model GCAM Global Change Assessment Model GDI Gender related Development Index (UNDP) GDP Gross Domestic Product GEM Gender Empowerment Measure (UNDP) GHG Greenhouse Gas GNP Gross National Product GRP Gross Regional Product GWP Global Warming Potential GtC Gigaton of carbon (1 GtC = 10^15 gC = 1 PgC ~ 3.7 Gt carbon dioxide) GWP Global Warming Potential HABITAT United Nations Centre for Human Settlements HDI Human Development Index (UNDP) HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus HS Harmonized Scenarios IA Integrated Assessment ICAM Integrated Climate Assessment Model ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization ID Identification IEA International Energy Agency IEA CIAB IEA Coal Industry Advisory Board IEW International Energy Workshop (IIASA - Stanford University) IGCC Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle IGU International Gas Union IIASA International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis IMAGE Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect IND Industrial(ized) countries IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IS92 IPCC scenarios 1992 IU Inverted U-curve J Joule ISO International Standards Organization km Kilometers kt Kilotons LAM Latin America and Caribbean (see Appendix III) LBNL Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (US) LNG Liquid Natural Gas LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas MACRO Macroeconomic model (see Appendix IV) MAGICC Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse gas-Induced Climate Change MARIA Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation model (see Appendix IV) MEA Middle East and North Africa (see Appendix III) MERGE Model for Evaluating the Regional and Global Effects of GHG Reduction Policies MESSAGE Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (see Appendix IV) MFR Maximum Feasible Reduction MiniCAM Mini Climate Assessment Model (see Appendix IV) MJ Megajoule (10^6 J) Mt Megaton = 10^6 tons = Tg MtS Megaton (elemental) Sulfur MWe Megawatts of electricity (electric capacity) NAM North America (see Appendix III) NAPAP National Acidic Precipitation Assessment Program (US) NIES National Institute for Environmental Studies (Japan) NIS Newly Independent States (of the Former Soviet Union) NGO Non-Governmental Organization NMVOC Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds (hydrocarbons) NTE Non-Thermal Electric ODS Ozone Depleting Substances ODT Oven Dry Tons OECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development OECD90 SRES region - OECD member states as at 1990 (see Appendix III) OLS Operational Linescan System OS Other Scenarios PAGE Policy Analysis for the Greenhouse Effect model PAO Pacific OECD (see Appendix III) PAS Other Pacific Asia (see Appendix III) PgC Petagrams of carbon (1 PgC = 1 GtC) PIEEI Price Induced Energy Efficiency Improvement PNLL Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (US) ppbv Parts per billion by volume (10^-9) ppmv Parts per million by volume (10^-6) PPP Purchasing Power Parity pptv Parts per trillion by volume (10^-12) RAINS Regional Acidification INformation and Simulation model (see Appendix IV) R&D Research and Development RCW Rapidly Changing World scenario RD&D Research, Development and Demonstration REF SRES region - Central and Eastern Europe and Newly Independent States of the former Soviet Union (see Appendix III) RIVM Netherlands National Institute of Public Health and the Environment SA90 1990 Scientific Assessment of the IPCC SAR Second Assessment Report of the IPCC SAS South Asia (see Appendix III) SC Sulfur Control (scenario) SCENGEN Scenario Generator model (University of East Anglia) SCW Slowly Changing World scenario SG Scenario Generator model (IIASA) (see Appendix IV) SPM Summary for Policymakers SRES Special Report on Emissions Scenarios SRTT Special Report on methodological and technological issues in Technology Transfer SOx Sulfur Oxides t Ton TAR Third Assessment Report of the IPCC TE Thermal Electric TES Terrestrial Environment System (IMAGE model) TFR Total (average) Fertility Rate TgC Teragrams of Carbon (1 TgC = 1 MtC) TGCIA Task Group on Climate scenarios for Impact Assessment TgN Teragrams (million tons) of (elemental) Nitrogen TgS Teragrams (million tons) of (elemental) Sulfur TIMER Targets IMAGE Energy Regional simulation model TSU Technical Support Unit UN United Nations UNAIDS Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment and Development UNDP United Nations Development Programme UNEP United Nations Environment Programme UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change UNFPA United Nations Population Fund 584 Acronyms and Abbreviations USCB United States Census Bureau US DOC United States Department of Commerce US DOE United States Department of Energy US EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency VNIR Visible and Near-InfraRed light VOC Volatile Organic Compounds (hydrocarbons) WBCSD World Business Council for Sustainable Development WEC World Energy Council WHO World Health Organization WG Working Group WMO World Meteorological Organisation WRI World Resources Institute United States Department of Energy US EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency VNIR Visible and Near-InfraRed light VOC Volatile Organic Compounds (hydrocarbons) WB World Bank WBCSD World Business Council for Sustainable Development WEC World Energy Council WHO World Health Organization WMO World Meteorological Organisation WRI World Resources Institute ZJ Zetajoule (10^21 J) IX Chemical Symbols Chemical Symbols C Carbon CF4 Tetrafluoromethane - CFC-14 C2F6 Hexafluoroethane - CFC-116 CFC Chlorofluorocarbon CFC-14 Tetrafluoromethane - CF4 CFC-116 Hexafluoroethylene - C2F6 (CH2)4(COOH)2 Adipic Acid CH4 Methane CH3OH Methanol CO Carbon Monoxide CO2 Carbon Dioxide H Atomic Hydrogen H2 Molecular Hydrogen HCFC Hydrochlorofluorocarbon HCO3 Bicarbonate Ion HFC Hydrofluorocarbon (Hydrogenated FluoroCarbons) HFC-134a CH2FCF3 HNO3 Nitric Acid MeOH Methanol N Atomic Nitrogen N2 Molecular Nitrogen NH3 Ammonia NMVOC Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds (hydrocarbons) N2O Nitrous Oxide NO Nitric Oxide NOx Nitrogen Oxides (the sum of NO and NO2) O Atomic Oxygen O2 Molecular Oxygen O3 Ozone PFC Perfluorocarbon S Atomic Sulfur SF6 Sulfur Hexafluoride SOx Sulfur Oxides SO2 Sulfur Dioxide X Units Units Table X-1: SI (Système International) Units and Fractions and Multiples Having Special Names Physical Quantity – Name of Unit – Symbol amount of substance – mole – mol area – hectare – ha energy – joule – J (kg m2 s-2) force – newton – N (kg m s-2) frequency – hertz – Hz (s-1 = cycles per second) length – metre (meter in this report) – m length – micron – μm (10^-6 m) power – watt – W (kg m2 s-3 = J s-1) pressure – pascal – Pa (kg m-1 s-2 = N m-2) temperature – kelvin – K time – second – s weight (mass) – kilogram – kg weight – tonne (ton in this report) – t (10^3 kg) weight – gram – g (10^-3 kg) Fraction – Prefix – Symbol 10^-12 pico p 10^-9 nano n 10^-6 micro μ 10^-3 milli m 10^-2 centi c 10^-1 deci d 10^1 deca da 10^2 hecto h 10^3 kilo k 10^6 mega M 10^9 giga G 10^12 tera T 10^15 peta P 10^18 exa E 10^21 zetta Z Table X-2: Non-SI Units °C degrees Celsius (0°C = ~273K); Temperature differences are given in °C rather than the more correct form of “Celsius degrees” Btu British Thermal Unit (1.055 kJ) kWh kilowatt-hour (3.6 MJ) MWe megawatts of electricity (electrical capacity) ppmv parts per million by volume (10^-6) ppbv parts per billion by volume (10^-9) pptv parts per trillion by volume (10^-12) tce tons of coal equivalent (29.31 GJ) toe tons of oil equivalent (41.87 GJ) TWh terawatt-hour (3.6 PJ) Units XI Glossary of Terms Glossary of Terms Afforestation The act or process of establishing a forest, especially on land not previously forested. Alternative Energy Energy derived from non-fossil fuel sources. Anthropogenic Emissions Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) associated with human activities. These include burning of fossil fuels for energy, deforestation, and land-use changes. Annex I Countries Annex I to the Climate Convention (UNFCCC) lists all the countries in the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), plus countries with economies in transition, Central, and Eastern Europe (excluding the former Yugoslavia and Albania). By default the other countries are referred to as Non-Annex I countries. Under Article 4.2 (a&b) of the Convention, Annex I countries commit themselves specifically to the aim of returning individually or jointly to their 1990 levels of GHG emissions by the year 2000. Annex II Countries Annex II to the Climate Convention lists all countries in the OECD. Under Article 4.2 (g) of the Convention, these countries are expected to provide financial resources to assist developing countries comply with their obligations such as preparing national reports. Annex II countries are also expected to promote the transfer of environmentally sound technologies to developing countries. Annex B Countries Annex B in the Kyoto Protocol lists those developed countries that have agreed to a target for their GHG emissions, including those in the OECD, Central and Eastern Europe, and the Russian Federation. Not quite the same but similar to Annex I, which also includes Turkey and Belarus, while Annex B includes Croatia, Monaco, Liechtenstein, and Slovenia. Baseline A projected level of future emissions against which reductions by project activities could be determined. Base Year A common year for calculating emission inventories or to begin model simulations for future scenarios. Biofuel A fuel produced from dry organic matter or combustible oils produced by plants. Examples of biofuel include alcohol (from fermented sugar), black liquor from the paper manufacturing process, wood, and soybean oil. Biomass The total dry organic matter or stored energy content of living organisms. Biomass can be used for fuel directly by burning it (e.g., wood), indirectly by fermentation to an alcohol (e.g., sugar), or by extraction of combustible oils (e.g., soybeans). Carbon Cycle The natural processes that influence the exchange of carbon (in the form of carbon dioxide (CO2), carbonates and organic compounds, etc.) among the atmosphere, ocean, and terrestrial systems. Major components include photosynthesis, respiration, and decay between atmospheric and terrestrial systems (approximately 100 billion tons/year (gigatons)); thermodynamic invasion and evasion between the ocean and atmosphere, operation of the carbon pump and mixing in the deep ocean (approx. 90 billion tons/year). Deforestation and fossil fuel burning releases approximately 7 Gt into the atmosphere annually. The total carbon in the reservoirs is approximately 2000 Gt in land biota, soil, and detritus, 750 Gt in the atmosphere, and 38,000 Gt in the oceans. (Figures from IPCC WGI Scientific Assessment 1990.) Carbon Dioxide A naturally occurring gas, CO2 is also a by-product of burning fossil fuels and biomass, as well as land-use changes and other industrial processes. It is the principal anthropogenic GHG that affects the earth’s temperature. It is the reference gas against which other GHGs are measured and therefore has a “Global Warming Potential” (GWP) of 1. Carbon Sequestration The long-term storage of carbon or CO2 in the forests, soils, ocean, or underground in depleted oil and gas reservoirs, coal seams, and saline aquifers. Examples include the separation and disposal of CO2 from flue gases or processing fossil fuels to produce H2- and CO2-rich fractions, and the direct removal of CO2 from the atmosphere through land use change, afforestation, reforestation, ocean fertilization, and agricultural practices to enhance soil carbon. Carbon Sinks Natural or man-made systems that absorb CO2 from the atmosphere and store them. Trees, plants, and the oceans all absorb CO2 and, therefore, are carbon sinks. CFCs See “Chlorofluorocarbons”. See “Methane”. Glossary of Terms Chlorofluorocarbons Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are GHGs covered under the 1987 Montreal Protocol and used for refrigeration, air conditioning, packaging, insulation, solvents, or aerosol propellants. As they are not destroyed in the lower atmosphere, CFCs drift into the upper atmosphere where, given suitable conditions, they break down ozone. These gases are being replaced by other compounds, including hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), which are GHGs covered under the Kyoto Protocol. Climate Change (UNFCCC definition) A change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and that is in addition to natural climate variability over comparable time periods. Climate Convention See “UN Framework Convention on Climate Change”. Climate Models Large and complex computer programs used to mathematically simulate global climate. They are based on mathematical equations derived from our knowledge of the physics that governs the earth-atmosphere system. Co-generation The use of waste heat from electric generation, such as exhaust from gas turbines, for either industrial purposes or district heating. Commercialization Sequence of actions necessary to achieve market entry and general market competitiveness of new innovative technologies, processes, and products. Conference of the Parties (COP) The supreme body of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprises countries that have ratified or acceded to the Framework Convention on Climate Change. The first session of the Conference of the Parties (COP-1) was held in Berlin in 1995, COP-2 in Geneva 1996, COP-3 in Kyoto 1997, and COP-4 in Buenos Aires. COP-5 will be held in Bonn. CO2 See “Carbon Dioxide”. Cost-effective A criterion that specifies that a technology or measure delivers a good or service at equal or lower cost than current practice, or the lowest cost alternative for the achievement of a given target. Decarbonization A decrease in the specific carbon content of primary energy or of fuels. Deforestation The removal of forest stands by cutting and burning to provide land for agricultural purposes, residential or industrial building sites, roads, etc., or by harvesting the trees for building materials or fuel. Demand-Side Management Policies and programs designed to reduce consumer demand for electricity and other energy sources while maintaining (or even increasing) the services the energy use renders. It helps to reduce the need for constructing new power facilities. Dematerialization A decrease in the material intensity of economic activity in general, or of individual production processes and end-use applications. Economic Potential The portion of technical potential for GHG emissions reductions or energy efficiency improvements that could be achieved cost-effectively in the absence of market barriers. The achievement of market potential requires additional policies and measures to break down market barriers. Emissions The release of GHGs and/or their precursors into the atmosphere over a specified area and period of time. Emissions Category The SRES Scenarios are grouped into four categories of cumulative CO2 emissions (all sources) between 1990 and 2100: low, medium-low, medium-high, and high emissions. Each category contains scenarios with a range of different driving forces yet similar cumulative emissions. See also “(Scenario) Category.” Emission Standard A level of emission that under law may not be exceeded. Energy Intensity This and/or their precursors into the atmosphere over a specified area and period of time. Emissions Category The SRES Scenarios are grouped into four categories of cumulative CO2 emissions (all sources) between 1990 and 2100: low, medium-low, medium-high, and high emissions. Each category contains scenarios with a range of different driving forces yet similar cumulative emissions. See also “(Scenario) Category.” Emission Standard A level of emission that under law may not be exceeded. Energy Intensity This is the ratio of energy consumption to economic or physical output. At the national level, energy intensity is the ratio of total domestic primary energy consumption or final energy consumption to gross domestic product or physical output. FCCC See “UN Framework Convention on Climate Change”. Final Energy Energy supplied that is available to the consumer to be converted into useful energy (e.g. electricity at the wall outlet). Fossil Fuels Carbon-based fuels, including coal, oil, and natural gas and their derived fuels such as gasoline, synthesis gas from coal, etc. Fuel Switching Policy designed to reduce CO2 emissions by requiring electric utilities or consumers to switch from high-carbon to low-carbon fuels (e.g. from coal to gas). GHGs See “Greenhouse Gases”. GHG Reduction Potential Possible reductions in emissions of greenhouse gasses (quantified in terms of absolute reductions or in percentages of baseline emissions) that could be achieved through the use of technologies and measures. Global Warming The hypothesis that the earth’s temperature is being increased, in part, because of emissions of GHGs associated with human activities, such as burning fossil fuels, biomass burning, cement manufacture, cow and sheep rearing, deforestation, and other land-use changes. Global Warming Potential A measurement technique to define the relative contribution of each GHG to atmospheric warming. A GWP can only be calculated for specified time horizons (e.g. 20 to 500 years) and for given GHG concentration levels (e.g. current). Both direct and indirect effects are considered. (Indirect effects include changes in atmospheric chemistry such as ozone formation and changes in stratospheric water vapor.) CO2 has been assigned a GWP of 1, against which all other GHGs are compared. For example, methane (CH4) has a GWP that is currently estimated to be about 21 times greater than that of CO2 over a 100 year time horizon, and thus CH4 has a GWP of 21. (Note that in the economic literature GWP usually denotes gross world product, referred to as global GDP in this report.) Greenhouse Effect The trapping of heat by an envelope of naturally occurring heat-retaining gases (water vapour, CO2, nitrous oxide (N2O), CH4, and ozone) that keeps the earth about 30°C (60°F) warmer than if these gases did not exist. Greenhouse Gases Gases in the earth’s atmosphere that absorb and re-emit infrared radiation. These gases occur through both natural and human-influenced processes. The major GHG is water vapour. Other GHGs include CO2, N2O, CH4, ozone, and CFCs. Gridding The provision of emission or socio-economic activity data in spatially highly explicit form. GWP See “Global Warming Potential”. HFCs See “Hydrofluorocarbons”. Harmonization A procedure to ease comparability of model results by adopting common (exogenous) input assumptions. Through harmonization, differences in emissions outcomes resulting from differences in model input assumptions (e.g. exogenous population growth) can be separated from differences that arise from different internal model parametrizations (e.g. of the dynamics of technological change). The scenarios reported here can be classified into three categories: “fully harmonized” scenarios share population, GDP, and final energy use assumptions at the level of the four SRES regions (and hence also at the global level) between 1990 and 2100 within prespecified bounds. “Globally harmonized” scenarios share global population and GDP assumptions at the global level for the 1990 to 2100 period within prespecified bounds (deviations in one 10-year interval are not considered). “Other scenarios” have adopted alternative assumptions for population and GDP than the ones suggested for scenario harmonization. Hydrofluorocarbons HFCs are among the six GHGs to be curbed under the Kyoto Protocol. They are produced commercially as a substitute for CFCs. HFCs are used largely in refrigeration and semiconductor manufacturing. Their GWPs range from 1300 to 11,700 times that of CO2 (over a 100 year time horizon), depending on the HFC. Illustrative Scenario A scenario that is illustrative for each of the six scenario groups reflected in the Summary for Policymakers of this report. They include four revised “scenario markers” for the scenario groups A1B, A2, B1 and B2, and two additional scenarios for the A1FI and A1T groups. All scenario groups are equally sound. See also “(Scenario) Groups” and “(Scenario) Markers”. Intergovernmental Organization (IGO) Organizations constituted of governments. Examples include the World Bank, the OECD, and the International Civil Aviation Organization. The UNFCCC allows accreditation of these IGOs to attend the negotiating sessions. International Energy Agency (IEA) Paris-based organization formed in 1973 by the major oil-consuming nations to manage future oil supply shortfalls. International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) Non-governmental, international, interdisciplinary research institute located in Laxenburg, Austria. IIASA is supported by the Academy of Sciences and similar learned societies from 15 countries. Its research focuses on the human dimensions of global change. Kyoto Mechanisms (formerly known as Flexibility Mechanisms) Economic mechanisms based on market principles that Parties to the Kyoto Protocol can use in an attempt to lessen the potential economic impacts of GHG emission-reduction requirements. They include Joint Implementation (Article 6), the Clean Development Mechanisms (Article 12), and Emissions Trading (Article 17). Kyoto Protocol The Protocol, drafted during the Berlin Mandate process, that, on entry into force, would require countries listed in its Annex B (developed nations) to meet differentiated reduction targets for their GHG emissions relative to 1990 levels by 2008-2012. It was adopted by all Parties to the Climate Convention in Kyoto, Japan, in December 1997. Marker (Scenario) See “(Scenario) Marker”. Market Penetration The share of a given market that is provided by a particular good or service at a given time. Market Potential (or Currently Realizable Potential) The portion of the economic potential for GHG emissions reductions or energy efficiency improvements that could be achieved under existing market conditions, assuming no new policies and measures. Measures Actions that can be taken by a government or a group of governments, often in conjunction with the private sector, to accelerate the use of technologies or other practices that reduce GHG emissions. Methane One of the six GHGs to be mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol, it has a relatively short atmospheric lifetime of 10 ± 2 years. Primary sources of CH4 are landfills, coal mines, paddy fields, natural gas systems, and livestock (e.g., cows and sheep). It has a GWP of 21 (100 year time horizon). Model A formal representation of a system that allows quantification of relevant system variables and simulation of systems’ behavior, e.g. the implications on future GHG emissions of alternative demographic, economic and technological developments (scenarios). Montreal Protocol International agreement under the UN which entered into force in January 1989 to phase out the use of ozone-depleting compounds such as CFCs, methyl chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and many others. NGO See “Non-Governmental Organization”. Nitrous Oxide One of the six GHGs to be curbed under the Kyoto Protocol, N2O is generated by burning fossil fuels and the manufacture of fertilizer. It has a GWP 310 times that of CO2 (100 year time horizon). Non-Annex I Parties The countries that have ratified or acceded to the UNFCCC that are not included in Annex I of the Convention. Non-Annex B Parties The countries that are not included in the Annex B list of developed nations in the Kyoto Protocol. Non-Governmental Organization/Observer Non-Governmental Organization (NGOs) include registered non-profit organizations and associations from business and industry, environmental groups, cities and municipalities, academics, and social and activist organizations. No Regrets Actions that result in GHG limitations and abatement, and that also make good environmental and economic sense in their own right. Ozone Ozone (O3) in the troposphere, or lower part of the atmosphere, can be a constituent of smog and acts as a GHG. It is created naturally and also by reactions in the atmosphere that involve gases resulting from human activities, including nitrogen oxides (NOx), from motor vehicles and power plants. The Montreal Protocol seeks to control chemicals that destroy ozone in the stratosphere (upper part of the atmosphere), where the ozone absorbs ultra-violet radiation. PAMs See “Policies and Measures”. Perfluorocarbons Among the six GHGs to be abated under the Kyoto Protocol. Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) are a by-product of aluminum smelting and uranium enrichment. They also are the replacement for CFCs in manufacturing semiconductors. The GWP of PFCs is 6500-9200 times that of CO2 (100 year time horizon). PFCs See “Perfluorocarbons”. Policies and Measures In UNFCCC parlance, policies are actions that can be taken and/or mandated by a government – often in conjunction with business and industry within its own country, as well as with other countries – to accelerate the application and use of successful measures to curb GHG emissions. Measures are technologies, processes, and practices used to implement policies that, if employed, would reduce GHG emissions below anticipated future levels. Examples might include carbon or other energy taxes, standardized fuel efficiency standards for automobiles, etc. “Common and co-ordinated” or “harmonized” policies refer to those adopted jointly by Parties. (This could be by region, such as the European Union (EU), or by countries that comprise a given classification, for example, all Annex I nations.) Precautionary Principle From the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (Article 3): Parties should take precautionary such as the European Union (EU), or by countries that comprise a given classification, for example, all Annex I nations.) Precautionary Principle From the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (Article 3): Parties should take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimize the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing such measures taking into account that policies and measures to deal with climate change should be cost-effective so as to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost. Primary Energy Energy embodied in natural resources (e.g., coal, crude oil, sunlight, uranium) that has not undergone any anthropogenic conversion or transformation. Quantified Emissions Limitations and Reductions Objectives Abbreviated to QELROs, these are the GHG emissions reduction commitments made by developed countries listed in Annex B of the Protocol. (See also “Targets and Timetables”.) Regulatory Measures Rules or codes enacted by governments that mandate product specifications or process performance characteristics. Renewables Energy sources that are, within a short timeframe relative to the earth’s natural cycles, sustainable, and include non-carbon technologies such as solar energy, hydropower, and wind as well as carbon-neutral technologies such as biomass. Research, Development, and Demonstration Scientific/technical research and development of new production processes or products, coupled with analysis and measures that provide information to potential users regarding the application of the new product or process; demonstration tests, and feasibility of applying these products and processes via pilot plants and other pre-commercial applications. Scenario A plausible description of how the future may develop, based on a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions (“scenario logic”) about key relationships and driving forces (e.g., rate of technology change, prices). Note that scenarios are neither predictions nor forecasts. (Scenario) Category The SRES Scenarios are grouped into four categories of cumulative CO₂ emissions (all sources) between 1990 and 2100: low, medium-low, medium-high, and high emissions. Each category contains scenarios with a range of different driving forces yet similar cumulative emissions. See also “Emissions Category”. (Scenario) Family Scenarios that have a similar demographic, societal, economic and technical-change storyline. Four scenario families comprise the SRES scenario set: A1, A2, B1 and B2. (Scenario) Group Scenarios within a family that reflect a consistent variation of the storyline. The A1 scenario family includes four groups designated as A1T, A1C, A1G and A1B that explore alternative structures of future energy systems. In the Summary for Policymakers, the A1C and A1G groups have been combined into one “Fossil Intensive” A1FI scenario group. The other three scenario families consist of one group each. The SRES scenario set reflected in the SPM thus consists of six distinct scenario groups, all of which are equally sound and together capture the range of uncertainties associated with driving forces and emissions. (Scenario) Marker A scenario that was originally posted in draft form on the SRES website to represent a given scenario family. The choice of markers was based on which of the initial quantifications best reflected the storyline, and the features of specific models. Markers are no more likely than other scenarios, but are considered by the SRES writing team as illustrative of a particular storyline. They are included in revised form in this report. These scenarios have received the closest scrutiny of the entire writing team and via the SRES open process. Scenarios have also been selected to illustrate the other two scenario groups (see also “Scenario Group” and “Illustrative Scenario”. (Scenario) Set A set of scenarios developed using a particular methodological approach. The SRES scenario set comprises 40 scenarios grouped into four scenario families, seven (six in the SPM) scenario groups and four (cumulative CO₂) emissions categories. (Scenario) Storyline A narrative description of a scenario (or a family of scenarios) highlighting the main scenario characteristics, relationships between key driving forces and the dynamics of their evolution. Standardization Adopting standardized numerical values to improve model and scenario comparability. In this report, emissions are standardized for the two reporting years 1990 and 2100 across all models and scenarios, and individual scenario differences thereafter are corrected for differences between original model outputs and standardized values (“offsets”). (Base year differences reflect scientific uncertainty in source/sink strengths for many GHGs as well as differences in model calibration and simulation time horizons, e.g. for some models 1990 is a projected year as simulations begin by an earlier base year. See “Sulfur Hexafluoride”. Sinks (UNFCCC Definition) Any process or activity or mechanism that removes a GHG, aerosol, or precursor of a GHG from the atmosphere. Source (UNFCCC Definition) Any process or activity that releases a GHG, aerosol, or precursor of a GHG into the atmosphere. Standards/Performance Criteria Set of rules or codes that mandate or define product performance (e.g., grades, dimensions, characteristics, test methods, rules for use). Structural Change Changes, for example, in the relative share of GDP produced by the industrial, agricultural, or services sectors of an economy; or (more generally) systems transformations whereby some components are either replaced or potentially substituted by other ones. Sulfur Hexafluoride One of the six GHGs to be curbed under the Kyoto Protocol. Sulfur hexafluoride (SF₆) is largely used in heavy industry to insulate high-voltage equipment and to assist in the manufacturing of cable-cooling systems. Its GWP is 23,900 times that of CO₂ (100 year time horizon). Targets and Timetables (see also QELROs) A target is the reduction of a specific percentage of GHG emissions (e.g., 6%, 7%) from a baseline date (e.g., “below 1990 levels”) to be achieved by a set date, or, timetable (e.g., 2008–2012). For example, under the Kyoto Protocol’s formula, the EU has agreed to reduce its GHG emissions by 8% below 1990 levels by the 2008–2012 commitment period. These targets and timetables are, in effect, a cap on the total amount of GHG emissions that can be emitted by a country or region in a given time period. Technical Potential The amount by which it is possible to reduce GHG emissions or improve energy efficiency by using a technology or practice in all applications in which it could technically be adopted, without consideration of its costs or practical feasibility. Technology A system of means towards particular ends that includes both hardware and social information, e.g. a piece of equipment or a technique for performing a particular activity. Trace Gas A minor constituent of the atmosphere. The most important trace gases that contribute to the greenhouse effect are CO₂, ozone, CH₄, N₂O, ammonia, nitric acid, ethylene, sulfur dioxide (SO₂), nitric oxide, CFCs, HFCs, HCFCs, SF₆, methyl chloride, carbon monoxide, and carbon tetrachloride. UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) A treaty signed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by more than 150 countries. Its ultimate objective is the “stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic (human-induced) interference with the climate system”. While no legally binding level of emissions is set, the treaty states an aim by Annex I countries to return these emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000. The treaty took effect in March 1994 upon the ratification of more than 50 countries; a total of some 160 nations have now ratified. In March 1995, the UNFCCC held the first session of the COP, the supreme body of the Convention, in Berlin. Its Secretariat is based in Bonn, Germany. In the biennium 2000–01, its approved budget and staffing level are approximately US$12 million annually with approximately 80 personnel. Values Values are based on individual preferences, and the total value of any resource is the sum of the values of the different individuals involved in the use of the resource. The values that are the foundation of the estimation of costs are measured in terms of the willingness to pay (WTP) by individuals to receive the resource or by the willingness of individuals to accept payment (WTA) to part with the resource. Voluntary Measures Measures to reduce GHG emissions that are adopted by firms or other actors in the absence of government mandates. Voluntary measures help make climate-friendly products or processes more readily available or encourage consumers to incorporate environmental values in their market choices. List of Major IPCC Reports Climate Change—The IPCC Scientific Assessment The 1990 Report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish) Climate Change—The IPCC Impacts Assessment The 1990 Report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish) Climate XII List of Major IPCC Reports List of Major IPCC Reports Climate Change—The IPCC Scientific Assessment The 1990 Report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish) Climate Change—The IPCC Impacts Assessment The 1990 Report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish) Climate Change—The IPCC Response Strategies The 1990 Report of the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish) Emissions Scenarios Prepared for the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group, 1990 Assessment of the Vulnerability of Coastal Areas to Sea Level Rise—A Common Methodology 1991 (also in Arabic and French) Climate Change 1992—The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment The 1992 Report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working Group Climate Change 1992—The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Impacts Assessment The 1992 Report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group Climate Change: The IPCC 1990 and 1992 Assessments IPCC First Assessment Report Overview and Policymaker Summaries, and 1992 IPCC Supplement Global Climate Change and the Rising Challenge of the Sea Coastal Zone Management Subgroup of the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group, 1992 Report of the IPCC Country Studies Workshop 1992 Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of Climate Change 1992 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Three volumes, 1994 (also in French, Russian, and Spanish) IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations 1995 (also in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish) Climate Change 1994—Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios 1995 Climate Change 1995—The Science of Climate Change Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report 1996 Climate Change 1995—Impacts, Adaptations, and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report 1996 Climate Change 1995—Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change Contribution of Working Group III to the Second Assessment Report 1996 Climate Change 1995—IPCC Second Assessment Synthesis of Scientific-Technical Information Relevant to Interpreting Article 2 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 1996 (also in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish) List of Major IPCC Reports Technologies, Policies, and Measures for Mitigating Climate Change IPCC Technical Paper I 1996 (also in French and Spanish) An Introduction to Simple Climate Models used in the IPCC Second Assessment Report IPCC Technical Paper II 1997 (also in French and Spanish) Stabilization of Atmospheric Greenhouse Gases: Physical, Biological and Socio-economic Implications IPCC Technical Paper III 1997 (also in French and Spanish) Implications of Proposed CO₂ Emissions Limitations IPCC Technical Paper IV 1997 (also in French and Spanish) The Regional Impacts of Climate Change: An Assessment of Vulnerability IPCC Special Report 1998 Aviation and the Global Atmosphere IPCC Special Report 1999 Land Use, Land Use Changes and Forestry IPCC Special Report 2000 Methodological and Technological Issues in Technology Transfer IPCC Special Report 2000 ENQUIRIES: IPCC Secretariat, c/o World Meteorological Organization, 7 bis, Avenue de la Paix, Case Postale 2300, 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland