This Global Tiger Day, tigers—and the rest of us—have reasons to be hopeful. While only inhabiting a fraction of the space they used to occupy (92% of their historic range is now lost), tigers are slowly returning to the areas they once roamed. Together, governments, communities, and NGO’s like WWF, are helping tigers and, by doing so, supporting other wildlife and healthy ecosystems.
Here are a few regions in Asia where tigers are making a return:
The Terai Arc landscape in northern India, where Rajaji Tiger Reserve is located, is a diverse region home to an incredible array of wildlife, including tigers. However, towns and cities here continue to expand, putting increasing pressure on the natural areas which surround them. Rajaji Tiger Reserve has seen this impact more than most. A growing city, railway line, and highway have sliced through the center of the reserve making it near impossible for tigers to move between the eastern and western regions.
© Siddhant Umariya / WWF-India
Since 2021, a total of five tigers has been successfully translocated from a nearby tiger reserve to the west of Rajaji Tiger Reserve. The translocation helped boost populations on the western side of the Rajaji. WWF-India supported the Uttarakhand Forest Department, Government of India, in these translocations and continues to support the State Forest Department in monitoring the movements of these tigers. Additionally, WWF-India is working to enhance functional wildlife corridors which will increase connectivity between tigers on each side of the reserve. It's hoped the tiger population will recover here in the years to come.
In Kazakhstan, a landmark conservation project returns wild tigers to a country and region where they have been extinct for more than 70 years. In late 2024, two captive Amur tigers were translocated from a tiger reserve in the Netherlands, to a semi-wild enclosure in Kazakhstan’s Ile-Balkhash Nature Reserve. The hope is that, as these tigers reproduce, future generations can return to the wild. This ambitious program led by the Government of Kazakhstan with support from WWF and the United Nations Development Project.
© Central Asia and Ministry of Ecology of the Republic of Kazakhstan
In the future, Kazakhstan plans to reintroduce more wild tigers in this landscape to support genetic diversity and build a healthy and stable population of wild tigers in Central Asia.
In 2022 a tiger pugmark (footprint) was discovered in northwest Thailand’s Mae Ping Mae Ping-Om Koi Forest Complex, a more than 1,300 square-mile conservation area rich in biodiversity. It was a remarkable find, as for years it was believed that tigers no longer roamed the region. Months later, camera traps recorded a tiger in the same forest. Most likely the tiger naturally traveled from a source tiger population more than 60 miles south of forest complex, where decades of conservation efforts have seen the population recover. Further efforts to improve connectivity between these two areas is underway.
As tigers return to some of their historic ranges, there is tremendous hope for the future of all wild tigers. These stories show that sustained funding and strong partnerships can make a difference and tigers, with healthy habitats and corridors, will come roaring back.
See how WWF is helping wild tigers
© Om Koi Wildlife Sanctuary
