There is growing understanding among institutions and organizations that involving youth voices in initiatives, partnerships, and decision-making is key to the success of any effort. The environmental sector in particular has seen the rise of youth showing up strong in movements they started or as instrumental collaborators for existing programs. Collaborating with young people shouldn’t just be for those dedicated youth programs, as youth perspectives are valuable to any undertaking in conservation.
WWF-US celebrates the contributions of youth in conservation through various external programs, such as the annual Youth Conservation Leadership Award and Panda Ambassadors program . Internally, WWF’s Early Conservationist Network—led by youth staff for youth staff—aims to elevate youth expertise and perspectives across the organization and externally to build a more inclusive conservation industry.
So, we asked WWF’s early-career conservationists and their allies the question: Why are youth voices valuable in conservation?
Chief Scientist and Early Conservationist Network Executive Sponsor she/her
By deeply engaging youth now, we create a generation of future leaders and decision-makers who are environmentally conscious and motivated to continue conservation efforts. Youth bring different energy, creativity, and innovation to solving environmental challenges, knowing that they will live in the world they help create. Involving them in decision-making ensures that policies and actions are aligned with their interests, and their enthusiasm and passion can inspire others, including adults, to act. Young conservationists bring a sense of urgency and moral clarity to environmental issues, helping to galvanize broader community efforts. The conservation movement only gains by ensuring these issues are embraced by youth.
© WWF-US/Keith Arnold
Associate Specialist, Consumer Engagement she/her
As a young person in conservation, I’m constantly in awe of my generation’s passion and commitment to making this planet a better place for all. At WWF, it’s incredibly rewarding to co-lead the organization’s Early Conservationist Network and foster a vibrant community of fellow young environmentalists. Our generation, as well as the generations to follow, will be most impacted by climate change and thus understand the urgency of intersectional collaboration to address environmental issues. Young people bring a fresh, innovative perspective to solving environmental challenges, especially through an inclusive lens to ensure underrepresented voices, like themselves, also have a seat at the table. As a first-generation Filipino American, I knew I wanted to enter the conservation industry from a young age, especially after experiencing firsthand the disproportionate effects of climate change for island nations like the Philippines. Around the world, younger generations’ passion and commitment to an inclusive conservation movement continue to inspire me and give me hope for the future of our planet.
© Francesa Edralin
Program Officer, Private Sector Engagement she/her
The world is constantly changing, and the youth voice brings in a fresh perspective and willingness to openly embrace new tools and advancing technology. As we see more natural disasters like forest fires, mudslides, or drastic swings in temperature in our communities, my friends and family members will reach out to me and say that I need to go save the world. While this is a monumental task that no person can do alone, as the younger generation that will be living with the impacts of climate change, it's essential that we get a chance to weigh in and have a seat at the table where our futures are being decided.
© Sondra Halperin
Senior Assistant, Media and External Affairs she/her
Youth recognition of the Earth’s health is not something to be taken lightly. I believe youth activism is vital, as there are significant barriers to entering the science and technology fields. Young people need a certain level of confidence to not only find science and nature exciting but also to feel capable of pursuing it. On top of that, there is a window of opportunity in a young person’s life where they are hungry for this knowledge. I am basking in this period of curiosity, eager to learn everything I can about our planet and willing to change my day-to-day habits in order to see better results for future generations.
© Maggie D'Amaro
Communications Intern, Earth for Life she/her
Youth voices are crucial in conservation because the impacts of biodiversity loss and climate change will most directly affect this generation and the next. Their perspectives are essential in shaping the objectives and targets needed to address these challenges. In recent years, young people have shown immense passion and commitment to a future that prioritizes both environmental protection and human well-being. While the expertise of professionals is invaluable in guiding conservation efforts, incorporating the perspectives of youth also ensures that this critical issue is approached with the urgency and seriousness required in such a decisive decade for achieving conservation and climate goals.
© Fabian Carchi
Program Officer, Plastic and Material Science she/her
Youth involvement in conservation is vital because the stakes are higher for our generation and the futures we’ll face. Younger generations will bear the brunt of climate change, the plastic waste crisis, and environmental injustice—issues that disproportionately impact marginalized communities. It’s impossible to envision a future where these challenges don’t shape our decisions and way of life. Many say they work in conservation to secure a better world for their children and grandchildren, but it’s crucial that youth, as those very children and grandchildren, have an equal voice in shaping the planet’s future. Young people bring passion, creativity, and fresh perspectives, all of which are essential to building a more just and sustainable world for everyone.
© Julia Beaumier
Specialist, Travel Marketing she/her
Considering that over half of the world's population is under the age of 30, having youth involved in the decisions that impact our future is imperative. We are the ones who will be calling our world “home” for quite some time and can also provide a fresh perspective on the most pressing challenges of our time. Climate change and biodiversity loss are inextricably linked and are two of the largest threats that our world faces daily. Not only is it impacting the species that we love and work to protect, but it is also having deep impacts disproportionally on communities that are bearing the brunt of these ever-growing threats. Young people will be the ones left to pick up the pieces of the legacy of mistakes left behind for us.
© Maddy MItchell
Senior Assistant, Earth for Life he/him
The youth bring a fresh perspective to conservation. We are seeing and feeling the impacts of climate change and nature loss in our lives, and now is the time to tap into our perspectives and voices. We have a strong passion for protecting nature because we want to see a future for ourselves and our children where our environments are protected and thriving. We don’t want to lose Earth’s amazing landscapes, seascapes, and wildlife that inspire us. We want to continue to see, explore, and learn more about the vast ecosystems this planet houses. Being half-American and half-Palauan, climate change and sea-level rise are important issues to take on as my family, roots, and heritage go back to Palau, a small island nation, which is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Having that voice in conservation to preserve the future is so important.
© David Ramarui
Program Associate, Policy and US Government Affairs she/her
As a young person and early-career professional entering the environmental space, I have found immense joy and inspiration from the strength, knowledge, and compassion exhibited by my generation in how we advocate for and promote greater education and outreach on conservation issues. Youth voices in conservation are critical as young people are already leading the charge to address and heal from historical missteps in how we’ve approached conservation in the past. With a particular focus on inclusivity, we are seeking out greater opportunities to collaborate more broadly across sectors and with communities to provide platforms and ensure that all voices are represented in this work. As a second-generation Chinese American, I have learned what it means to live in harmony with nature from an early age, seeking wisdom from my parents and grandparents as they cared for the land and our bodies through the many medicinal herbs and plants we grew in our kitchen gardens. With the escalating threats of nature and biodiversity loss facing our planet, listening to and learning from our youth is essential for charting a path toward a thriving future where my generation and all those to come can continue to live with and learn from the Earth.
© Sammi Lin
Program Associate, Markets she/her
As a second-generation Chinese American, queer, early-career professional in the environmental sector, I, along with many of my peers, navigate the complexities of our current climate reality and the intersecting identities that transcend cultural boundaries, embracing a diverse range of voices, perspectives, and ways of life. Youth leadership and perspectives are essential to elevate our generation, as well as future generations of climate advocates, in the fight for conservation and environmental justice, particularly for underrepresented populations who will increasingly—and alarmingly—bear the brunt of climate change impacts. Standing alongside my peers who are driving change in conservation, despite the barriers imposed by society, fills me with hope for the meaningful progress our generation and others will achieve.
© Vivian Lee
Senior Director, Marketing and Outreach she/her
As a parent and a professional who works closely with young people both in my community and career, I've witnessed firsthand the value youth voices bring to conservation efforts. Their informed perspectives and innovative thinking have not only led to successful initiatives but have also directly inspired me. Programs like WWF's Panda Ambassador initiative exemplify this power of youth engagement. The diverse young leaders in our program are hosting educational events, leading community actions, and meeting with politicians and business leaders to drive real change. I regularly see young people approach environmental challenges with creativity and determination. Their ability to see possibilities where others see obstacles has led to solutions in projects and advancements in policy, while calling attention to critical issues impacting marginalized communities.
The WWF-US Youth Conservation Leadership Award celebrates exceptional young individuals who are making outstanding contributions across a range of environmental issues, from climate change mitigation to biodiversity conservation. These youth leaders serve as inspiring examples of how young people can create meaningful impact in their communities.
Involving youth in conservation isn't just about shaping the future—it's about transforming our present. They are vital if we want our environmental initiatives to succeed.
© Deb Lindsey/WWF-US
