Few insect species are more beloved than the monarch butterfly . They sail languidly across meadows, grace our backyards, and soar to misty mountaintops bringing joy to people across three nations. They are among the truly rare insects that so many have dedicated time and effort to protect, and yet still their numbers decline despite our best efforts. The butterfly’s population has dwindled so much, in fact, that the US Fish and Wildlife Service has proposed Endangered Species Act protection for this remarkable animal. Where have we gone wrong?
For years the “why” has mostly been attributed mostly to habitat destruction, both in the monarch’s overwintering grounds in central Mexico and across the Great Plains. Across these varied landscapes, multiple generations of monarchs fly north each spring and summer, before individuals, known as the Methuselah generation (after a Biblical character who purportedly lived to the ripe old age of 969), draw from stored body fats that would otherwise be used for producing offspring, to fuel their long return flight of up to 3,000 miles to their roosting sites in central Mexico’s Sierra Madre Mountains.
Until recently, many, if not most of the farms the butterflies encounter along their central flyway provided monarch butterflies with food and shelter. Milkweed plants—monarch caterpillars’ only food source—were commonly found growing around the margins of many agricultural lands. However, since their adoption in the 1990s, two farming technologies have nearly clipped the migratory monarch butterfly’s wings for good.
© Clay Bolt / WWF
The first of these was the development of genetically modified (GMO) Roundup Ready crops. These GMO crops don’t directly harm the butterfly. Rather, it is their ability to resist Glyphosate, a weed-killer and the primary active ingredient in Roundup, that has eliminated 99% of the milkweed that once grew in corn and soybean fields.
The second blow was the launch of neonicotinoids (neonics), a class of neurotoxic insecticide. Although marketed as a safer option for selectively killing pests, neonics have instead made US agriculture 48 times more toxic to most insects, including pollinators. These pesticides are affecting entire food chains as they are persistent in the environment, infiltrate groundwater (highly water soluble), and have cumulative and largely irreversible effects on invertebrate populations.
© WWF-US / Clay Bolt
The primary method for dispersing neonicotinoids is via seed treatments. Neonics are used in high concentrations in the coatings of seeds used to grow corn, canola, sunflowers, soy, other vegetables, and more. A neonic treated seed retains only 2-5% of the pesticide, while the rest leaches into the surrounding environment. A 2024 analysis of land use practices, pesticides, and butterfly survey data across the Midwest found that butterfly abundance and species richness, including the migratory monarch, were particularly impacted by the practice of planting neonicotinoid-treated seeds.
If neonic treated seeds provided significant benefit to farmers, the case for their continued use could be made more easily. On the contrary, independent scientists as well as government experts have found that neonicotinoid seed treatments’ positive impact on agricultural productivity is marginal at best, in part because they are used so pervasively regardless of whether there is need or not. Since pest pressures requiring their use are rare, these seed treatments add to farmers’ upfront costs without providing a consistent return on investment. In fact, they can even result in lower yields than crops grown without neonicotinoids by killing off beneficial insects. Unfortunately, farmers are typically denied the choice of how or when to use un- or selectively-treated seeds, even as they are becoming more precise in other areas of management. The decision to put neonics and other coatings on seeds is typically made by the agribusinesses that control most of the global patented seed market, making it difficult for growers to source neonic-free seeds.
Like us, monarch butterflies and their young need food, shelter, and a safe place to live. The proposed threatened species listing under the Endangered Species Act is an important first step to providing these necessities. This is one of those rare wildlife conservation issues that isn’t difficult to “sell.” After all, who doesn’t want to live in a world where monarch butterflies still fly? The real question is whether we will commit to realizing this dream. Lasting recovery of this magnificent species will depend not only on government protections, but also collaboration among landowners, farmers, conservationists, and everyday citizens who can help safeguard critical habitats along their astonishing 3,000-mile migratory route to survival.
