Senior Social Scientist
“I love learning about the creative and unique ways people all over the world have long peacefully co-existed with their environments,” said Rafaella Lobo, Senior Social Scientist at WWF. “It excites me to work on empowering and strengthening that diversity. Conservation must recognize all the ways people interact with and protect nature.”
Rafaella leads research on conservation efforts in Latin America guided by the vision, rights, and needs of local communities. “Being from Brazil myself, I find it really fulfilling to do work that contributes to the region. Latin America has some of the greatest people, culture, and nature—and I feel very fortunate to maintain that connection through my work.”
The growing recognition of community-driven approaches in conservation – especially at important global meetings and large conservation organizations – is exciting to her.
Even when the work feels daunting, Rafaella stays motivated by shifting perspective. “People default to binary thinking—either ‘we save the planet’ or ‘we’re doomed’—but the reality is there are millions of possibilities in between. Every little bit we do is better than the alternative. Protecting a few species is better than losing them all. Keeping warming to 1.8°C is better than 2.5°C. Improving the lives of hundreds is better than none.”
For Rafaella, conservation must embrace complexity. “The world is messy, and the best conservation solutions will accept and work within that complexity.”
Director, Western Indian Ocean Seascape
“I grew up near the coast and was always fascinated by the complex relationships between people, nature, and our oceans,” said Shauna Mahajan, Director for the Western Indian Ocean Seascape at WWF. Shauna’s journey into conservation was driven by curiosity—and a little luck. “That fascination took me from the agricultural landscapes of Quebec to the coastlines of the Indian Ocean, and eventually to WWF.”
“Working with teams of international scientists and conservationists has definitely been the highlight of my career,” said Shauna. “It’s an amazing way to foster creativity, empathy, and to learn about different cultures and how we can reach our global goals together.”
Shauna partners with conservationists, communities, NGOs, and governments to advance holistic marine conservation solutions. “I'm really excited that at the end of this month, we will be publishing the inaugural Stewards of the Coastline report. It summarizes the current state of community-led governance in five countries and charts a roadmap for strengthening the capacities and finance needed to accelerate community-led conservation.”
More than anything, Shauna hopes decision-makers understand that conservation isn’t separate from other societal challenges—it’s deeply interconnected. “The biodiversity crisis is tied to issues like poverty and climate change. That means we need creativity and out-of-the-box solutions that work across sectors to create a future where both people and nature can thrive.”
Director of Conservation Areas, Earth for Life
“I was born and raised in Mexico City. For many, it might just seem like a vast and polluted city, but for me, it was the gateway to a lifelong love of nature,” said Lucia Ruiz, Conservation Areas Director at WWF. “My parents gave my brother and me an incredible gift—their passion for the natural world. They took us hiking, drove us to nearby forests, and, thanks to their research work, we traveled to protected areas and archaeological sites across the world. Growing up immersed in nature, I realized that this was my true passion—this is where I felt most at home: in the wilderness.”
Today, Lucia supports the advancement of protected and conserved areas. Right now, Lucia says there are two projects that she’s most excited about. “First, I’m leading the translation of a complex technical guide into an engaging e-learning course tailored for policymakers and decision-makers—because knowledge should be empowering, not intimidating. Second, I’m working to strengthen sustainable, long-term conservation finance in Yucatán, ensuring that conservation commitments are built from the ground up—with partnerships, innovation, and in hand with the government and local communities.”
For Lucia, the most rewarding part of her work is the people. “I get to collaborate with some of the most talented, passionate, and driven individuals in conservation. Learning from diverse perspectives and working across cultures is what I wake up for every day.”
At WWF, Lucia says she found more than just a job—she found a movement. “There is a profound sense of belonging, a feeling that we are all working toward something bigger than ourselves. It’s a place where you can learn from the best minds in conservation, collaborate across continents, and see real impact on the ground.”
Marine Biologist, US-Arctic Program
“There are so many ways to be a part of conservation science,” said Alexis Wills, a marine biologist with WWF’s US-Arctic Program. “From statistical analyses and seabird tagging, to artists who visualize data and editors who make science accessible—everyone has a role to play. Conservation science thrives on diverse perspectives and skills.”
As for Alexis, she leads research to support wildlife monitoring and area-based conservation in the Arctic, helping to safeguard critical ecosystems and species. “Some species show an incredible ability to adjust to changes in temperature, food availability, and extreme weather. Others may not adapt as easily,” she says. “By learning how species respond, we can better develop and deploy conservation interventions when possible.”
Ultimately, Alexis hopes more people recognize our deep connection to nature. “We are part of the environment,” she says. “When we protect biodiversity, we’re also promoting healthier communities and a more sustainable future for us all.”
Senior Program Officer, Ecosystem Carbon Science
“Growing up in Pokhara, Nepal—a place of snow-capped mountains, serene lakes, and vibrant landscapes– I developed a deep appreciation for the natural world,” said Karuna Paudel, Senior Ecosystem Carbon Specialist at WWF. “Witnessing nature’s beauty and fragility firsthand shaped my love for conservation and set me on the path I’m on today.”
Karuna’s journey in conservation started with an internship at WWF Nepal, which inspired her to pursue a PhD before returning to WWF in the U.S. “It felt like a full-circle moment—blending my childhood inspiration with my professional aspirations.”
Now, at WWF, Karuna works to assess the climate impact of conservation projects and translate complex policies into actionable insights. “One of the most rewarding parts of my work is ensuring that local and Indigenous-led conservation efforts receive the funding they need,” she said. “These investments don’t just support individual projects; they can transform entire regions.”
Since becoming a mother recently, Karuna says she’s found an even greater sense of purpose in her work. “I am driven by the hope that, through the small contributions I make today, my son will be able to experience the same pristine landscapes I did—hiking the same trails, marveling at the same snow-covered peaks.” That hope–and the incredible dedication of her WWF colleagues– Karuna says, fuels her commitment to her work, even on the toughest days.
