The world’s environmental emergencies are as pressing as ever, underscoring a core WWF commitment: to support locally-led and designed conservation efforts to better recognize the inherent links between ecosystems and societies. For 28 years, WWF’s Russell E. Train Education for Nature Program (EFN) has done just that.
WWF is excited to announce the 2022 recipients of EFN’s individual and institutional grants.
This year’s recipients include 53 individuals and organizations from 21 countries across the globe, spanning the gamut of scientists and conservation leaders who are exploring solutions to myriad of challenges and disruptions in today’s ecological systems. Selected through a multi-step rigorous assessment, this year's cohort will focus on a diverse range of topics and activities, from conserving the endangered golden langur in Bhutan to assessing human-shark interactions in Mexico to determining the knowledge, attitudes, and distribution of pangolins in Tanzania.
The 2022 recipients join EFN’s global community of over 3,000 individuals and 600 institutions across 60 countries whose contributions continue to significantly accelerate the pace of progress in addressing biodiversity challenges. The grant recipients and alumni test new ideas, evaluate what doesn't work, implement lessons learned, and serve as an inspiration for building the next generation of conservation scientists and leaders.
EFN provides support through direct grants to individuals and institutions to enhance expertise and technical skills at all career levels and community restoration activities. This year’s award winners include:
20 outstanding conservation leaders from 12 countries received the Train Fellowship to support their master’s and PhD degrees in conservation-related fields. Upon completing their programs, these individuals continue to build upon their research to inform critical decisions, establish in-country academic programs, mentor the next generation of scientists and leaders, and more.
3 Cassagnol Fellows became the inaugural recipients of the Cassagnol Fellowship intended to support their efforts in leading innovative programs that promote long-term outreach and capacity building in research, education, and training.
10 scholars from Royal Thimphu College in Bhutan and Ecole Normale Supérieure d'Antananarivo in Madagascar received the Russell and Aileen Train Legacy Scholarship. The Legacy Scholarships are awarded through partnerships with select universities to support students to attend conservation undergraduate and master’s degree programs in biodiversity-rich countries. The Legacy Program builds on EFN’s existing foundation and supports alumni by engaging universities where former Train Fellows serve as faculty members.
3 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Grant recipients from Kenya and Tanzania received support to enhance capacities to address environmental and social impact assessment needs with an emphasis on local communities and local practitioners.
17 Reforestation Grant recipients from 11 countries comprise local organizations in select WWF priority areas dedicated to restoring forest ecosystems whilst building the local capacity and promoting diversified livelihoods.
Adelina Langa
Sádia Chitará-Nhandimo
Nélio das Neves Sitoe
María José Guarderas
Estefanía Sánchez Flores
Fridah Munyi
Clara Ortiz Alvarez
Kuenzang Dorji
Denis Momanyi
Elise Nghalipo
Bijaya Neupane
Gorky Ríos-Alvear
Rio Heriniaina
Valeria Ramírez Castañeda
Kateryn Pino
Sonia Palacios Ramos
Patricio D. Carrera Játiva
Nirjala Raut
Stella Mary Amarilla Rodríguez
Guilain Tsetagho
Aung Tun Oo
Nadia Rubio
Nina Wambiji
Tanzania Research and Conservation Organization (TRCO)
Sammy Wambua
Conservation of Nature for Survival (CONASU)
RAZANAMERY Annissa Thomis
Diamondra Julie RAVAKINIAINA
Dina Anjaramalala RAJAONAH
RAVAOARIMALALA Heriniaina Marie Olivia
RAKOTOHARISOA Tantely Ny Aina
Randriamihajamanana Lalaina Larissa
Gaylek Wangchuk
Ngawang Lhendup
Rahul Chhetri
Tshering Chokey
Bay Islands Conservation Association (BICA)
Asociación Peruana para la Promoción del Desarrollo Sostenible (APRODES)
Wildlife Conservation Nepal
Humana People to People Laos
Red Panda Network
Kwetu training centre for sustainable development
Save Ghana Frogs
Aqua-Farms Organization (AFO)
Yayasan Planet Indonesia
Fundación ProPetén
Foundation Ishpingo
Agrointroductions Ghana
Conservation of Nature for Survival (CONASU)
Corporación para el Desarrollo del Medio Ambiente
Fundación Aliados
Fundesabanas Corporation
Madagasikara Voakayj
