The growing challenge of climate change is driving the need for resource-efficient solutions that support the health of communities and nature. Companies and countries worldwide are rapidly building clean energy infrastructure, including solar panels, wind turbines, and electric vehicles, and modernizing power grids to reduce pollution and limit global warming. Building out the infrastructure for a clean energy transformation requires a lot of minerals. From lithium and graphite to copper and rare earth elements, the shift to cleaner energy depends on a reliable supply of e nergy transition minerals (ETMs). While those minerals can in part be sourced through reuse and recycling, mining is needed to supply a portion of these materials.
The demand for ETMs presents both an opportunity and a challenge. How do we obtain these necessary minerals while protecting the communities, ecosystems, and biodiversity we're also trying to save? The good news is that a new report shows it's possible: The impact of mining ETMs for the renewable energy transition is considerably smaller than that of fossil fuel extraction.
© Michael Buckley / WWF-Canada
ETMs are key ingredients in the clean energy technologies we need to limit carbon emissions and other pollutants. Copper conducts electricity through high voltage transformers, power lines, and virtually any kind of electrical equipment. Lithium, graphite, and cobalt power the batteries in electric vehicles and energy storage systems. Rare earth elements create powerful magnets that wind turbines convert motion into electricity with remarkable efficiency.
As the world shifts away from burning fossil fuels for energy, demand for ETMs is growing. Historically harmful mining practices provide lessons that can inform policies, practices, and guardrails around ETM mining as it grows. For example, land use changes caused by mines and their associated infrastructure have degraded nearby landscapes, damaged habitats for plants and animals, and impacted the livelihoods of local communities. Mines generate large amounts of waste that, if poorly managed, can pollute nearby resources, and their operations can consume large amounts of water, depleting supplies for downstream communities and ecosystems. We have an opportunity with future ETM mining to do things differently and better.
Recent analysis from WWF’s Community Positive Energy Transition program delivers reason for optimism: Mining for clean energy minerals has a substantially lower impact on biodiversity than fossil fuel extraction. Only about 7% of ETM mining projects overlap with key biodiversity areas¹, areas identified as crucial to protecting the survival of global biodiversity. In contrast, oil and gas extraction pose meaningful threats to these biodiversity hotspots: Nearly one-fifth of key biodiversity areas in tropical regions worldwide contain active or potential oil and gas operations.² This finding builds on a 2023 report that found the mining footprint needed for ETMs is “far smaller than the land spared from decommissioned coal mining.”
What does this mean? Put simply, transitioning to clean energy isn't just good for the climate–it's better for nature too. Still, it is critical that industry and policymakers proactively mitigate and minimize the impacts of mining ETMs on biodiversity, ecosystems, and people.
The window for getting this right is closing quickly as renewable energy deployment, and the buildout of supporting infrastructure like transmission and energy storage, accelerates to meet growing demand. Fortunately, there are clear strategies that can reduce the impacts of mining for ETMs.
Mining should be avoided in protected and conserved areas, including key biodiversitt areas, World Heritage Sites, important wetland areas (often designated as Ramsar sites), and other conservation areas . Policymakers can leverage geospatial tools to avoid mining and other harmful activities in these sensitive areas. As our new report shows, the overlap between key biodiversity areas and ETMs is small enough that avoidance is a viable strategy that should be a first consideration for mine owners and manufacturers sourcing ETMs. Mining companies should adopt responsible mining practices that minimize environmental and community impacts, improve water use efficiency, and prioritize land restoration. Additionally, global investment in infrastructure that enables the reuse and recycling of minerals is needed. Studies have shown that a circular economy for the clean energy supply chain could supply 40% of ETMs by 2050³. Finally, innovative technologies that require fewer minerals or support lower-impact mining practices can further reduce pressure on fragile ecosystems.
Any discussion about mining must also include Indigenous peoples and local communities who live near mineral deposits. Their rights, knowledge, and well-being must be central to decisions around mine siting, planning, operations, and closure.
We are at a critical moment where the decisions we make now about sourcing ETMs will shape the future of both our climate and nature. For the energy transition to meet global climate goals, it must accelerate. While the clean energy shift will increase the need for ETMs and reduce total mineral extraction, unnecessary harms to communities and ecosystems from new mining must be avoided to ensure the transition is a success. That requires thoughtful policies, strategic investments, and cross-sector commitment to communities and environmental stewardship while building clean energy infrastructure.
This analysis is just the start of an important and needed conversation about responsible mineral sourcing. We need more research to fully understand mining's impacts, find better ways to transform decommissioned mining sites from environmental liabilities into community assets, and build stronger partnerships between industry, communities, and conservation experts.
The path to a clean energy future doesn't have to come at nature's expense. By embracing responsible methods for sourcing ETMs, we can power our future while protecting the natural world that sustains us all.
© WWF-US / Keith Arnold
[1] https://portals.iucn.org/union/sites/union/files/doc/a_global_standard_for_the_identification_of_key_biodiversity_areas_final_web.pdf
[2] https://assets.takeshape.io/17e2848c-4275-4761-9bf5-62611d9650ae/dev/6ca9a091-27b8-4bf6-a190-373f8d74cbc6/Website%20Res%20-%20Closing%20Window%20-%20Full%20Report.pdf
[3] https://iea.blob.core.windows.net/assets/3af7fda6-8fd9-46b7-bede-395f7f8f9943/RecyclingofCriticalMinerals.pdf
