In the last 10 years, 742 new species of wildlife and plants have been identified in the Congo Basin, according to WWF’s New Life in the Congo Basin: A Decade of Species Discoveries (2013–2023) report.
The report highlights the remarkable biodiversity and urgent conservation needs of one of the world’s most vital ecosystems. This includes a stunning array of new species comprising previously unknown plants, invertebrates, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals. Among these are unique orchids, new species of coffee, clawed frogs, crocodiles, electric fish, owls, spiders, turtles, and even a monkey species known locally as the "lesula."
The findings illustrate not only the richness of the Congo Basin but also the pressing need for conservation efforts to protect its fragile ecosystems. The Congo Basin is the largest carbon sink in the world, absorbing more carbon than the Amazon. It also harbors the planet’s largest tropical peatland. Spanning six countries, its rain forest provides food security and an essential lifeline for Indigenous and local populations and serves as a critical habitat for endangered species, including forest elephants and gorillas.
This latest report follows WWF’s Living Planet Report 2024 , which revealed an alarming decline in global wildlife populations, particularly in tropical regions. As the Amazon faces increasing threats including dangerous tipping points, the Congo Basin’s significance has never been greater.
© Nik Borrow
© Vincent Droissart
"I spent my early career carrying out wildlife surveys in many parts of the Congo Basin and was always astonished by its biodiversity. So this report does not come as a surprise to me but rather as a call to action," said Dr. Allard Blom, WWF vice president for African forests. "We need to do more as the Congo Basin remains one of the least researched places on the planet and urgently needs additional protection."
The report also celebrates the role of Indigenous knowledge in conservation. Indigenous communities, who have coexisted with these forests for generations, are key to preserving and understanding the region’s biodiversity. While many of the species in the report are newly described in the scientific literature, many have been familiar to local communities for generations.
"For centuries, Indigenous communities have lived in harmony with the forests. Recognizing their knowledge is integral to conservation success," said Moise Kono, Indigenous peoples coordinator for WWF-Cameroon. "It is crucial that their voices and rights are respected as stewards of this land."
WWF calls for urgent action to protect the unique and endangered biodiversity in the Congo Basin. The governments in the region have agreed to bring 30% of their land under some form of protection by 2030, and WWF is supporting them to identify these areas and effectively protect them. The existing protected areas are in dire need of effective management. Meanwhile, a recent study conducted in Gabon and the Republic of Congo revealed that a higher number of large mammals are found in logging concessions certified by the Forest Stewardship Council ® (FSC®) than in noncertified forests. Sustainability certification is therefore a proven method to protect biodiversity and create economic benefits for communities and governments.
" Our commitment to the Congo Basin is unwavering," added Jaap van der Waarde, head of conservation for the Congo Basin at WWF-International. "WWF is working alongside governments, partner organizations, local communities, and Indigenous groups to protect these ecosystems. From biomonitoring programs to FSC certification of logging concessions, our goal is ensuring that future generations experience the wonders of the Congo Basin."
