Author: Liz Georges
By the end of 2023, the US had logged 28 disasters where overall costs from each incident clocked in at more than $1 billion. This was 10 more disasters than in 2022, and 8 more than in 2021. Already in the first half of 2024 there are 15 disasters that are confirmed to have passed the $1 billion mark, which means this year is well on its way to exceed the average from the past 5 years, and potentially set another record as hurricane season ramps up. Climate change impacts are creating more opportunities for damaging storms, heat waves, droughts, flooding and other severe weather events.
From June 30 until July 30, in 2023, Phoenix, Arizona went 31 days with temperatures exceeding 110 degrees Fahrenheit. This smashed its previous record of 18 days, set in 1974. There would ultimately be 645 heat related deaths in Phoenix in 2023, also an all-time record. Many of the victims were unhoused or over 50 years old.
On February 26, 2024, a utility pole blew down in a small town just north of Amarillo, Texas, igniting what became known as the Smokehouse Creek Fire. By the time that firefighters succeeded in controlling the blaze nearly a month later, the fire had burned through more than a million acres of land in the Texas panhandle and into Oklahoma. The Smokehouse Creek Fire is now one of the largest and most devastating fires in U.S. history. Two people were killed, along with thousands of animals and livestock, as that area of the country is home to a large number of cattle ranchers. Hundreds of structures, including homes and churches, were lost. Climate change is causing wildfire season to start earlier and last longer, as rising temperatures lead to longer stretches of time where vegetation is dried out, which are ideal conditions for a wildlife to start.
After a heavy rainfall spanning much of the East Coast of the US in January 2024, much of the area close to the harbor in Portland, Maine was beset by flooding caused by record high tides. At one point, a trio of historic fishing shacks that had stood at Willard Beach in South Portland for more than 100 years succumbed to the flooding and slid into the sea. By the end of the day, the report came that the tide gauge for Portland had recorded the highest tide ever in the city, at 14.57 feet. 4 Record breaking rainfall on the west coast a few days later caused flash floods in San Diego, California, as more than a month’s worth of rain fell in a single day. 5 The city had to close its central library and police station, and hundreds had to be rescued from submerged homes and vehicles. NOAA monitors high tide flooding around the country, as sea level rise and increased rainfall caused by climate change have increased the incidence of high tide flood events.
Established by NOAA and confirmed by NASA, 2023 had the warmest average surface temperature ever recorded. And according to NOAA officials, it wasn’t even close. In 2023, earth’s average land and ocean surface temperature was 2.12°F above the averages for the 20th century. It is also the highest global average temperature since NOAA started monitoring global temperatures in 1850. The 2023 temperature beat out the next hottest year, 2016, by 0.27°F, which is also a record-breaking margin. While this does not mean that we’ve officially missed out on the 1.5°C goal of the Paris Agreement, it is deeply concerning that our planet is heating so much so quickly.
