Nate Johnson steers a small boat through the morning fog, navigating around an array of colorful buoys. The buoys are all that can be seen of his kelp farm.
A little less than four acres large, Johnson’s farm is designed for up to 15 single one-thousand-foot lines, meaning the horizontal underwater lines that hold the kelp.
Kelp is a type of seaweed grown in Maine and other northern coastal regions. Its benefits are numerous, from helping to buffer against climate change impacts to improving water quality . And, able to photosynthesize on all sides, kelp grows fast.
You probably interact with seaweed in more ways than you know. “Seaweed is an unsung hero in so many different products. Biologically, it is designed to do some pretty extreme stuff. It lives in wind, ice, and hot sun, so it lends a lot of helpful qualities to foods,” says Jaclyn Robidoux, a seaweed specialist at SeaGrant Maine. “Like preventing freezer burn or helping particles in chocolate milk stay suspended.” You can even make gummy worms using seaweed extract.
Years ago, Johnson went to the grocery store, curious to check out the seaweed products he’d heard they were selling. They were sold out. “I thought, that’s kind of interesting. Then Paul Dobbins, [seaweed farmer and now WWF’s vice president of aquaculture], gave me some kelp and my wife made kelp piccata," Johnson says. "The kids all liked it. So that was one of the catalysts for realizing that farming kelp interests me.” Now, he’s in his ninth year as a sea farmer.
“I’m gonna get a workout today,” Johnson quips as he yanks the long line of kelp onto the boat, leaning back and straining under its weight. “When you set these up to start, you can hardly see the kelp spores.” When it's full-grown, his kelp grows 10 to 15 feet in length!
The clean, brown mass of vegetation emerges from the water. “Anyone wanna try some of my profit?” he asks, handing us a long piece. “You can do a million different things with it,” he says, smiling. “This is real high-quality stuff.”
Johnson lives on nearby Long Island, a small island with a tight community of 234 year-round residents. His family has lived there for hundreds of years, now mostly lobstering for a living. But his income isn’t nearly as secure as it used to be. Lobsters are especially vulnerable to climate change, and the Gulf of Maine is warming 96% faster than the rest of the ocean. “If something happens to the lobsters, then there’s a lot of risk to my community," he says. "So that’s one of my motivating factors, trying to demonstrate something new.” Lobstering typically moves offshore during the winter, which is when kelp season starts closer to shore. That makes kelp farming “the perfect timing to complement the lobster industry.”
During harvest season, Johnson uses his father’s fishing boat to transport the seaweed. “He’s very interested in kelp, and the kids are involved too. [Seaweed] provides opportunity, so we can continue to live and work on the islands."
“It’s kind of a no-brainer,” Johnson says, as his boat nudges up against the wooden dock.
Nate Johnson Sea farmer
Paul Dobbins squeezes into a booth at Becky’s Diner, his old haunt on the far end of Portland, Maine’s Commercial Street. Dobbins and his collaborators are celebrated locally for starting Maine’s first seaweed farm.
"Raise your hand if you've brushed your teeth today," he tells the table. All hands go up. "In that case, thank a seaweed farmer.” That’s because seaweed extracts are used in many toothpastes to make them thick.
Growing up off the coast of Maine and diving for scallops to put himself through college, Dobbins never expected to continue working on the coast. “When I graduated from college, I turned to my parents and said, ‘I will never have to get in that cold crappy water ever again.’” But after working in an office for some time, “I realized that the coastal communities I grew up in were struggling. There weren’t as many fish in the sea.”
In the past, fishers would catch lobster from June through October. They would fish for cod in the winter, and in March, they’d start shrimping. Around May, the season for pogies and menhaden would begin. If times got really bad, they could clam. “But now there’s no cod, the shrimp disappeared 10 years ago, the green crabs decimated the clams, and lobsters are moving north due to warming waters,” Dobbins says. “So I was trying to think, what could communities do to help keep them going? We looked into a number of different things. It all went to seaweed and shellfish aquaculture.”
The oldest seaweed farm—in Tokyo Bay, Japan—is 354 years old. But in 2008, there were none in the US. When the opportunity to experiment with seaweed arose, Dobbins jumped. He and his partners seeded kelp on one of their mussel rafts, seeing if they could get it to grow. They converted a two-room farmhouse into a processing facility, harvested wild seaweed to determine which species worked best for different products, and learned to farm. Three years later, they had the basics down.
“The goal was that we would learn how to farm, and then we’d step back and have the fishers do it,” Dobbins says. So he and the Island Institute, a nonprofit supporting Maine’s coastal communities, approached fishers with an unusual proposition—they would get a contract for all the kelp they could grow, giving them stability in a new market. They’d also receive free seed each fall, and support throughout the process.
“One of the first guys we gave a check to was Keith Miller. I was standing down at the dock with a check for $483 for a winter’s worth of work,” Dobbins recalls. “I thought he was going to be very disappointed. Keith looked at it, didn’t say anything, and walked up the dock to where the old timers were hanging out. He said, ‘boys, this is the future.’” Twelve years later, those checks are substantially larger, helping Keith’s family and dozens of others make it through the winter. The company Dobbins started is now known as Atlantic Sea Farms.
Seaweed is the lowest input form of farming that exists. All that’s required is the sun and the ocean!
“It's the most efficient way to create vegetable biomass on the face of the earth. There’s nothing better,” says Dobbins.
If you compare an acre of broccoli to an acre of sugar kelp, for example, broccoli grows just 14 to 15 inches down in the soil and a foot or so up in the air.
Kelp reaches 10 to 40 feet below the ocean's surface. Seaweed farming is truly 3D, making it very space-efficient.
How do you scale up the seaweed industry without creating some of the problems caused by other marine industries? That’s where WWF comes in. Dobbins now heads up WWF’s seaweed work as vice president of aquaculture, where his team of experts funds efforts to advance sustainable sea farming.
The low growl of the engine of the Linda Kate , a large fishing boat, echoes across Casco Bay, a few miles off the coast of Portland, Maine. Thick morning fog hangs over the water, but the boat deck is buzzing with chatter.
Brent Nappi, a burly, bearded fisher, is at the wheel. He’s made his living on this water for over 30 years. “Mostly lobster, urchin diving, scallop, and menhaden,” he says. But the fisheries are changing. “Global warming has been affecting them a lot. You’re seeing a lot of species diminish. Kelp seems more resilient, it grows well around here.”
Nappi is working to start his own kelp farm, together with his best friend Bryan Lobell. “If it catches on up here, it’ll be good supplemental income. It could help a lot,” he says. Why kelp? “It's a beautiful industry. I like the fact that kelp is self-sustained,” says Lobell.
Nappi agrees, though the process of starting a farm has been challenging. Seaweed farming happens in “the commons”—the ocean, that is—which is not owned by any individual. In Maine, if a farm is within 1000 feet of private property, the property's owners get input. Many people don’t know what a seaweed farm looks like. As a result, they sometimes oppose new farms, unsure of what the change will mean. That’s often made the process of getting new farm leases drag on for years. Nappi says that many aspiring kelp farmers give up. “People say, ‘holy shit this is taking forever, there’s no guarantee I’m gonna get it, how long do I spend my time and money?’”
In reality, the only visible part of a kelp farm is the buoys bobbing on the water's surface, and the farms actually help to clean up the bay, absorbing nutrient runoff from fertilizer. WWF is working to educate the general public about seaweed. Metrics for success include the number of comments at public hearings supporting seaweed farms and the number of farm applications. Much of this is done by funding local organizations already engaged in the work. “One of our biggest opportunities is the number of people unfamiliar with sea farming,” says Emily Whitmore of the Maine Aquaculture Innovation Center, which has received WWF funding.
Brent Nappi Lobsterman
The goal? Make kelp buoys just as iconic to Maine's brand as lobster buoys. “It’s ok for people to see the lobstering industry because it’s become part of what they expect the ocean to look like. I think when you understand all the magic that kelp has, people will bend more toward that,” says Nappi.
One thing is for sure—Nappi loves working on the water, and he wants to keep doing it. “You’re not in an office, so that’s good. The good days are better and the bad days are worse. Bad days are when someone gets hurt, a boat catches on fire, or something like that. And good days are just nice days, like today,” he says, steering the Linda Kate through the mist, as the sun starts to peak through.
During the pandemic, Kate Weiler spent many days on the water along the coast of Maine. One day, she remembers counting 121 pieces of trash. Much of it came from fishing, such as lines, bait bags, and nets. That got her thinking—what is the best way to stop ghost gear, the plastic pollution that comes from the fishing and sea farming industries?
Now, Weiler heads up Viable Gear, a start-up working to create seaweed-based plastic replacements, specifically to replace plastics used in the ocean. The unique polymer structure of seaweed lends itself to being made into plastic alternatives.
Local sea farmers currently use plastic-based lines for their kelp. She wants seaweed farms to use seaweed-based materials. That’s not an easy task—the line needs to be compostable so it doesn’t become ghost gear, but it also has to hold up in a harsh marine environment.
Sitting in a conference room with a view of the foggy Portland harbor, Weiler slides a piece of twine across the table. It’s virtually indistinguishable from its plastic-based counterpart. And yet, it is 99.5% seaweed.
Twine is only the beginning. Her next goal is to weave the twine into bait bags for the lobster and crab industries. Seaweed-based food wrap, zip ties, and fishing line are also in the works. These uses for seaweed are not new. Until the 1930s, most of the cling wrap used to package food in Britain was actually made from seaweed. After World War 2, cheap oil led people to turn to oil-based plastic. But now, the tide is starting to shift back.
She’s received an enthusiastic response from seaweed farmers. Fishers are also interested, though some worry about the cost. To Weiler, success means making her products cost-competitive so they can be used widely. “We’re really passionate about the reduction of petroleum-based plastics in our food system. The more plastics we can stop from going into our oceans, the more microplastics we can take out of our food system,” she says. “And that is important for public health."
Kate Weiler Founder of Viable Gear
Donning a hair net, white jacket, and shoe covers, Casey Ballin, director of operations and sustainability, enters a spotlessly clean, brightly lit room in the basement of a converted warehouse. A hulking silver metal processor sits in the center, stretching for 75 feet. This is the processing facility for Atlantic Sea Farms, the company that Dobbins started. Now, it sources kelp from 40 farmers, including Nate Johnson.
The massive machine is a veggie processor adapted for kelp. The seaweed is cut—the shredder can chop 10,000 pounds per hour—then cooked at 175 degrees, and left to cool. The process takes just 7 to 8 minutes per batch. The superfood is then made into an array of products—salads, burgers, and even smoothie cubes. (Dobbins says he gave some seaweed to a local smoothie shop, and it caught on.)
The facility is humming with movement, as factory workers place tops on jars of seaweed salad in one room while researchers examine new ways of growing kelp across the hall. Atlantic Sea Farms is vertically integrated, meaning that they are involved with every step of the process, from giving the kelp spores to farmers to packaging the final products. When it arrives in the grocery store, there is full traceability of each product down to the day and location it was harvested.
Getting to this point hasn’t been easy. There was no precedent for processing kelp in the US, so figuring out the best system to do so took some experimentation. They even learned from spaghetti processing because there were similarities.
At Luke’s Lobster, a popular Maine restaurant overlooking the water, five burgers are set down on the table. They look like normal burgers but are actually made with kelp by Atlantic Sea Farms, possibly from Johnson’s farm across the bay.
There is a lot of room for growth—98% of seaweed consumed in the US is imported from six countries in the western Pacific. Atlantic Sea Farms sees this as only the beginning. “We want kelp in every aisle of the grocery store, and not just food,” Ballin says.
What does a seaweed farmer look like? When you think of someone who catches lobster for a living, a distinct image probably comes to mind. But sea farmers come from many different backgrounds.
Seaweed, in fact, is the only ocean-based industry heavily staffed by women. The diverse group of farmers is united by a collaborative culture, says Robidoux. “Because seaweed is tapping into so many diverse skill sets, there’s a sense it’s a big seaweed family here in Maine. Everyone is really excited to help each other and work together.”
Kelp is not a silver bullet. But it’s one impactful piece of the puzzle in how to create a food production system that has less impact on the earth and can feed the world’s growing population.
Plenty of challenges remain. As the climate changes, warming waters have impacted kelp, and research is still emerging. Rising temperatures could also mean new pests, such as small snails, that eat kelp. And coastal infrastructure—essential to farming and harvesting kelp—is at risk across Maine’s coast due to stronger storms and sea level rise. When supporting new farmers, Robidoux says, she encourages people to think about climate trends.
The industry is still small and needs to scale. “We need larger quantities of kelp coming to shore [to decrease cost], so we need larger leases to be approved,” Nappi says. “If you can let people get leases, you could really start ramping up. We could easily put 25,000 pounds a day on the boat. Hopefully, everyone does their job and I only gotta focus on one thing, how much kelp I can put on the boat.”
If seaweed production continues to grow at the rate it’s been growing over the past four years, it will surpass potatoes as the world’s fourth-largest cultivated crop by 2051. “Five years down the line, I want a robust, thriving industry that is a very present part of our working waterfronts,” Robidoux says.
As for her favorite food? “I love kelp salad on a hot dog. It’s the essence of summer.”
