WWF’s 2025 Connected by Nature report explores how deeply Americans value and connect with nature in their daily lives. Based on research conducted by GlobeScan on behalf of WWF, the report finds that people in the US strongly believe nature plays a vital role in their lives—shaping health, happiness, and cultural identity—and that nature urgently needs protection. | Read the full report
Time in nature is deeply valued. More than eight in 10 Americans surveyed say they like or love it, and over 92% believe being outdoors is important. People see nature as essential to health, well-being, enjoyment.
Beyond a personal connection, 73% see nature as a defining part of American life and identity. This connection transcends age, gender, region, and politics.
Q17. We’re now interested to know how you feel about nature. How much, if at all, does the statement below describe your opinion about nature?
“Nature is an essential part of America's cultural identity”
© Brian Adams / WWF-US
Americans see nature as essential to both personal and societal well-being. On an individual level, people value nature’s role in providing clean air and water, supporting physical and mental health, and offering daily enjoyment.
At a broader level, Americans recognize how nature sustains food and water systems, reduces climate change, and protects wildlife. Taken together, these perspectives emphasize nature’s critical role in nurturing and strengthening both individuals and society at large.
Q17. We’re now interested to know how you feel about nature. How much, if at all, do each of the below statements describe your opinion about nature?
“Spending time in nature is important for my health.”
Americans understand there are important benefits to protecting nature, with 77% saying nature is critical for a steady supply of food and water.
Q17. We’re now interested to know how you feel about nature. How much, if at all, do each of the below statements describe your opinion about nature?
Protecting nature is critical for a steady food and water supply Describes my opinion a lot for 28% Completely describes my opinion for 49%
Protecting nature is important to prevent natural disasters Describes my opinion a lot for 29% Completely describes my opinion for 43%
Protecting nature is important to reduce climate change Describes my opinion a lot for 26% Completely describes my opinion for 44%
Addressing threats to nature is as important as economic issues Describes my opinion a lot for 31% Completely describes my opinion for 38%
Addressing threats to nature is as important as social issues Describes my opinion a lot for 28% Completely describes my opinion for 38%
Describes my opinion a lot for 28% Completely describes my opinion for 49%
Describes my opinion a lot for 29% Completely describes my opinion for 43%
Describes my opinion a lot for 26% Completely describes my opinion for 44%
Describes my opinion a lot for 31% Completely describes my opinion for 38%
Describes my opinion a lot for 28% Completely describes my opinion for 38%
© Bruce D. Taubert
© Enrique Prunes / WWF-US
The polling revealed that Americans are deeply concerned about threats to nature, though more people see those threats as happening farther away rather than in their own backyards. For most, national and global environments are considered strained or degraded, while local nature is perceived as stable and thriving. As far as the greatest threats to nature, opinions were diverse, highlighting multiple areas of concern
Q18. There are many different potential threats to nature today. Which, if any, of these potential threats to nature concern you the most? Please select up to five that concern you most.
The polling revealed that Americans are deeply concerned about threats to nature, though more people see those threats as happening farther away rather than in their own backyards. For most, national and global environments are considered strained or degraded, while local nature is perceived as stable and thriving. As far as the greatest threats to nature, opinions were diverse, highlighting multiple areas of concern
Q18. There are many different potential threats to nature today. Which, if any, of these potential threats to nature concern you the most? Please select up to five that concern you most.
Three out of four Americans surveyed say, caring for nature is not optional. It is a responsibility shared across society that requires collective action involving individuals, communities, businesses, and government.
While many feel personally responsible and take steps to protect nature, they also expect strong leadership and urgent action from national and state governments. This balance of individual agency and government responsibility highlights the need for collective solutions to ensure nature is protected for themselves and future generations.
Q17. We’re now interested to know how you feel about nature. How much, if at all, do each of the below statements describe your opinion about nature?
“It's a civic duty to take care of nature.”
WWF’s 2025 Connected by Nature report explores how deeply Americans value and connect with nature in their daily lives.
© Michel Gunther/WWF
