One of the most common questions we receive during Earth Hour is how switching your lights off 60 minutes once a year actually helps fight climate change and address the drastic loss of diversity of life on Earth.
It’s a good question. And the answer comes down to a single word: intention.
Every effective movement starts with intentional action. The key is to find where your passion and opportunity for change align and then using that discovery to influence those around you.
Earth Hour is an excellent time to reflect on your activism goals. Maybe you use this hour to think about how you can, in the future, bring together a diverse group of people and create a space to exchange ideas and forge new connections. Maybe you spend the hour reflecting on the work you’ve done so far to protect our planet and set intentions for the coming months. A collective pause to determine where you fit into the movement—understanding how your actions add up, building bridges for others—can help strengthen and sustain the movement over time.
What actions did I take in the past year that re-solidified my commitment to fighting climate change and protecting life on Earth?
What motivates me and how can I link my passions to driving action?
What tangible steps can I take in the next month to support action? How about the next year?
Who do I know who thinks differently than me? What steps can I take to better understand their values and how they might connect to supporting climate action and protecting the planet?
How does my community advance large changes in society? And what can I do to support my community in driving change?
Intentional action will put us all on the right trajectory for a safe and just future. So while the physical act of turning off your lights doesn’t necessarily make an impact on the amount of heat-trapping greenhouse gases in our atmosphere or help keep fossil fuels in the ground, it does allow us the necessary space to reflect on and consider the actions that can lead to a healthier planet.
Learn more
