Five years ago, WWF began honoring young people in the United States who’ve made outstanding contributions to conservation with our Conservation Leadership Award . These remarkable individuals made strides in protecting biodiversity, mitigating and adapting to climate change, fighting for environmental justice, and preventing food loss and waste, among other critical issues. Winners receive $5,000 to further their academic or professional development related to conservation.
Our most recent winner, Charitie Ropati , a Yup’ik and Samoan Indigenous scientist, scholar, climate activist, and advocate for education equality, centers the voices of Indigenous people and youth in her work.
To mark the fifth anniversary of the award, we checked in on previous recipients about what they’ve been up to since they won.
Unsurprisingly, they continue to push the needle in impressive ways. Explore their recent accomplishments below.
What she’s been up to since winning
Attended the international climate change talks in Glasgow and Madrid to advocate for climate justice
Started Moonture, a sustainable jewelry brand
Received the 2023 AmeriCorps’ President’s Volunteer Service Award for her leadership in environmental justice.
Recently, Päki has been working with Data for Indigenous Justice, an Alaska Native and Womxn-Led non-profit stewarding a database for missing and murdered Indigenous womxn, girls and relatives in Alaska. She also assisted in the inaugural Alaska Native Filmmakers Intensive, aimed to expand access for Alaska Native creatives in digital media production. The 2021 session theme of “Stories for Climate Justice” encouraged participants to reflect on how they adapt to a changing climate and fight to protect the communities that they love.
You can find out more and follow along with Päki ’s work on her Instagram and Native Movement’s social media channels on Instagram , X (formerly Twitter) and LinkedIn .
What she’s been up to since winning
Conducted research with farmers for her Ph.D. dissertation in Jamaica and Hawaii
Co-founded the AYA Research Institute, an environmental justice think-tank
Collaborated with the Federation of American Scientists (FAS) on topics of US science policy.
“The creation of the Justice40 tracker and report, in collaboration with FAS and the White House Council for Environmental Quality, stands out as a landmark achievement in my career,” White said. This initiative was designed to track the US government's progress towards ensuring that 40% of the benefits from federal climate and environmental spending reach disadvantaged communities, directly addressing historical injustices and creating a more equitable future. Her contributions to this project were recognized in 2023 with the prestigious Federation of American Scientists Policy Entrepreneurship Award.
Follow along with Alexa’s work on her LinkedIn and Instagram .
What she’s been up to since winning
Launched a mini-series on PBS Terra called Sharks Unknown with Jasmin Graham in which she visits MISS members and showcases their work
Working on a collaborative project examining how the harmful algal bloom, Florida Red Tide, is impacting sharks and rays
Wrote a book titled Sharks Don't Sink: Adventures of a Rogue Shark Scientist , which will be published in July 2024
Graham has also started a working group focused on characterizing and establishing a baseline for data-deficient fisheries in five countries—the US, Sri Lanka, India, Brazil, and Nigeria. The project emphasizes inclusive conservation and directly involves fishing communities using genetics, stable isotopes, biovisualization, and scientific illustration. Integrated, Coordinated, Open, Networked Inclusive Conservation of our Oceans (ICONIC Oceans) is a collaboration between MISS members who have been working with their local fishing communities to study shark and ray populations. The project will also heavily involve early career scientists, artists, and science communicators and will take a highly interdisciplinary approach to conservation research.
Follow Jasmin’s work on X and on MISS’ Instagram .
What she’s been up to since winning
Partnered with a coalition of environmental justice organizations to successfully oppose the fast-tracking of fossil fuel projects on federal lands
Organized international campaigns on loss and damage at the international climate talks in 2022 and pushed for an equitable fossil fuel phase-out at last year’s talks
Supported the Karankawa tribe’s efforts to stop the expansion of the Enbridge pipeline and protect the Gulf Coast and Karankawa land
Last year, Leclercq received a master’s degree from the Harvard Graduate School of Education with a focus on liberatory pedagogy and using education to advance conservation and environmental justice. Her senior thesis examined how the educational system underprepares students to tackle climate change and injustices around them due to structural oppression. Her degree is deeply connected with her environmental justice education non-profit, Start:Empowerment , which has expanded its outreach efforts.
Follow along with Leclercq’s work on her Instagram .
