The plastic waste crisis can be seen and felt in all corners of the planet, affecting nature and people alike. At WWF, we're approaching this global and complex problem with holistic solutions, because we need everyone to come together—including scientists, business leaders, environmentalists, community organizers, and more—to make real impact. In our work, we've noticed an inspiring trend worth celebrating: many of those who are paving the way forward for a waste-free future are women.
We've invited some of these women leading the charge against plastic pollution to share their thoughts on the significance of this dynamic. The list we've assembled here is by no means complete. It's a snapshot of just some of the amazing women I've had the pleasure of interacting with on the journey to tackle the plastic waste crisis. There are many other women at the helm in various capacities and regions around the world, and we celebrate them all.
- Erin Simon , the head of Plastic Waste + Business at WWF
The private sector is a critical lever for catalyzing the systems-change we need in plastic production, use, and waste management. It takes decision-makers and voices that will disrupt "business-as-usual" by bringing new, bold, and ambitious actions to the table through corporate strategy, business model innovation, and investing.
Science is at the foundation of solving the plastic crisis. The more data and insight we have into the problem—from the effects on human and planetary health, to the broken systems that have caused it—the more effective our solutions will be.
Localized actions are the linchpins to widespread impact. While this environmental crisis is global in scope, we need communities to change so the world can. Whether problem-solving for targeted interventions or a civic leader or activist, the actions taken on the ground are the first step towards systems-change.
There are many moving parts to this crisis, many stakeholders and communities impacted, and many voices we need to hear. That's why it is critical to have leaders who can make technical information accessible to everyone, break down silos, and facilitate dialogues and collaboration.
