Wild tigers are top predators and critical to maintaining ecosystem balance, including keeping forests healthy by preventing overgrazing and contributing to biodiversity by maintaining balanced prey populations. For tigers to do this, they need large areas of healthy and well-connected habitat to move safely, find food, and breed.
Today tigers are found in just about 8% of the places they lived in just a couple of hundred years ago. Increasing global tiger range is critically important for restoring nature loss and must happen in a way that benefits local communities. To support an increase in wild tiger populations and ensure human-tiger coexistence, we need to secure parts of their historic range and allow tigers to return there. These rewilded spaces can support both biodiversity and people.
But how can tigers reach areas that they no longer occupy?
One way to increase tiger habitat is natural range expansion , when tigers disperse from their breeding areas to new locations. This often happens when an area reaches what is called its ‘carrying capacity’— meaning the habitat reaches the maximum number of tigers it can support due to the availability of prey , the size of the habitat, and the number of tigers that are already living there. Tigers may also move out of an area, even if the carrying capacity hasn’t been met. However, in both scenarios, tigers require good connectivity to move safely and freely through a landscape. In places where the lines between tiger habitat and human settlements blur, natural range expansion can sometimes help manage human-tiger conflict.
Another way to expand tiger range is through tiger translocations . This requires human intervention to physically move multiple tigers from one place to another, starting from an area in the wild or a science-based captive breeding program. Wild-to-wild tiger translocations are more commonly used and are the preferred method over using captive tigers.
An effective and important conservation practice, translocation is also costly and requires significant pre-planning, such as community engagement, habitat and prey restoration, and continuous animal monitoring after the release. Translocation is preferred when wild tigers can be reintroduced to a place where they once lived but are unable to move back through natural dispersal. In Kazakhstan in Central Asia, wild tigers were wiped out in the mid-20th century, largely because of targeted hunting. Though there is still healthy tiger habitat there, the nearest wild tiger population is now thousands of miles away. In 2024, two tigers were translocated to Kazakhstan from a shelter for big cats in the Netherlands. Additional tigers will be brought to Kazakhstan from a combination of accredited zoos and foreign wild populations, to re-establish this majestic carnivore to its rightful home.
WWF’s 2022 report ‘ Restoring Asia’s Roar ’ identified one million miles of additional suitable landscapes where tigers could return. Expanding tiger range is critical for the species and wider global biodiversity. The impact of range expansion goes far beyond tigers: Protected areas for this iconic big cat help restore ecosystems and connectivity, benefitting both nature and people.
More tigers in more places also supports the global goal to increase wild tiger populations. It was only in 2010 that tiger populations in the wild had dropped to their lowest number ever, plummeting from 100,000 to as few as 3,200 in just over a century. Though global wild tiger populations are slowly increasing thanks to conservation efforts (Global Tiger Forum estimates roughly 5,574 tigers in the wild as of 2023), they’re not yet out of the woods. The continued threat of poaching, loss of habitat, and potential human-wildlife conflict impact almost all wild tiger populations.
© Siddhant Umariya / WWF India
Any tiger reintroduction requires extensive pre-planning and consultation with Indigenous peoples and local communities. Top predators cannot be reintroduced to a landscape until the landscape and its people are ready to support them. It is a long-term process that relies on community support and often habitat and prey restoration before the tigers can return. People-centered tiger conservation approaches that are made in partnership with communities are critical to coexistence. Effective measures must be in place to respond to human-tiger conflict should it arise.
With community support and government help and funding, tigers can return to places they once lost, ensuring their survival in the wild for future generations.
