Our lives are fundamentally linked to nature, its forests, fresh water, and oceans. But just how much do we rely on nature and what does nature need from us in return?
63% of our medications Over half of the world’s medications are related to natural products. And further scientific breakthroughs in medications will continue to rely on nature, too. By protecting nature, we protect our health and well-being too.
50% of the air we breathe Without ocean life, we’d lose 50% of the oxygen we breathe. Marine plants and organisms, like phytoplankton and kelp, release oxygen as a byproduct of photosynthesis. That oxygen goes into the ocean but also into the atmosphere we rely on to survive.
75% of the renewable water supply Forest and mountain ecosystems are source areas for more than 75% of the world’s renewable water supply. Their freshwater systems are naturally renewed through the water cycle and are essential to our water security.
$24 trillion US dollars for the economy The blue economy —all economic activities related to oceans, seas, and coasts—is worth $24 trillion. A staggering sum that impacts the lives of millions. But declining ocean health and mismanagement of marine resources threaten the future of communities and economies that rely on oceans.
100% of rubber tires on the road Every car tire comes from natural rubber, which, of course, comes from trees. In fact, 75% of the world’s rubber is used to make tires alone . But rubber is at risk if we can’t stop rampant deforestation and forest degradation.
Over half of the world’s medications are related to natural products. And further scientific breakthroughs in medications will continue to rely on nature, too. By protecting nature, we protect our health and well-being too.
Without ocean life, we’d lose 50% of the oxygen we breathe. Marine plants and organisms, like phytoplankton and kelp, release oxygen as a byproduct of photosynthesis. That oxygen goes into the ocean but also into the atmosphere we rely on to survive.
Forest and mountain ecosystems are source areas for more than 75% of the world’s renewable water supply. Their freshwater systems are naturally renewed through the water cycle and are essential to our water security.
The blue economy —all economic activities related to oceans, seas, and coasts—is worth $24 trillion. A staggering sum that impacts the lives of millions. But declining ocean health and mismanagement of marine resources threaten the future of communities and economies that rely on oceans.
Every car tire comes from natural rubber, which, of course, comes from trees. In fact, 75% of the world’s rubber is used to make tires alone . But rubber is at risk if we can’t stop rampant deforestation and forest degradation.
© Brent Stirton / Getty Images
Our lives are fundamentally linked to nature, its forests, fresh water, and oceans. But just how much do we rely on nature and what does nature need from us in return?
73% loss of wildlife populations In the last 50 years, wildlife numbers have declined, on average, a whopping 73%. When a species population dips below a certain threshold, it can upend an entire ecosystem, not just other species, but all of the resources that habitat provides for people, too.
17% of Amazon rainforest lost The health of the Amazon is directly linked to the health of the planet. Its rainforests, holding an estimated 150–200 billion tons of carbon, help stabilize the local and global climate. Today, we’ve lost 17% of those forests to deforestation and another 17% to degradation, with negative consequences being felt around the world.
35% of mangroves destroyed Mangroves are one of nature’s greatest climate solutions , providing storm protection and powerful carbon sinks, along with food for coastal communities. Unfortunately, they’re disappearing at an alarming rate, too often cleared for industry, agriculture, or timber.
In the last 50 years, wildlife numbers have declined, on average, a whopping 73%. When a species population dips below a certain threshold, it can upend an entire ecosystem, not just other species, but all of the resources that habitat provides for people, too.
The health of the Amazon is directly linked to the health of the planet. Its rainforests, holding an estimated 150–200 billion tons of carbon, help stabilize the local and global climate. Today, we’ve lost 17% of those forests to deforestation and another 17% to degradation, with negative consequences being felt around the world.
Mangroves are one of nature’s greatest climate solutions , providing storm protection and powerful carbon sinks, along with food for coastal communities. Unfortunately, they’re disappearing at an alarming rate, too often cleared for industry, agriculture, or timber.
© WWF-US / Marlon del Aguila
The numbers don't lie. Nature needs us now, more than ever before. But Americans are united in their love of nature and commitment to protect it.
73% of Americans agree we must care for nature In a recent WWF survey , nearly three out of four Americans said that caring for nature is not optional. It is a civic duty, shared across society, that requires collective action involving individuals, communities, businesses, and government.
In a recent WWF survey , nearly three out of four Americans said that caring for nature is not optional. It is a civic duty, shared across society, that requires collective action involving individuals, communities, businesses, and government.
Each of us can take action to stop nature loss and protect what provides for us. As individuals or as part of collective efforts, we can shape a thriving future for people and nature.
Do your part to protect what you love in your daily life. Nature needs us all more than ever.
© Shutterstock / Ondrej Prosicky
