Mangroves—remarkable trees that grow along ocean coasts around the world—serve many functions for people and nature. In Fiji, their importance is unmatched. Fijian communities rely on mangroves for traditional medicine, protection from storms and rising sea levels, and preservation of the Great Sea Reef by trapping sediment that would otherwise cover corals. Mangroves also function as a nursery for fish. WWF is working to restore, protect, and improve the management of mangrove ecosystems across Fiji to benefit local communities and wildlife. Here are some of the ways we’re helping:
Most of Fiji’s population lives along the country’s many island coastlines. The ocean provides a wealth of resources to people but can also put them at risk as climate change intensifies. Building up mangrove forests helps buffer strong waves, restore eroding beaches, and reduce the impacts of sea level rise and storm surges. WWF is finding solutions to help communities adapt to climate change, including through climate-smart mangrove restoration .
In the Yasawa Island chain in the west of Fiji, strong waves have eroded the shoreline in Vuaki village. To reduce the impact of such ocean activity inshore, WWF worked with the community to plant mangroves. Since the mangroves have taken root, the community has noticed that the shoreline seems more protected, and sand has been building up along the beaches.
Historically, mangrove ecosystems have not been considered worth protecting. But the ecological functions of these systems are invaluable. Community education is an important step in raising awareness of the value and benefits of mangrove ecosystems. WWF partners with Fijian community leaders to promote the function and benefits of mangrove forests lining many of Fiji's islands.
Once communities replant mangroves, local people see first-hand that roots hold the sand together, protecting their coastline. Community members also take the lead in keeping the young mangroves healthy. This can include monitoring planting sites for trash and debris, which chokes the growth of young mangroves and can kill the plant if it’s not removed.
© WWF-Pacific / Tom Vierus
© WWF-Pacific / Tom Vierus
Perhaps the most important benefit of mangrove ecosystems is that they help sustain some of Fiji’s coastal communities, in terms livelihoods and food security. Coastal communities depend on the benefits that the trees provide for their livelihoods, whether that means crabbing among the mangrove roots or fishing in thriving coral reefs next to mangroves that act as a nursery for juvenile species and support ecosystem connectivity.
“My vision for my village is to practice conservation and sustainability of our natural resources for our future generations. What we need to do is work together,” said Emosi Ravato, Traditional Clan leader in Vuaki village, Yasawa. “If we don’t work together, then everything that we do will be in vain. We need to plant more mangroves and sustainably manage our resources to add on to the good work that has been done by WWF.”
