Above: Marina Valera Rojas, a member of the Shipibo Indigenous people of the Peruvian Amazon, part of the Maroti Shobo craftsmaker enterprise.
Indigenous handicrafts are more than beautiful pieces; they represent a culture's identity. In addition, for Indigenous women, each object allows them to express themselves and build their communities' resilience.
In the Peruvian Amazon , 130 women from the regions of Loreto, Ucayali, Pasco, and Junín, as well as from the Kukama Kukamiria, Shipibo Konibo, Yanesha, and Ashéninca Indigenous peoples, recognize the multiple benefits that handicrafts have brought to their families and communities.
"Thanks to handicrafts, we have children who are now professionals. Some of them are teachers, nurses, and official tour guides and remain in our community. Others contribute to the development of our handicrafts. Over time, we've seen the benefits," says Emma Tapullima, a Kukama Kukamiria artisan, who also highlights that handicrafts brought visibility to other related interests. "Little by little, we began participating in more spaces for dialogue and exposure, successfully communicating our needs, among them the creation of a bilingual intercultural school, which is now a reality."
For other artisans, handicraft making was the catalyst for creating a safe space for women of all ages, allowing them to unite, raise their voices, improve their self-esteem, and break down barriers. "We built an artisan house [in our community] with our own hands, and those who knew how to weave and dye taught those eager to learn. We are 75 artisans who have overcome the fear of expressing ourselves, and we now sell our products with confidence. Without even realizing it, we began to feel proud of what we've accomplished and understood that we are ambassadors of our culture," says Elizabeth Miriam, a member of the Yanesha Artisan Committee in Oxapampa.
To achieve these impactful results, a comprehensive capacity-strengthening process was essential. WWF joined the initiative in 2017, with support from partners such as the World Bank and the Eaglemere Foundation, assisting four Indigenous women-led enterprises. In addition to providing technical and commercial support, the project included acquiring equipment to enhance production, improving sales infrastructure, developing multiple commercial partnerships with ongoing support, and planting over 10,000 seedlings to restore their forests .
"We make use of seeds in handicrafts and tree bark for dyeing looms without affecting the natural regeneration or the food sources of forest animals, ensuring their conservation. The communities that have understood this still preserve their standing forests. Others are seeking to restore them to prevent further loss of their income and water sources," states Jaime Chihuanco, a Yanesha community leader. In this way, Chihuanco emphasizes that handicrafts not only promote the revitalization of culture and allow Indigenous families to live with dignity but also represent a sustainable business.
Indigenous women have found in art a safe space to express themselves, engage in conversation, share their concerns, and have a support network. Additionally, the artisan houses have become centers for revitalizing their culture and strengthening their skills. Handicraft production has helped develop female leaders who start businesses and support their families while keeping the forest standing, as their materials can only be sourced from a healthy and biodiverse forest.
