Nature is at risk. Wildlife populations are down an average of 73% in the last 50 years and 2024 is set to be the hottest year on record. Climate change, deforestation, overfishing, plastic pollution, and the illegal wildlife trade all threaten the planet’s health and biodiversity.
The good news is that we can reverse these trends and everyone can play a part. Global leaders must take action and deliver sustainable solutions. Businesses need to set high sustainability standards across their entire operations and beyond. And individuals can make decisions in our daily lives with nature in mind—from what we eat and buy to how we power our homes and travel. Together, we can decrease the human impact on the planet's resources.
Through simple, mindful actions, it’s possible to reduce your footprint and contribute to lasting solutions. We urge everyone to take a pledge for the planet and find meaningful ways to make a difference.
Rethink what you use
Monitor your electricity usage and switch to clean energy where available.
Reconsider your daily commute to work or school. Is it possible to walk, bike, carpool, or use public transportation? Each option can decrease fossil fuel use per person and helps us become more energy efficient.
Reduce food waste in your home by only purchasing what you need.
Buy sustainably
Choose products that help protect forests, like those with the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) label .
Look for seafood that comes from sustainable fishing practices, such as those with the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) label.
If possible, find products that use sustainable palm oil and feature the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSP) label.
Speak up for nature
Sign petitions like WWF’s Pledge for the Planet .
Send messages to your elected officials and ask them to make policy choices that support nature.
Be a voice for the planet: Share your ideas and actions across platforms.
Around the world, WWF works to accelerate action and implement positive solutions that address nature loss and climate change. From tackling the plastics crisis and mitigating the impacts of climate change to restoring wildlife populations, we partner with local communities, Indigenous peoples, governments, and corporations to help deliver meaningful impacts that meet our planet’s challenges and ensure its healthy future.
