In the vast expanse of the Pacific Ocean, safeguarding one of the world’s greatest treasures—the Pacific tuna—is a challenging task. These highly migratory species travel great distances across the High Seas, moving in and out of different jurisdictions. The fishing crews in pursuit of these tuna travel hundreds of miles, often spending years at a time at sea, far from their shore-based homes.
These circumstances expose these fisheries to a high risk of human rights violations and create opportunities for illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing. These abuses not only affect the sustainability of tuna fisheries and long-term ecosystem health but deprive coastal communities of the benefits of their resources and endanger human lives.
In a historic decision, The Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC)—one of five global tuna regional fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) responsible for conserving and sustainably using highly migratory fish stocks, particularly tuna, in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean—has adopted the first-ever Conservation and Management Measure on Crew Labour Standards within a tuna RFMO. This groundbreaking measure ensures enhanced protection for the welfare, safety, and rights of crew members working across the WCPFC-managed fisheries, setting a significant global precedent for labor rights in the fishing industry.
Established in 2004, the WCPFC comprises 34 member countries and territories, and seven cooperating non-members dedicated to promoting the sustainable management of the world’s largest tuna fishery. WWF and other non-governmental organizations have collaborated with RFMOs, including the WCPFC, for years to advocate for the adoption of measures that safeguard social well-being, alongside the ecological management of tuna fisheries.
"The adoption of new labor standards by the WCPFC is a landmark first step towards acknowledging the human dimension of fisheries management, enhancing sustainability, and upholding the dignity and rights of those working on fishing vessels," says Vishwanie Maharaj, Director of Tuna and International Fisheries for WWF’s oceans program. This measure is a promising start to addressing crucial concerns such as forced labor, safe working conditions, and access to communication for fishing crews and observers.
In addition to the new labor protections, the WCPFC became the last tuna RFMO to adopted Electronic Monitoring—known as EM—Minimum Standards, enabling the effective monitoring of fishing activities at sea. These electronic monitoring standards will lay the groundwork for advancing the use of electronic monitoring technologies, such as camera monitoring, across the Pacific’s tuna fisheries and are critically needed on industrial vessels not able to deploy human observers.
Adoption of electronic monitoring is a vital step for these industrial fleets to ensure that activities at sea are scientifically grounded and promote ecological management.
“The commitment to safeguarding crew welfare establishes a high standard for industry sustainability and illustrates that sustainability encompasses both resources and the people involved," says Maharaj. “Credible monitoring and reporting measures must be in place to enforce these critical ecological and social protections. WWF commends the WCPFC for adopting these standards, promoting traceability, and transparency in the industry.”
WWF will continue collaborating with the WCPFC and other RFMOs to implement and strengthen these groundbreaking industry regulations that support the long-term well-being of tuna stocks and the communities they sustain. One way we are helping is by providing guidance to governments and industry on effectively implementing electronic monitoring. This is achieved through resources published jointly with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization as part of the Common Oceans Project, funded by the Global Environment Facility .
The strides made by the WCPFC in protecting crew welfare and improving sustainable practices in tuna fisheries are not just about safeguarding marine life, but also about preserving the rights and dignity of those whose livelihoods depend on the ocean. It is through such transformative measures that we can ensure a healthier future for our oceans and the people who rely on them. Let us continue to strive for a world where conservation and social justice go hand in hand, safeguarding both our planet's biodiversity and the livelihoods of those connected to its resources.
