We all experience the presence of wild animals in our daily lives, whether it be the song of a garden bird or the fish on our plate. It’s important to pause and consider the vital role that the astonishing diversity of wild animals plays in our own survival. The new report Nature’s Technicians sheds light on these often-overlooked roles, helping us to understand how deeply interconnected we are with wildlife. From the mighty whale to the humble dung beetle, wild animals are all essential pieces of the puzzle that makes up life on Earth.
Wildlife pollinates the vast majority of trees, not to mention a variety of our food crops. They help germinate tree seeds and ensure our forests remain healthy—capable of regenerating and storing as much carbon as possible. Wide-ranging animals facilitate the flow of nutrients within and among ecosystems, sustaining industries like fisheries, and helping prevent tipping points in crucial places like the Amazon. Little critters underground—the soil engineers—bolster food production and mitigate flooding. And an array of animals, including scavengers and predators, buffer against disease.
We risk our own survival if we lose these wild species. And it is not just important that they exist—their abundance and diversity are critical. We need thriving wildlife to interact with other animals and their habitats for effective ecological benefits.
Understanding the importance of wild animal species is both fascinating and sobering. The 2024 Living Planet Report revealed a 73% average decline in wild vertebrate species since 1970. Nature’s Technicians makes it clear why these declines are devastating not only for wildlife but also for people.

These two reports couldn’t have come at a more critical time. Nations will soon convene to discuss the levels of national ambition and global resources needed to halt and reverse nature loss, including the state of wild animal species, under the Convention on Biological Diversity . This critical global treaty, which entered into force in 1993, aims to conserve the diversity of life on Earth, including how to use biodiversity sustainably and who reaps the benefits. What more of a wake-up call do we need than understanding that the decline in wild animals is more catastrophic than previously thought and that such declines could devastate our food systems, economies, and resilience to climate change?
These talks—called the 16th conference of parties of the Convention on Biological Diversity, or COP16—are a critical moment for both ambition and resources to be secured at the necessary levels to save our biodiverse planet. We have the solutions, and we have the framework for action. Let’s ensure that this international conference is remembered as the pivotal moment when we came together to set the foundations for a thriving planet—for wildlife and people alike.
Wendy Elliott is the interim leader of WWF's Biodiversity Practice and Becky Chaplin-Kramer is the global biodiversity lead scientist for WWF.
