When we hear the words “record-breaking,” we tend to get excited. Superlatives of any kind are something you notice. Who doesn’t want to be the best? We all pay attention to what stands out most.
Some records, however, should remain unbroken.
Climate change is impacting our planet faster than anyone had predicted. With storms increasing in number and severity, with temperatures rising to unsupportable levels, with more flooding and more sea level rise and saltwater encroachment, we’re seeing more and more records getting broken. But these are the kinds of record-breaking events that cost lives and livelihoods, that harm our communities and the natural resources that sustain us.
Here are a few examples, all of which are all too recent:
2023 sees the most billion-dollar disasters in a single year in the US
By the end of 2023, the US had logged 28 disasters where overall costs from each incident clocked in at more than $1 billion. 1 This was 10 more disasters than in 2022, and 8 more than in 2021. Already in the first half of 2024, there are 15 disasters that are confirmed to have passed the $1 billion mark, which means this year is well on its way to exceeding the average from the past five years, and potentially set another record as hurricane season ramps up. Climate change impacts are creating more opportunities for damaging storms, heat waves, droughts, flooding, and other severe weather events.
Phoenix AZ sees the longest heatwave in its history in summer 2023
From June 30 until July 30, 2023, Phoenix, Arizona, went 31 days with temperatures exceeding 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 2 This smashed its previous record of 18 days, set in 1974. There would ultimately be 645 heat-related deaths in Phoenix in 2023, also an all-time record. Many of the victims were unhoused or over 50 years old.
On February 26, 2024, a utility pole blew down in a small town just north of Amarillo, Texas, igniting what became known as the Smokehouse Creek Fire. By the time that firefighters succeeded in controlling the blaze nearly a month later, the fire had burned through more than a million acres of land in the Texas panhandle and into Oklahoma. The Smokehouse Creek Fire is now one of the largest and most devastating fires in US history. 3 Two people were killed, along with thousands of animals and livestock, as that area of the country is home to a large number of cattle ranchers. Hundreds of structures, including homes and churches, were lost. Climate change is causing wildfire season to start earlier and last longer, as rising temperatures lead to longer stretches of time where vegetation is dried out, which are ideal conditions for wildfires to start.
The highest tide ever recorded in Portland, Maine is logged at 14.57 feet in January 2024.
After a heavy rainfall spanning much of the East Coast of the US in January 2024, much of the area close to the harbor in Portland, Maine, was beset by flooding caused by record-high tides. At one point, a trio of historic fishing shacks that had stood at Willard Beach in South Portland for more than 100 years succumbed to the flooding and slid into the sea. By the end of the day, the report came that the tide gauge for Portland had recorded the highest tide ever in the city, at 14.57 feet. 4 Record-breaking rainfall on the west coast a few days later caused flash floods in San Diego, California, as more than a month’s worth of rain fell in a single day. 5 The city had to close its central library and police station, and hundreds had to be rescued from submerged homes and vehicles. NOAA monitors high tide flooding around the country, as sea level rise and increased rainfall caused by climate change have increased the incidence of high tide flood events.
Established by NOAA and confirmed by NASA, 2023 had the warmest average surface temperature ever recorded. And according to NOAA officials, it wasn’t even close. In 2023, Earth’s average land and ocean surface temperature was 2.12°F above the averages for the 20th century. It is also the highest global average temperature since NOAA started monitoring global temperatures in 1850. The 2023 temperature beat out the next hottest year, 2016, by 0.27°F, which is also a record-breaking margin. While this does not mean that we’ve officially missed out on the 1.5°C goal of the Paris Agreement, it is deeply concerning that our planet is heating so much so quickly.
Talk about it! The most important thing we need right now is a clear public mandate for leaders in business, government and civil society to act on climate. We do that by making our interest in climate solutions as widely known as possible. We know from the research that you are not alone in your concern. Roughly 70% of Americans are at least somewhat concerned about climate change. But we can’t fix a problem we don’t talk about.
Become more energy efficient in your daily routine. The less power that you use on a day to day basis, the less carbon pollution being generated. Change out your light bulbs for more efficient LED bulbs. Set your thermostat to run a degree or two warmer in the summer and a degree or two colder in the winter. Turn off the lights when you leave a room or when you go to bed.
Look for carbon conscious ways to travel. Whether that’s riding a bike or taking public transit, there are lots of ways to reduce the amount of carbon you use when you travel. Avoid gas-powered vehicles – if you can drive an EV or even a hybrid, it helps. Walking is of course the best of all. Advocate for walkability in your community, and for things like bike paths and more public transit.
[1] NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters (2024). https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions/ , DOI: 10.25921/stkw-7w73
[2] https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-weather/2023/09/22/extreme-heat-brought-record-breaking-summer-to-arizona/70931723007/
[3] https://www.nytimes.com/article/texas-smokehouse-creek-fire.html
[4] https://apnews.com/article/maine-fishing-shacks-destroyed-south-portland-tide-1a5d26f2d87e4af3fd8be9be57162af2
[5] https://www.sandiego.gov/insidesd/record-amount-rain-causes-widespread-flooding-city-san-diego
[6] https://www.noaa.gov/news/2023-was-worlds-warmest-year-on-record-by-far
