The scale of food waste in the US is staggering: Nearly 40% of food in the US goes uneaten and the average household loses $3,000 each year to wasted food. And the toll on nature is enormous, with food waste accounting for roughly 10% of greenhouse gas emissions; that’s four times the emissions of global airlines. Producing food that ultimately goes to waste uses enough water to fill 9 million Olympic-sized swimming pools and land the size of California and New York combined.
It's a massive problem but also a huge opportunity for all of us to take action. Though food is lost at every level of the supply chain, nearly half of all food waste occurs in our homes. That means our own everyday actions—simple steps we take now—can have a big impact on the planet.
© 06photo / Shutterstock

Push the limit of your ingredients. Are some of your produce wilting in the crisper? You can reinvigorate some veggies, like lettuce, with a quick ice water bath. Are bananas going brown? Peel them and toss them in a container in the freezer to use later for baked goods or smoothies. Overcooked leftovers, wilted, or ugly produce are all prime ingredients for hearty soups and stews.

Trust your senses on 'best before.' Most food is safe to eat a lot longer than we think—for fresh and canned goods. Most expiration dates have nothing to do with safety and, depending on the kind of item, many foods are still safe to eat days, weeks, or months after confusing "best by," "sell by," and "best before" labels. Most of the time, trust your senses to know when food has gone bad or you can search the FoodKeeper App to learn more about food freshness and storage options.

Ready, set, freeze! You can freeze almost anything—eggs, meats, produce, sauces—whether you just brought it home or already cooked it. Keep containers tight and leave a little room for liquids. Freeze in portions for easy access, and date and label so you don't forget what's what. While it's a bit of extra work upfront, freezing will save you loads of cooking, prep, and even shopping time down the line. And you'll save money if you use everything you buy.
© Shutterstock

Learn more about food's connection to nature. The better we understand where our food comes from and its impact on the planet, the easier it is to shop smarter and cook more sustainably. Explore the hidden costs of food waste .

Sign the pledge. Reducing food waste at home is easier than you might think—and even small actions can make a meaningful difference. Sign the pledge and take just one simple step to a more sustainable kitchen.
