Author: Liz Georges
Having clocked the hottest year ever in 2023, and hotter by much more than expected, people are more concerned than ever about what the future holds for us with respect to climate change. 2023 is the year that the climate change future we were long warned about arrived.
While we at WWF do not have a crystal ball, we can share with you what issues the Climate Team is monitoring, what we are expecting to see, and why it matters. Here’s our run down of what to look for as 2024 unfolds:
Good policy and policymakers remain critical to realizing our climate goals. The passage of both the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act in 2022 were major watershed moments for U.S. federal climate legislation. In many ways, federal legislation is the start of the emissions reduction journey, not the end. Resources unlocked by legislation must be appropriately allocated and utilized, while still more policy issues, particularly at the federal level, need to be addressed. The Biden Administration indicated it will be finalizing several critical regulations in early 2024 , including those related to implementation of the Inflation Reduction Act and fossil fuel power plant emissions, and issuing the long-awaited finalization of the Securities and Exchange Commission financial disclosure rule.
There is also the matter of the development of the new NDC for the United States, a process that the Biden Administration noted will solicit input from a wide range of stakeholders, including state and local governments, businesses, and other institutions. Congress will consider this year’s reauthorization of the Farm Bill, which includes several provisions that impact climate, including the fate of a near $20 billion investment in climate-smart agriculture and forestry provided by the Inflation Reduction Act. As lawmakers continue negotiations on a full five-year Farm Bill, it is necessary to ensure that this historic funding is protected and remains in climate-smart agriculture and conservation programs. This investment represents the best opportunity in decades to meet demand for programs that help farmers, ranchers and foresters sequester carbon, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and adapt to a changing climate.
