Category: Greenpeace
The following message was sent to all Greenpeace staff around the world in response to Donald Trump being named president-elect of the United States. In this trying moment, we also want to share it widely with allies and supporters because the road to a better future is one we travel together.
Dear members of the Greenpeace community,
We write this letter to you with the spirit of gratitude and solidarity—gratitude for the work that each of you do to advance our shared purpose and solidarity in the struggle against corporate greed and government impunity. In the struggle for a green peace, a just, clean, safe and sustainable future for all life on our fragile planet.
The uncertainty, turbulence, and vitriol over the past several months pale in comparison to an election outcome that has devastating implications for our individual rights and freedoms, the health of our democracy, and the future of our planet. An election that has implications not only for the U.S. but one that will be felt around the world. Indeed, the authoritarian’s playbook—which includes rollbacks on climate and environmental protections, attacks on environmental defenders and marginalized communities, and the misuse of the institutions of democracy to undermine democracy and the rule of law—is being emulated and disseminated around the world in the countries and regions where we all live and work. As an environmental and climate justice organization, we must resist attempts to roll back environmental and climate protections in place. We must lean into the intersections between climate justice and democracy protection, given the increasing attacks on freedoms of speech, assembly, and association.
We know anxiety, anger, and sadness are creeping in right now. We feel it! The path to a brighter future got a bit dimmer today but that does not mean we cannot see it anymore. We will have to work even harder and stronger together.
Our strength lies in our global network. Our strength lies in our millions of independent supporters. And our strength lies in our unwavering and uncompromising commitment to a healthy planet—a commitment that is not encumbered by government or corporate influence. We are the ones who, in times of crisis, step forward with a shared mission and values to restore balance.
In the coming weeks, we will communicate plans to both resist rollbacks and advance a progressive vision for the future. Until then, one simple lodestar could be that the clean energy revolution—which we helped to start—will continue to shine brightly. Clean energy is cheap energy, safe energy and peaceful energy. Countries, companies and States will continue to expand and invest regardless of what Trump and his fossil fuel cronies say and do!
History has shown us that progress is never easy, but it’s always possible.
Our community of hope and courage will need to shine brighter, we know it can, to help light the way.
With gratitude, Mads Christensen & Sushma Raman
Mads Christensen is Executive Director of Greenpeace International
Sushma Raman is Executive Director of Greenpeace USA
