Category: Greenpeace
Jane Fonda in New York, a Pandanus in Rongelap, and Earth Day in Luxembourg. Here are a few of our favourite images from Greenpeace work around the world this week.
🇺🇸 USA – Greenpeace USA activists unfurl a banner calling on the US government to Stop Deep Sea Mining in front of Trump Tower on 5th Avenue in New York City. This week, Trump signed an Executive Order advancing U.S. ambitions to launch deep sea mining in U.S. and international waters, appearing to bypass the International Seabed Authority (ISA), the regulatory body set up by the United Nations to protect the deep sea as the common heritage of humankind.
🇺🇸 USA – Jane Fonda talks with reporters in the Millennium Hotel outside the United Nations about the United States no-show at major multilateral negotiations to protect the environment. This comes amidst the ongoing lawsuit against Greenpeace US.
🇮🇩 Indonesia – Greenpeace Indonesia holds a peaceful action in front of the South Korean Embassy in Jakarta on as an act of solidarity with the five Greenpeace activists who remain under travel restrictions in South Korea since November 2024. The action highlighted the ongoing restrictions on civil liberties faced by the activists following their peaceful protest against the production of single-use plastics.
Greenpeace Indonesia submitted an official letter addressed to the South Korean Embassy. The letter calls for the immediate lifting of the travel bans and the prompt repatriation of the five activists to their home countries.
🇩🇪 Germany – Greenpeace supporters in Berlin hold a protest in front of the CDU party headquarters to commemorate the victims of the Rana Plaza disaster in Bangladesh. On April 24, 2013, the biggest disaster in the textile industry to date occurred. More than 1,100 people died and over 2,000 were injured in a building collapse at the Rana Plaza textile factory in Bangladesh.
The protest draws attention to serious continuing abuses in the global textile industry.
🇲🇭 Marshall Islands – 40 years since Operation Exodus — when Greenpeace responded to the call of the Rongelap community to help relocate them from their ancestral lands as the impacts of decades of contamination from US nuclear weapons testing became clearer – the Rainbow Warrior returns.
As part of the Marshall Islands ship tour, a group of Greenpeace scientists and independent radiation experts are in Rongelap to sample lagoon sediments and plants that could become food if people came back. In this image, a local Pandanus Fruit is being cut up for radiation testing on board the Rainbow Warrior.
🇩🇪 Germany – On Easter Monday, Greenpeace volunteers demonstrate with around 300 people in Büchel (Rhineland-Palatinate), the only site in Germany where US nuclear weapons are still stored. With colourful flags, banners, music and clear messages, the protest marches from the industrial estate to the main gate of the airbase, where the final rally will take place.
🇱🇺 Luxembourg – Greenpeace Luxembourg, CELL, Action Solidarité Tiers-Monde (ASTM) and Kliko – de Klima Kollektiv took on the streets of Luxembourg to celebrate Earth Day and to call on our political leaders to take action for the climate. Before the march, the organisations gathered in front of the Ministery to create signs together and share testimonies from people affected by the climate crisis. The march was also followed by a symbolic ceremony with objects and testimonies related to climate disasters.
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
To see more Greenpeace Photo and Video, please visit our Media Library .
