Category: Social and Economic Systems
Plastic is polluting every corner of the planet: studies suggest it has found its way to the deepest parts of our oceans, into the snow of the Antarctic , and deep inside our bodies’ essential organs . While drag artists may sometimes use plastic as part of their costumes and performances, they are becoming increasingly vocal about the plastic industry’s intrusion into our lives – and bodies!
According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the demand for plastics doubled in the last 20 years – and is expected to triple by 205 0 . More and more , things we use everyday are being made out of plastic, and are of such poor quality that we become trapped in an endless cycle of having to dispose of and replace these deceptively “cheap” items, like fast-fashion . Many communities, including the drag community, have been particularly impacted by the rising costs associated with sustainable alternatives or non-plastic options.
Drag artists have long been boisterous social justice advocates and allies. They are at the forefront of challenging social norms , and are largely responsible for the visibility that our community has today. Despite facing blockages to economic opportunities because of prejudice , the drag community has historically been a safe haven for displaced queer people worldwide, promoting inclusivity and fostering a sense of belonging.
Apart from the obvious impact plastic has on our environment and health, being a product of fossil fuels makes plastic a contributor to a worsening climate crisis – which disproportionately impacts vulnerable communities like LGBTQIA2S+ people due to social stigma and lack of access to resources to cope with climate impacts.
It’s clear that we need decision-makers to take drastic action at the next round of Global Plastics Treaty negotiations to deliver a strong treaty that drastically cuts plastic production… It’s time for plastic to “sachet away”. Here are four drag artists standing against plastic, and other environmental abuse:

This fierce activist and Greenpeace ally went viral online after producing short-form outdoors activism content on social media, while in drag. Pattie Gonia’s activism focuses on the impact of the climate crisis on the LGBTQIA2S+ community, and their access to the natural environment. Earlier this year, she met with lawmakers, urging the Biden administration to protect old-growth forests . In her recent collaboration with Greenpeace International, she called out the fossil fuels industry for lobbying against a Global Plastics Treaty, while highlighting the impact of microplastics, which ordinary people keep ingesting.

Luke Rudman is a performance artist from Port Elizabeth, South Africa, who regularly works with Greenpeace Africa to raise awareness about plastic pollution . Rudman creates sculptural and elaborate costumes out of plastic waste, which he pairs with surreal make-up and body paints to form fully realised, conceptual pieces of living artwork: plastic monsters!
“I think it is important for anti-plastic-pollution campaigns to represent all of the complexities of the issue, to represent that plastic pollution is as much of a socio-economic issue as it is an environmental issue,” Rudman said.

The Chicago-based drag queen (also known as Melisser Elliott) not only advocates for environment protection, but also helps raise money for homeless members of the LGBTQIA2S+ community (who are one of the most vulnerable groups to climate impacts). Ludes is author of The Vegan Girl’s Guide to Life: Cruelty Free Crafts, Recipes, Beauty Secrets and More . They have been very vocal on the negative impact of fast fashion.
“I know Temu and Shein are cheap, but are we just all choosing to ignore that they are contributing to the rapid destruction of our planet? I know it’s fun to get new trinkets all the time, but you can also do that by going to thrift stores instead of creating more waste,” Ludes posted on social media .

Drag Race UK contestant Scaredy Kat is a performance artist who gained popularity on the show for having a girlfriend, who is a drag artist too! While Kat’s activism focuses mainly on ending animal cruelty, they’ve previously pointed out the environmental impact of plastic – most notably in their 2020 song Gasoline , where they sing:
“Gotta realise that not all is what it’s meant to be,
Because there’s shit on the screen and plastic in the sea,
I said I’m picking up from where J left off,
I got phlegm in my throat that makes me wanna cough.”
We demand an ambitious and strong global plastics treaty that will cut plastic production and end single-use plastic. A strong Global Plastics Treaty will keep oil and gas in the ground and stop big polluters with their relentless plastic production. A strong Plastics Treaty will deliver a cleaner, safer planet for us and for future generations.
