Category: Nature
It’s about time the Detox campaign officially landed on the stylish streets of one of the world’s most high profile fashion centres.
Here in Italy we are celebrating the latest Detox commitment, announced today by the Benetton Group, which owns brands such as Sisley, Playlife and most famously, the United Colors of Benetton.
It’s commitment to eliminate all releases of hazardous chemicals throughout its entire global supply chain and products by 2020 comes hot on the heels of similar announcements from Zara, Mango, Esprit and Levi’s, who responded to waves of pressure from activists and consumers around the world calling for fashion without pollution.
Meanwhile, some of its competitors in the fashion industry – including Calvin Klein, GAP and G-Star Raw – are looking increasingly out of touch now that 13 of the world’s top high street fashion brands have committed to clean up their act.
And wouldn’t it be fabulous if more big fashion houses in Milan and elsewhere caught on to the Detox trend? That’s what we’re working for and would like to see: more binding and serious commitments from other major companies in a country where fashion is a national passion, and from other major brands from around the world.
Help make toxic-free fashion a trend to last the seasons
We know that big brands such as Victoria’s Secret, GAP and Calvin Klein spend a huge amount of time watching what is being said about their brand online, as well as monitoring what their competitors are up to.
Today, Benetton threw down the gauntlet to the fashion industry to develop and use non-hazardous alternatives to the toxic chemicals that are in widespread use in the sector today. You too can use your voice to send these brands a signal by getting our video, Detox Fashion, on as many screens as possible.
Every time you like, share, comment on, or promote this video, it increases the pressure on these companies to change their ways: to stop poisoning rivers in the countries where their products are made, and to stop shipping hazardous chemicals all over the world in their clothes.
A toxic-free world is possible. Together we can help create it.
Chiara Campione is a campaigner in Greenpeace Italy
