Category: Greenpeace
Floods, deforestation, fires, typhoons and extreme heat. The photographs depicting these climate and biodiversity catastrophes are not fake or AI-generated. But despite every challenge thrown in our faces, hope and strength prevail. The people’s resilience is motivating thousands and thousands of others across the world to join hands towards a greener future.
The Swiss Senior Women for Climate Protection as well as four individual plaintiffs have brought an action against Switzerland before the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) for pursuing an inadequate climate policy and thus violating its human rights. here
Spain isn’t alone—devastating floods swept across multiple regions this year, displacing communities and endangering lives.
Greenpeace Philippines, together with Young Earth Savers, Koalisyon Isalbar ti Pintas ti La Union, Dalumpinas Oeste Eco Rangers, San Juan Resort Restaurant Hotel Association Inc., and communities in La Union, unfurl a giant banner on the shorelines of Urbiztondo, La Union, with a bold message to world leaders to “END PLASTIC NOW.”
Markus Mauthe’s Galapagos Trip for his worldwide project The Climate Turning Points. Underwater images, a swarm of black striped salema, Pinzon Island.
The Greenpeace sailboat Witness is conducting the Protect The Amazon Coast Expedition to document the potential impacts of oil exploration on the Amazon coast. The region is home to unique biodiversity, including the Great Amazon Reef System and vast mangroves, which are essential to local communities in terms of food and income.
An extent of damages brought by super typhoon Man-yi in Dipaculao township, Aurora province in northeastern Philippines, four days after the devastating super typhoon ‘Pepito’ (international name: Man-yi). The super typhoon made its second landfall to this town causing massive landslides that isolated three other towns in Aurora province.
Greenpeace Brazil was in Mato Grosso do Sul, in the southern part of the Pantanal, to document the impacts of the fires that ravage the biome on its biodiversity and on people’s lives.
A Greenpeace investigation in the North Pacific and the Emperor Seamounts was carried out by a team of researchers on board the Rainbow Warrior, into distant water fishing fleets.
Singer-songwriters Jacob Collier and AURORA join forces for the first time to perform a mash-up of their two songs, ‘A Rock Somewhere’ and ‘The Seed’ in front of Sveabreen Glacier in Svalbard. The creative performance was delivered in partnership with Greenpeace International from the organisation’s ship Arctic Sunrise and aims to highlight the urgent need to protect the oceans and stop deep sea mining.
A man wades through a flooded street in Milaor in Naga City. Several towns in Camarines Sur are still submerged in water brought by severe tropical storm Kristine (international name: Trami).
A powerful and diverse assembly of voices from around the globe gathered in front of the Peace Palace in the Netherlands to demand climate justice. As the International Court of Justice prepares to begin its hearings on climate change and its impacts on human rights for current and future generations, this peaceful demonstration sets the stage for these historic discussions.
