Category: Greenpeace
In this series of articles, we are shining a spotlight on the photographers responsible for some of the most iconic images from Greenpeace global campaigns.
All images @ Marizilda Cruppe / Greenpeace
Back in 2009, before I was assigned for my first Greenpeace campaign I was interviewed by phone (yes, this used to happen, people talked on the phone) by John Novis, head of photography at Greenpeace International for over three decades.
As I was a staff photographer for a major Brazilian newspaper, he assumed that I was able to cover the story, but he focused on asking me technical questions about overflight photography. Even now with a big range of drones available, photographing the Amazon from an airplane is still necessary, as there are spots only reachable from the air.
Photographers need to work together with the research team and the pilot to precisely capture the selected locations. They cross-reference GPS and camera data to be sure that the image corresponds to the precise coordinates. Photographers need to deal with their gear, the team and the pilot instructions and with personal health stuff. I was lucky to be born with a body that does not suffer from motion sickness while flying, so I can comfortably do my job - there are many people that feel uncomfortable with the manoeuvres the pilot needs to do to put the plane in the position that provides the best angle for the photo.

This photo was shot in 2017 and since then has been used thousands of times by Greenpeace, media outlets, school textbooks and universities courses all over the world. It is still reguarly being requested for publication, almost a decade after taking it.
During a flyover for the Protect the Amazon Coral Reef campaign, we were lucky to see a Pororoca (a word from the indigenous Tupi language that means ‘boom’) that occurs where river waters meet the sea. This example was captured on the border of French Guiana with the Brazilian state of Amapá.
This aerial image of an illegal mining site was made possible by the skill of pilot Fernando Bezerra, who flew in a smooth ascending spiral over the location, so that I could use a 50mm lens and capture the scene without distortions from a wide angle lens.
Graciela Encizo and her daughter Sophie were photographed in November 2012, in her village El Salto, Jalisco, Mexico.
They were fighting against industrial facilities in the area who were discharging toxic waste into the Santiago River.
Carmen Hernandez Flores and her son José de Jesus Rodrigues Hernandez were photographed at Hospital Civil de Guadalajara, where the boy was admitted nine days before this photo was taken for treatment for impaired kidney function. His disease was so severe that a kidney transplant was considered at that time the only solution.
The Encizos believe the boy's disease was related to the high levels of pollution in the river.
In 2022, Greenpeace returned to the Antarctic Peninsula with scientists Susanne Lockhart and Rachel Downey for a series of dives in a two-person submersible to explore the seafloor and document the unique wildlife found there in order to strengthen the call for an Antarctic Ocean Sanctuary.
"When I was offered the opportunity to join Greenpeace on board their Arctic Sunrise ship for an expedition to document the Antarctic Ocean floor, I was excited for several reasons: the opportunity to know a little more of the vastness of Antarctica, and to have the opportunity to follow the field work of two female scientists, and to finally leave the quarantine, since we were in the middle of the Covid pandemic.
Brazil (and the rest of the world) was going through a political moment in which science was being denied, so being able to contribute to scientific dissemination through my work was comforting at that moment. Before boarding the ship, we had to spend three weeks in quarantine, alone in a hotel room with meals left outside our door three times a day.
When I finally boarded the Sunrise, took my mask off, and was able to see everyone's faces and smiles, and hug the crew members I knew from previous assignments, it was a wonderful feeling of being in a bubble where life was the same as before the pandemic."

Portrait of life onboard Greenpeace ships

I met Usnea in 2018 during a Greenpeace campaign in Brazil to protect the Amazon's coral reefs. I was lucky to share a cabin with Usnea onboard the ship Esperanza. Usnea welcomed me with a big smile, explained everything and made me feel at home. The crew worked hard in this campaign and we hardly saw each other in the cabin.
I was the onboard photographer for this expedition, and was allowed to be close to the operations. As a photojournalist with an eye on the human side of the stories I am covering, I noticed Usnea’s discreet but almost omnipresent involvement at critical moments of the operations, during their shifts on the bridge and night patrols around the ship, helping the photo and video team do their job safely, dressing the small injuries of our colleagues when needed and, in their few free hours, working out to keep remain strong and ready for the work, or calmly knitting in the ships lounge.
I tried to get a little into the routine of this character, who was praised for their professional skills and sense of responsibility by the operations coordinator, the captain and first officer, their crewmates, and everybody on board the ship.

The cherry on the cake was the arrival of Usnea's twin brother, a carpenter, who would be doing some repair work on board the ship. I photographed Usnea anxiously awaiting Silas' arrival at the Belém do Pará dock, and running to greet him with a huge hug...
During a ship tour, it is traditional to give a presentation to the crew of the images taken while on board.
In addition to the general photos, I did a presentation just about Usnea. Some time later, they sent me a message saying that they had shown it to their family and that they were finally able to understand what Usnea's job was on the ship.
Portraits from the First Indigenous Women's March, Brasilia, 2019

"Before the First Indigenous Women's March took place in Brasilia in 2019, I suggested to the head of the Greenpeace Amazon campaign in Brazil that we tried to photograph at least one representative of each of the Indigenous groups present at the march.
I hung a black cloth as a background and shot the portraits with natural light. Even in this improvised way, we managed to photograph 84 women, and learn from them about their own experiences and why the First Indigenous Women's March was so important to their communities.
I have a personal goal that is photograph a representative of every Indigenous group in attendance at the march, at least 130 individual groups."
Pictured: Glicéria Tupinambá, a native of the Tupinambá de Olivença Indigenous Land in the Northeastern state of Bahia. She is actively involved in issues related to education and women's rights.

Federal Deputy for Minas Gerais, Célia Xakriabá defends the agendas of traditional peoples, education, the environment and culture.
Sonia Guajajara, leader of the Guajajara people from Maranhão, currently Minister of Indigenous Peoples, a ministry created in the Lula 3 government.
I remember meeting John Novis (former head of photography at Greenpeace International) while in line at the talks by the World Press Photo winners in 2010. That year a Greenpeace-commissioned photographer had been a finalist. John and I greeted each other with that nod of the head that is common among people who don't know each other. When I read the name on his badge I introduced myself, and it was then he realised I was the person he had commissioned for the first time a year earlier! And that was the beginning of a long and fruitful collaboration with Greenpeace over more than a decade.
Before being asked to put together a selection of images for this series, I've never had the chance to have a look at my collaboration with Greenpeace as a whole body of work since the first assignment until today.
I'm enjoying it because I have no regrets. We fought a lot, we did our jobs. If the world is how it is, at least we tried to prevent getting to this point.

A huge thanks to Marizilda for this incredible selection of images and contribution to Greenpeace campaigning of work over the years.
You can find more of Marizilda's work at her website, and for more Greenpeace photography, please visit our Media Library
