Category: Social and Economic Systems
Imagine the feeling of being disconnected, even when you are surrounded by others. Loneliness has become a serious issue in our society, and it has emerged as a significant global public health concern .
We talked about this with Amanda Costa , climate activist and Director of Perifa Sustentável , in the new episode of SystemShift, a podcast by Greenpeace International that explores how we can move from a world that serves the economy to an economy that works for people and the planet.
Our crowded but isolating cities have become a clear manifestation of a system that prioritises profit, consumption, and individualism. Add polarisation, constant bad news, increasing conflict, and climate anxiety, it’s easy to feel hopeless. “Despite living right next to one another and seemingly being in a community, people still feel a sense of isolation and hopelessness,” said Yewande Omotoso, the podcast co-host. If 60% of humanity will live in cities by 2030 , this problem is nothing but growing, right? However, cities have also been the birthplace of powerful social movements throughout history. From community gardens or shared public spaces, to thousands of women demanding equality in the city centres and neighbours in peripheries resisting extreme weather events.
They all start with people coming together, breaking down isolation and creating a sense of purpose, while driving real change in the making.
That is precisely why collective work and community-driven solutions often work: because, unlike top-down approaches, they actively centre, advocate and involve people’s needs, perspective, and active work.
In the podcast, Amanda also explains how urban communities are linked with climate action, and why joining them with people you share some values and a common purpose can bring hope. People come together as a form to resist social inequalities and climate hazards. That’s the case of informal settlements, usually on the periphery of cities – such as the Favelas in Brazil, where 73% of the population is black .
The inhabitants of favelas defend their basic right to stay and thrive by using their collective power. As a result, they develop an invaluable sense of belonging and create strong solidarity networks that allow them to share knowledge, resources, and mutual support. It’s not romanticising inequality, but acknowledging the lived experience of millions of people who transform their territories together.
These are some concrete steps to advocate for climate and social justice while bringing hope that you can take:
Listen or watch the new episode of the SystemShift podcast – which inspired this blog post!
Check out your local community or do a quick search online for social or environmental groups
Attend a community event or initiative in your area
Consider volunteering for a cause you care about in a local group or organisation. It could be Greenpeace or any other you like!
Set up or join a protest or other types of civic activities in your city or town
Maybe you can’t or don’t feel comfortable doing any of this. In that case, try doing your own community-building activity, at your own pace.
Loneliness and hopelessness are tough, but you are not alone in feeling this way. By joining local initiatives and working together, we can create stronger communities—and bring #SystemShift too.
