Category: Greenpeace
A selection of images from Greenpeace photographers around the world this week. Comment below and let us know which one is your favourite!
🇿🇦 South Africa – As G20 Finance Ministers meet in Cape Town, South Africa, Greenpeace activists take a stand for tax justice, demanding that the super-rich pay their fair share. With bold messages and unwavering determination, they are making sure world leaders cannot ignore the truth.
The G20 presidency emphasises Ubuntu – ‘I am because you are’ – a philosophy of interconnectedness, solidarity, and equality. Now, it’s time for leaders to uphold these values and create a fairer system that works for everyone, not just the elite few.
🇵🇹 Portugal – The Arctic Sunrise arrives into Lisbon on the Tagus River for the presentation of the new Greenpeace office in Portugal.
🇮🇩 Indonesia – Residents from haze-affected areas in South Sumatra participated in the 853rd Kamisan action in front of the Presidential Palace, Jakarta. They came to fight cases of haze that have repeatedly occurred due to forest and peatland fires, which have taken away the right to a clean and healthy environment and air, and to sue three timber companies suspected of causing the haze in South Sumatra.
🇧🇪 Belgium – In this collaboration between Greenpeace Belgium and choreographer Pierre Bastin, a group of 15 modern dancers, using radiant light umbrellas designed to mimic the movements of graceful octopuses, transport you into the heart of the deep sea. Each performance highlights the ocean’s vital role in sustaining life on Earth and the urgent need to protect it. The dancers take you on a journey of reflection. Inviting visitors to cherish and preserve our blue planet.
🇺🇸 USA – Greenpeace’s Zach Norris takes part in the Oak Flat Run 2025 in Arizona to support the Apache Stronghold to protect Oak Flat as a sacred site of the Apache Nation. Greenpeace representatives marched and ran with Apache Stronghold to protect Oak Flat, demonstrating that Greenpeace will not be silent and we continue to stand for indigenous sovereignty.
🇮🇩 Indonesia – Residents from haze-affected areas in South Sumatra, accompanied by Greenpeace Indonesia and Pantau Gambut representatives, meet with Indonesia’s Human Rights Minister in Jakarta, Indonesia.
🇺🇸 USA – Greenpeace USA brought their message to the streets of Washington, DC, with an ad truck around the city to highlight the growing threat to free speech and peaceful protest. The truck messages come just days before Dallas-based Energy Transfer’s $300 million lawsuit against Greenpeace USA and Greenpeace International is set to go to trial. The February 24th trial represents a blatant attempt to silence dissent and intimidate those who fight for climate justice.
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
To see more Greenpeace Photo and Video, please visit our Media Library
