Category: Nature
Cabo Pulmo is an underwater paradise. The national park, on the east coast of Mexico’s Baja California Peninsula, is home to one of the world’s most important coral reefs that provide refuge to iconic marine species, like whale sharks, manta rays, and sea turtles.
Cabo Pulmo is an incredible example of marine conservation in action. It became a National Park in 1995, after many years of campaigning from local communities, who fought to protect the area against overfishing and irresponsible tourism. Since then, fish populations have increased by more than 400% and many of its notable species, like whale sharks, have returned.
Unfortunately, this UNESCO World Heritage Site is now once again in the crosshairs of greedy corporations that want to exploit the area’s natural marine and terrestrial beauty for profit. Over the years, several real estate and tourism companies have tried but failed.
Back in 2008, Hansa Urbana tried to develop a new tourist complex, Cabo Cortés, in an area bordering Cabo Pulmo. The project’s wastewater discharge, as well as oil from tourist boats, and the high demand for drinking water, to name a few issues, would have had a devastating impact on the reef and its marine life.
Local communities worked tirelessly alongside organisations, including Greenpeace Mexico, to pressure the government to cancel Cabo Cortés. Over 220,000 citizens signed the Greenpeace petition to stop this destructive project. Finally, in 2012, Mexican President Felipe Calderón’s government listened to the voices of the people and cancelled the plans. This momentous victory demonstrates the impact of people power in defending ocean sanctuaries.
Corporate greed is once again threatening to destroy Cabo Pulmo and its abundance of biodiversity. Two new projects, La Abundancia and Baja Bay Club, want to transform nearly 700 hectares of land surrounding Cabo Pulmo into enormous hotels, golf courses, villas, beach clubs, shopping centres, and a desalination plant.
In the last days of outgoing Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador’s administration, the local representation of the Secretariat of Environment and Natural Resources (SEMARNAT) approved both projects. SAMARNAT fully ignored the National Commission of Protected Natural Areas’ (CONANP) warnings that these projects are incompatible with the conservation of the Cabo Pulmo National Park.
If these projects move forward, the consequences will be devastating for Cabo Pulmo’s marine ecosystems and local communities:
The habitat of unique marine and terrestrial species will be destroyed.
Water and soil will be polluted, putting the health of the reef and the biodiversity of the area at risk.
Local water resources will be impacted, affecting local communities and the biodiversity that depend on them.
Mexico’s carbon footprint will be increased by the projects, contradicting the country’s environmental commitments.
Biodiversity loss will increase due to the destruction of the unique habitat in the Punta Arena area, putting endangered marine species, like coastal birds and nesting sea turtles at risk.
Ocean sanctuaries, like Cabo Pulmo, are specifically successful at protecting biodiversity, ensuring ecosystem recovery and benefiting local communities. We need to protect at least 30% of the oceans from destructive human activities, like overfishing and exploitative tourism, with a network of marine sanctuaries. This will be a great step towards the recovery of ocean ecosystems and for the well-being and balance of our entire planet.
Greenpeace Mexico in coalition with local and national organisations are demanding that SEMARNAT revoke these projects’ authorisations to protect the invaluable National Park from real estate and tourist exploitation that threatens its existence. CEMDA has already taken legal action, requesting SEMARNAT review both projects’ authorisation.
People power protected Cabo Pulmo once, and together we can do it again. Raise your voice to protect Cabo Pulmo by signing the petition https://act.gp/3UR2UcG
