Category: Social and Economic Systems
With the SystemShift podcast, we explore how to move from a world that serves the economy to an economy that serves people and the planet.
Season three debuted with an episode titled Would the World Change if We Taxed the Super-Rich? in line with the peaceful demonstrations by Greenpeace activists at the World Economic Forum and the increasing global demand to #TaxTheSuperRich. Now, the new season of the SystemShift is now fully available.
Here are five reasons why you should watch or listen to the SystemShift podcast:
Season three takes accessibility very seriously. For the first time, all episodes are available on video on Greenpeace International’s YouTube channel , allowing listeners and viewers alike to access the show.
All episodes are subtitled in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, German, Indonesian, Korean, Portuguese, and Spanish, widening access further to deaf and non-English-speaking audiences.
Additionally, all episode transcripts can be found and read on the Greenpeace International website , along with a blog post that recaps each episode.
“It’s impossible to talk about environmental injustice without talking about race injustice”, said young Brazilian activist Amanda Costa in the second episode .
Following seasons 1 and 2, the new episodes of SystemShift spotlight different global perspectives with an intersectional approach, exploring the links between the climate and environmental crises and current social and economic issues, from the role of billionaires and democracy to housing, AI and public transport.
Throughout the season, episodes expose clear connections between climate change and taxes , mental health , democracy , access to jobs , people of colour , religion , gender inequality , and the cost of living .
The new season includes topics, hosts, and guests representing five continents.
To start, environmental justice technologist Joycelyn Longdon and novelist Yewande Omotoso now join long-time host and former politician Carl Schlyter.
Across the season, hosts have insightful conversations with diverse academics, activists and experts: Amanda Costa , Chenai Mukumba , Lali Riascos , Mateus Fernandes , Nala Amirah , Nishant Singh, Rhoda Boateng , Dr Rumman Chowdhury , and Tariq Al-Olaimy .
Each episode begins with people’s ideas. In total, 4,657 listeners from around the world took part by sharing their thoughts and opinions on Greenpeace International’s social media.
Finally, the new season was produced by Crowd Network. This independent podcast network also developed Greenpeace UK’s Oceans: Life Under Water podcast, which won the Bronze Climate Award at the 2024 British Podcast Awards.
All new episodes maintain the first two seasons’ focus on making ideas and tools for driving change available and tangible.
This new season brings together solid stories, testimonies and facts that help listeners discover that system change is not only urgent but possible and even already available.
Shifting the system may sound overwhelming. That is why, by the end of all episodes, hosts share tangible ideas, tools and actions that most people can easily put into practice.
And many others are tuning in and recommending it!
Watch and listen to SystemShift podcast, now fully available on Apple Podcasts , Spotify , YouTube or any other platform you use.
