Category: Nature
You smell it first – the smell of recently splintered trees is so strong that it hits me long before I reach the logging site. The tree stumps are still sticky with resin. A few hours ago this was a lush forest with trees that had stood tall for over a hundred years. Now it is a barren wasteland.
It’s heartbreaking, because I know that just one tree can be home to so much other life; insects, birds, mushrooms, lichen. It will take a long time for this place to become a living ecosystem again.
Go here right away if you want to give a voice to all of the creatures of the forest. Or read on if you want to know who’s responsible for the mess that I’m standing in.
The producer of Tempo is Essity. This Swedish tissue and paper giant could play a key role in stopping the destruction of the Great Northern Forest, in Sweden, Finland, Russia and elsewhere across this green crown of the planet. Essity is sourcing pulp from companies that are continuing to expand their logging operations into critical areas of forests that are vital for biodiversity.
Read about it in the Greenpeace International report here .
Where I’m from in Sweden, most of the forested land has been clearcut and turned into industrial tree plantations. That’s a major problem for most forest species because they simply cannot survive in these plantations. Since the last remaining areas of old-growth forests are small and scattered, there is an urgent need to protect these, for the many precious species of plant, insect, and even some animals, that depend on them for their survival. This is not only happening in Sweden. It’s happening across the rest of the Great Northern Forest including in Finland and Russia, where Essity also sources it pulp.
Companies like Essity – the world’s second largest tissue producer – have a responsibility to ensure their suppliers don’t expand their logging operations into the last remaining critical forest landscapes.
You can act now by asking them to clean up their global supply chain and we will deliver your demands straight to the CEO himself.
It’s not that difficult, really. Essity can protect life in the forest and still make toilet paper. Forestry can take place outside the critical forest landscapes that need protection. More tissue can be produced from recycled paper and recovered fibre.
It’s your business how you use your toilet paper – but it’s everybody’s business how Essity produces it.
Tell Essity to stop wiping away the Great Northern Forest!
Lina Burnelius is a forest campaigner with Greenpeace Nordic.
