Category: Social and Economic Systems
Reading climate books is one of the most accessible ways to better understand what’s going on with our planet and to learn how to help protect it. As 2024 was the hottest year ever recorded worldwide , the demand for urgent climate action should be louder than ever. Here are 5 books for your 2025 reading list that can help empower you to help fight the climate crisis:
Highly acclaimed novelist Amitav Ghosh explores the roles of literature, history, and politics in a time of climate change in The Great Derangement. He discusses that contemporary literature nowadays is not truly connected with our nature world, so it leads to the lack of awareness and engagement with the climate crisis conversations. He then traces the link between capitalism and carbon emissions in the chapters that follow. Though Ghosh admits that it’s too late for us to avoid impacts of the current global climate, he’s optimistic that the younger generation will be able to rediscover the connection with other beings and be able to transcend the isolation in which humanity was entrapped.
Edited by policy expert and marine biologist Ayana Elizabeth Johnson, and writer and climate activist Katharine K. Wilkinson, All We Can Save is an eye-opening anthology of essays and poems written by a diverse group of inspiring women with different backgrounds and different roles who are at the forefront of the climate movement. This book addresses many things that went wrong: the leaders who have been more focused on power and profit over people and our planet, the disproportionate impacts to the marginalized communities, and the exclusion of women in a systemic patriarchal power. On the other hand, the anthology maintains a tone of sheer determination, encouraging us that we must still be courageous and hopeful. Solutions to the climate crisis are already there. It’s time for all of us to collectively, immediately step up.
Using humor can be a good idea to understand climate change better, especially for those who are not really familiar with the subject. This is what environmental researcher and comedian Matt Winning does through Hot Mess . The reason behind his book is not because our burning planet situation is laughable, but it aims to keep the readers entertained when learning about this difficult issue. Winning also calls out the fossil fuel industry and the wealthy to take the responsibility for causing global warming and its worsening effects, while highlighting the importance of pushing policy makers to change the systems.
Right Here Right Now contains interesting perspectives from Natalie Isaacs who admitted that she was once apolitical and disengaged from any climate issues, then years later decided to get more involved in the climate movement. She then established 1 Million Women , a community that seeks to unite and empower women around the world to fight climate change. Throughout her book, she raises points how women can take bold actions and lead the way in the climate emergency. The author’s personal experience makes this book feel inclusive for everyone, whether you have been involved in climate activism for so long or you have just signed up to this topic for the very first time.
With beautiful illustrations by Jackie Morris and introduction by actress Emma Thompson, Letters to the Earth encourages people to reflect on human relationship with nature, and to act against the climate crisis who has been a threat to millions of lives. This book is a heartwarming collection of letters to our Earth, written by climate activists, scientists, politicians, parents, and yes, children as well.
