Category: Energy
Throughout the year, Greenpeace was able to capture incredible moments that show the courageous spirit and determination of the many activists and volunteers who took action for people and the planet even in the midst of a raging pandemic. We saw climate activists stepping up and challenging world leaders to take drastic and bolder measures to address the climate emergency with even greater urgency especially as 2021 saw extreme weather shatter records globally . Some activists also took it upon themselves to document and bear witness to the worsening impacts of climate change in their part of the world. These images are a testament to their remarkable strength and conviction to create a positive change and speak truth to power.
We would like to thank each and everyone who took part and supported Greenpeace this year- from our fearless volunteers, donors and cyber activists, to our incredibly brave photographers and videographers who captured these stunning images. The photos below are only snippets, with many more available in the Greenpeace Media Library .
Greenpeace France activists paint a plane green to denounce the French government’s greenwashing on the topic of air transportation.
Taking on the French minister of transportation Jean-Baptiste Djebbari at his word, they demonstrate how green planes are not the solution to solve air traffic’s impact on climate.
A total of 300 illuminated drones were used to create the displays, making it one of the largest drone shows ever produced in the UK. The drone formations were up to 250ft (76m) in height and 400ft (122m) in length.
Greenpeace activists demonstrated against the weak climate policy of the Grand Coalition at the lignite-fired power plant Neurath in Germany. They projected the portraits of 31 politicians and the slogan “We prevented climate protection” onto a cooling tower of the power plant.
Indigenous People and activists used 1,296 signs to symbolically demarcate Brasília as an Indigenous Land, in a protest against the government’s refusal on demarcating Indigenous Lands. The signs were placed in front of the National Congress and carried the names of all Indigenous Lands in the country, including the 530 that haven’t even begun being demarcated.
Over 5,000 Indigenous leaderships from all over Brazil gather in Brasília from August 22-27 in the Struggle for Life camp, for a week of activities, mobilizations, actions and meetings. The Indigenous People have long struggled for their constitutional rights, for their lands to be free and healthy, for the demarcation and exclusive usage of their lands, for their culture and for the future.
Greenpeace Indonesia activists installed a giant “oligarchy monster” during an action at the parliament building in Jakarta. The activity was done to mark the first year since the problematic Omnibus Law on Job Creation (UU Cipta Kerja) was ratified. Many signs and symbols around the octopus-shaped monster show how the oligarchy monster latches onto numerous dimensions and aspects of citizens’ lives: energy, agriculture, freedom of speech, the lives of indigenous peoples, as well as the weakening of the Corruption Eradication Commission (KPK).
Greenpeace Spain carried out an action with activists from 18 different nationalities, from onboard the ship MY Esperanza and inflatable boats. The activists blocked the entrance of Sagunto port to prevent the Merchant vessel loaded with liquefied fossil gas from entering. They also painted “No + Gas” on the side of the ship.
The Greenpeace Arctic Sunrise sailed near the site of a gas rig, which sank almost a year ago, located on the bottom of the sea in the Croatian Adriatic. Greenpeace activists unfolded a 23 meter-long banner saying “Clean up your mess – stop fossil gas”. Greenpeace CEE demanded authorities to urgently address the issue of outdated fossil fuel infrastructure and the risk of methane leakage during fossil gas extraction which substantially contributes to the climate crisis.
Activists with Greenpeace US, Oil & Gas Action Network and Regenerating Paradise gathered at a burn scar site in the North Complex Fire urging Governor Newsom to take immediate action to phase out fossil fuels and end neighbourhood drilling.
During the opening of the COP26, 200 women gathered at Mt Yasur, an active volcano on the island of Tanna in Vanuatu. The women held signs calling for climate justice in the Pacific.
Offset Taskforce was hit by protests at COP26.
Greenpeace Executive Director challenged Carney’s task force at the greenwash event.
Activists across the world took part in the Global Day of Action for COP26, calling on their governments and world leaders to stop failing us on the climate crisis.
Greenpeace activists raised a banner reading “NOT FOR SALE” against the iconic giant globe at the centre of the COP26 conference hall in Glasgow, as talks entered their final hours.
This came just days after a landmark climate study warned the earth is on track for 2.4 degrees of warming and three months after the UN’s IPCC report signalled a “code red for humanity”.
