Category: Social and Economic Systems
News of smallholder farmers across Kenya standing up to unconstitutional laws prohibiting them from sharing, exchanging or selling uncertified and unregistered seeds is but the latest legal battle on the African continent aiming to protect the rights of local communities and customs.
This is a prime example of agricultural legislation which punishes ordinary citizens and smallholder farmers, and favours big multinational corporations. As the cost of living skyrockets, greedy corporations are profiting from hunger . The global food system is broken. But, activists and local communities are not taking it laying down – not in Kenya, nor elsewhere on the continent.
Here are three African activists who are pushing back to protect the right of African communities to continue our culture and traditions around food, as well as our right to food security.
Nasike is an environmental scientist who campaigns mainly on food and seed sovereignty within the African region. She currently leads the Seed is Sovereign campaign at Greenpeace Africa, a project that seeks to safeguard farming communities from exploitation by exposing neo-colonialist attempts that threaten seed sovereignty, local livelihoods and food sovereignty. The campaign is currently supporting smallholder farmers who have taken Kenya’s government to court for passing a punitive seed law that criminalises farmers from selling and sharing seeds that are unregistered and uncertified. This legislation , punishes offenders with a prison sentence of up to a maximum of 2 years or a fine of up to KES 1,000,000.
Darcise Dolorès is an award-winning Environmental Law student from Soa, Center Region, Cameroon. She is also an active member of the Greenpeace Africa volunteer group in Yaoundé, the nation’s capital. Based at the University of Yaoundé II, her studies draw on the landmark South African rooibos case on access and benefit sharing, which proved Indigenous Peoples’ ownership over their native plant wherever the plant or product made up of the plant is found. She hopes to use this legal victory to protect the access and benefit sharing of palm oil; essential to Indigenous Peoples’ culture in Cameroon, used in traditional dishes and ceremonies, as well as medicinally.
Delwyn is a well-known social justice activist based in Durban, South Africa. He has worked closely with Greenpeace Africa for many years, coordinating the organisation’s volunteer base in his city. The Environmental Management graduate also founded the Food Connect Durban campaign. Food Connect is all about connecting communities around sustainable food that is grown locally for a healthy body and mind, a healthy planet, and a healthy future for all – from the seed to the plate. The project seeks to maintain varieties of seeds, by collecting and saving heirloom seeds, for use in growing systems for the direct benefit of a community. It is aligned to that of the ‘ Global Movement for Seed Freedom ” and the “ Climate Justice Charter Movement “.
