Category: Social and Economic Systems
The future of the oceans is being decided this week at the United Nations, where governments are negotiating a new Global Ocean Treaty. The outcome will determine the fate of our blue planet for centuries to come.
We need our oceans. They keep our planet habitable. They provide sustenance and livelihoods for billions, and are home to so much of our planet’s biodiversity.
But they are in crisis. From industrial fishing to deep sea mining, the oceans face so many threats. Thankfully, more than 100 governments have joined scientists in supporting the solution; protecting at least 30% of the oceans by 2030, the 30×30 target, to give them space to recover .
This is impossible without a strong new Treaty.
Currently, there is no way for governments to protect the high seas, waters outside national jurisdictions. A strong Treaty would fix this by enabling the creation of vast ocean sanctuaries, off limits to destructive human activities.
The need for action is urgent. Governments first discussed a new Treaty almost two decades ago. While they’ve talked, the ocean crisis has deepened. Countless species and habitats have been destroyed or lost.
A strong Treaty would provide hope for the future of the oceans, and for the billions of people who depend on them.
A weak Treaty, or any further delay, would make 30×30 practically impossible. This would be a slap in the face for all those who have put faith in political leaders actually keeping their promises.
Over 5 million people have joined us to call for action to protect the oceans and deliver a strong Treaty.
Now it’s up to delegates to protect the oceans. Time truly is running out. The world is watching. The future is watching.
Signed by: Rosanna Arquette, Actor and Activist Hayley Atwell, Actor Alec Baldwin, Actor and Activist Javier Bardem, Actor Carlos Bardem, Actor Lily Cole, Model Fearne Cotton, Presenter Laura Dern, Actor and Activist David de Rothschild, Explorer Shepard Fairey, Artist and Activist Hugh Fearnley Whittingstall, Chef Jane Fonda, Actor and Activist Silvia Frey, KYMA Sea Conservation & Research Stephen Fry, Actor Álvaro Longoria, Film Director and Activist Robert Lindsay, Actor Joanna Lumley, Actor and Activist Will McCallum, Head of Oceans, Greenpeace UK Adam McKay, Writer, Director, Producer Helen Mirren, Actor Arizona Muse, Model Cornelia Nauen, Mundus Maris – Sciences and Arts for Sustainability Vicki Nichols Goldstein, Inland Ocean Coalition NOMA, Model and Activist Farah Obaidullah, Women4Oceans Lillian Ono, Climate justice activist Chris Packham, Presenter Piper Perabo, Actor Michael Palin, Actor Grag Queen, Singer and Activist Inde Relph and Sally Ranney, Co-founders, GlobalChoices Mark Rylance, Actor Susan Sarandon, Actor and Activist Andrew Sharpless, Oceana, CEO Alex Smolinsky, SharkProject International, President Alejandro Sanz, Singer Andrew Sharpless, Oceana, CEO Gustaf Skarsgård, actor and environmentalist Alex Smolinsky, SharkProject International, President Brett Sommermeyer, Law of the Wild, Legal Director Alison Sudol, Singer, Actress and Activist Masahiro Takemoto, Diver and Environmentalist Ted Turner, Founding Member, Ocean Elders Amber Valletta, Model and Activist Shailene Woodley, Actor and Oceans Advocate Bonnie Wright, Filmmaker and Author Sindhu Vee Daisuke Yosumi, Author and Naturalist
