Category: Energy
On 31 July, people in more than 25 cities are publicly holding the oil industry accountable for causing climate anxiety, climate breakdown, climate disaster, and climate emergency in communities around the world. From the Philippines to Greece, from Russia to Brazil and from Canada to New Zealand people are rising because they have been harmed by oil industry or to show solidarity with those already harmed.
Here are some of the posters that are now circulating in reclaimed bus shelters and on walls outside and inside public spaces.
The photos used in the posters (with the exception of oil spill images) represent generic images of what climate change is predicted to bring: more and more severe forest fires, rainfall becoming more extreme, hurricanes and cyclones becoming more intense with increased rainfall and extreme temperatures becoming more frequent.







When it comes to oil spills there is data of 10.000 spills by oil tankers in 2018 alone . Information about which company is responsible for each is not readily available. We hold the industry at large responsible for this neglect.
These posters spread from New Zealand to Brazil make a link between the historic culpability of global oil companies as polluters and their current actions to lobby and block climate policy that continue to add fuel to the fire of climate breakdown. While scientists are still very cautious about linking single events to climate breakdown, it is known that climate change does make extreme weather more frequent and more intense. That’s why we need to be the generation that ends oil. Join us .
Want to learn more?
This map by Carbon Brief has brought together studies that help attribute extreme weather events to climate change. These videos provides a good summary on why hurricanes are getting wetter (VOX) because of climate change and heatwaves are getting more extreme (CBS). The scientific yearly reports from BAMS are a good resource to understand some of the complexities behind weather events and climate breakdown.


