Category: Ships
Youth voices from the Middle East, Africa and beyond must be heard at COP27.
A few weeks ago, more than 400 youth climate leaders came together in Tunisia to work together and share skills and experiences to strengthen the climate movement. Right now, some of them are sailing on board the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior in Egypt to highlight the need for climate justice for the Global South .
Countries from the Middle East, Africa, and beyond are among the most vulnerable to climate impacts , experiencing droughts, floods, famine, and soaring temperatures as well as desertification and rising sea levels.
Meanwhile, rich countries bearing historical responsibility for the climate crisis are not providing the financial support needed in efforts to address the unavoidable impacts of climate change that countries cannot adapt to .

The young climate leaders taking part in this United for Climate Justice ship tour have one goal in mind: delivering a message of hope , solidarity and solutions ahead of COP27.
Every little twig that has created the collective concept of this nest we call home is disappearing. We are connected to every human that ever stepped foot on this planet, that ever spoke, that ever shed a tear. We are being asked to love humanity and keep it alive.
That’s all this is: devotion to the billions of stories that got us here. I am supporting the United for Climate Justice ship tour to learn from the many people who are working hard to help us live more sustainable lives so that we are able to collectively preserve our home.”
The climate crisis is impacting millions around the world unequally and catastrophically threatening future generations. Young climate leaders from the Global South and beyond are working tirelessly for environmental justice.
At COP27, world leaders must heed their words. Protecting the right of future generations to a dignified life means transitioning away from fossil fuels and delivering climate justice.

Nouhad Awwad is a Greenpeace MENA campaigner on board the United for Climate Justice ship tour .
