Category: Greenpeace
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to its core values of bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
Here are a few recent pictures from Greenpeace photographers around the world.
A Greenpeace paraglider activist flies near the Neptun Deep drilling platform in Constanta, Romania, holding a banner reading ‘Stop Fossil Gas’.
Firefighters mop up hot spots near the major communications towers on Mount Wilson, used by law enforcement agencies, LAX radars, television and radio broadcasting, that were threatened by the flames of the deadly Eaton Fire on January 9, 2025 near Altadena, California.
Homes that were destroyed in the Eaton Fire are left in the dark of night on January 12, 2025 in Altadena, California.
Volunteers bring water to give to people who remained in a few of the houses left among the thousands that burned the Eaton Fire. Residents were concerned they would not be allowed to return if they were to leave their devastated neighborhoods on January 12, 2025 in Altadena, California.
In this image from 2017, Greenpeace activists deploy a banner on a construction crane near the White House reading ‘RESIST’ on the fifth day of Donald Trump’s first term in office.
During incumbent chancellor Olaf Scholz’ election campaign appearance at the Jovel Music Hall in Münster, the local Greenpeace group reminds the SPD (Social Democratic Party) not to forget the S for Social in their party name.
Greenpeace Belgium and Greenpeace Poland activists greeted guests at an event inaugurating the Polish presidency of the Council of the European Union in Brussels with an urgent call for EU governments to accelerate ratification of the Global Ocean Treaty.
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
To see more Greenpeace Photo and Video, please visit our Media Library .
