Category: Nature
BBNJ, UN Ocean Conference, CCAMLR and OSPAR. You probably want to click away already. But please stay. This is more important than you might think.
These weird acronyms are the names of regular meetings that discuss the fate of our blue planet. And soon, Norway will be hosting another conference called ‘Our Ocean’. But isn’t this just one in a million? Why should we give a sh*t about this specific conference?
Empty Promises = Empty Oceans
On 23-24 October, political and business leaders are meeting in Oslo to talk about the future of our oceans at the ‘Our Ocean’ conference . This is an event for governments, corporations and NGOs to discuss what needs to be done to protect the ocean. But all too often it amounts to baby steps and empty words. That’s not the scale of action we need to meet the existential threats facing the ocean.
This time, we’re demanding more than empty promises. We are calling on governments to step forward and commit to fighting for a strong Global Ocean Treaty that will allow us to protect at least 30% of the global oceans by 2030.
The conference is hosted by Norway – a country that is in NoWay doing all they can to solve the crisis our blue planet is facing. Of course they still want to look good, and hosting this conference is one of the ways they try to do that. But our oceans don’t need leaders to look good, they need real solutions and concrete action.
We need to protect at least 30% of the oceans by 2030
Scientists say that to allow marine life to recover from the threats they’re facing and to help avoid the worst effects of the climate breakdown, we need to put at least a third of our oceans off-limits to harmful human activities by 2030. Right now, governments are negotiating a Global Ocean Treaty at the UN that could do just that – if they get it right. There have already been three rounds of negotiations, but they are not agreeing fast enough or showing enough ambition.
Now that ministers, royals, government officials, businesses and organisations have gathered for this ‘Our Ocean’ conference, let’s remind them: we need to protect the oceans. Our lives depend on it.
Let the past inspire the future
Last year, the UK made a commitment at the UN General Assembly to actively support trebling current targets to ensure that 30% of the ocean is designated as an ocean sanctuary, or ‘Marine Protected Area’ by 2030. Since then, their initiative has created a Global Ocean Alliance , and other governments are starting to join.
Now we expect these countries to take the lead on securing a strong Global Ocean Treaty that can actually make effectively protected ocean sanctuaries real all around the world. This is what the level of ambition needs to be.
You have the chance to disrupt a PR-stunt
We don’t want the Norwegian Prime Minister, Erna Solberg, to use this international conference to spin positive PR around her government’s “ocean work”, and continue building the myth that Norway are ocean champions, while lobbying against a strong Global Ocean Treaty.
Help us bust this myth and drive Norway to take real action for our oceans: go to Twitter and give our blue planet the voice it deserves! Hopefully that can push Norway to actually DO something for the oceans – thanks to you.
If all politicians do is talk, we need to push them forward to act. Keep an eye on conferences and events like these. Dare to question your government representatives. Dare to believe the future can be better. We care and we know you do too. Now we need to make our leaders care. So, what do you say? Join us and remind world leaders to protect the oceans.
Emina Serbic is a digital campaigner with Greenpeace Nordic
