Category: Greenpeace
From a demonstration in Mexico to a plastic picnic in Jakarta, to a climbing action in Scotland, UK, here are a few of our favourite images from Greenpeace’s work around the world this week.
🇮🇩 Indonesia – An inspiring initiative introducing reuse protocols in public spaces. From package-free meals to creative zero-waste workshops, this event became a hub for learning and community gathering, uniting people who envision a city free from plastic pollution. The event aimed to promote efforts to end plastic pollution by reducing single-use plastic production, promoting reuse solutions, and improving waste management using a waste hierarchy approach.
🇬🇧 United Kingdom – An international team of Greenpeace activists abseil from Scotland’s Forth Road Bridge to block an INEOS tanker from delivering its cargo of fracked American gas to the Grangemouth petrochemical facility. The Greenpeace protest is aimed at chemicals giant INEOS, owned by billionaire Sir Jim Ratcliffe, which is opposing efforts by UN Member States to secure a Global Plastics Treaty to curb plastic pollution. INEOS is the UK’s biggest plastics manufacturer, producing pellets daily at its Grangemouth plant – enough to make 60 million plastic bottles.
🇲🇽 Mexico Greenpeace Mexico went this morning to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (SRE) to make a strong call for Mexico to maintain an ambitious position during the next round of negotiations of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) for a global treaty on plastic pollution, or Global Plastics Treaty. These discussions, which will take place from August 5 to 14 of this year in Geneva, Switzerland, are key for Mexico, through the SRE, to continue promoting the protection of the oceans.
Through a peaceful protest, the organization delivered a document containing 90,000 signatures of people who have raised their voices in favor of a Plastics Treaty that is capable of solving the problem of plastics throughout their life cycle, including single-use plastics and the damage they cause to ecosystems and human health.
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
To see more Greenpeace photos and videos, please visit our Media Library .
