Category: Greenpeace
A selection of images from the last week of January 2025 from Greenpeace photographers around the world. Comment below to tell us your favourites!
🇬🇧 U.K. – Activists outside the Royal Courts of Justice in London Demonstrate for the Right to Protest. Greenpeace UK, Friends of the Earth and other organisations join forces outside the Royal Courts of Justice to show their support for 16 Just Stop Oil activists who are appealing against their sentences which total 41 years in prison for peaceful protest. The outcome of this critical legal appeal could have far-reaching implications for the future of all peaceful protest in the UK.
🇦🇹 Austria – Sampling water for microplastics at Hallstädter Glacier. The results of the microplastic analyses show that of the five the glaciers where sampling took place, all are contaminated with microplastics. Thirteen different types of plastics were identified, some of which were extremely specialised.
🇱🇰 Sri Lanka – Protect the Oceans campaign activity with giant octopus and banners at Lotus Tower in Colombo.
🇵🇹 Portugal – Positive example of a private protected area with regenerative agriculture and livestock in Alentejo. Greenpeace has documented some examples of good and bad environmental practices on the occasion of the opening of its new office in Portugal in February 2025.
🇬🇧 U.K. – Activists outside the Royal Courts of Justice demonstrate for the Right to Protest.
🇸🇪 Sweden – Greenpeace activists have hidden three valuable works of art by Sami artist Britta Marakatt-Labba, along with hidden live streaming cameras, in forests on Ohredahke Sami community land to prevent valuable forest areas from being logged by SCA.
🇩🇪 Germany – Greenpeace campaigner Dr Julios Kontchou takes samples of sea foam on north German island Sylt, to have them tested for PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances) – the so-called ‘forever chemicals’.
🇰🇷 South Korea – Hettie Geenan, captain of the Greenpeace ship the Rainbow Warrior, pictured on the ship’s bridge in South Korea. Hettie, along with four other activists, are still in South Korea and unable to go home after being detained for a peaceful protest against plastic production in November 2024.
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to its core values of bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
To see more Greenpeace Photo and Video, please visit our Media Library .
