Category: Greenpeace
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to its core values of bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
Here are a few recent pictures from Greenpeace photographers around the world.
To see more Greenpeace Photo and Video, please visit our Media Library
Firefighters battle the Eaton Fire on January 8, 2025 in Altadena, California. Powerful Santa Ana winds pushed the fire across more than 10,000 acres in less than 24 hours. At least 1,000 structures have burned and 70,000 people are forced from their homes in the Los Angeles area as multiple dangerous wildfires continue to erupt.
The poppy bee (Osmia papveris or Hoplitis Papaveris) is a wild solitary leaf-cutting bee that lines its nest with pieces petals from the common poppy (Palaver rheas). Bundledinto small packages these pieces are brought to the nest and unfolded carefully to line its sandy walls.
A petition that has been signed by more than 1,640,108 people is handed in at the UK Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs in London, asking Steve Reed, Secretary of State for Environment, to enforce a total ban on bee killing pesticides.
Australia’s deepest female freediver, Amber Bourke, swimming gracefully with bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops) in the deep blue waters, 600 metres deep and located 15 kilometres off Lord Howe Island, Australia.
Greenpeace Germany organises a demonstration bus to call on the incoming government to secure the ‘Deutschlandticket’ – an affordable annual ticket to all public transport in Germany. The side of the red double-decker bus reads ‘More buses and trains’
Large banner that reads ‘Stop Woodside’s Drill’ in Sydney CBD, Australia, outside of Tanya Plibersek’s office. Last week the Western Australian Government approved Woodside’s North West Shelf project extension—a part of its monstrous Burrup Hub. Woodside has plans to drill up to 50 gas wells at Scott Reef, home to endangered species, including pygmy blue whales and endangered dusky sea snakes.
Residents of Bilangbilangan and Batasan Islands in the Philippines, with support of local government units and Greenpeace have installed solar panels and charging stations to strengthen their climate response capabilities and transition away from fossil fuel dependence.
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
To see more Greenpeace Photo and Video, please visit our Media Library .
