Category: Energy
As we witness the increasing impacts of climate and biodiversity emergencies around the world, the call for urgent climate action is now. Extreme weather events demand too much of our strength and resilience, forcing us to question how we will maintain our hope and courage towards pursuing climate justice.
But through the joys and creativity of animation, Greenpeace has been telling the stories of our planet, the climate and environmental crisis, and how people, young and old, can get involved in taking action for a better, greener and more sustainable world.
Did you know that the oldest seabird is an albatross named Wisdom? She is 72 years old and has many scary longliner stories to tell in this award-winning animated series.
My Pet Footprint is an animation series that casts a light on the deceit and greed that endangers civilization. Through comedy and satire, Bella and her companion Betty travel through time in this comedy eco-adventure. Greenpeace East Asia partnered with Wit and Wisdom , a team of world-class illustrators & animators , to redefine how we talk about climate change.
Set in the deep waters of the ocean, Into the deep is a one-minute film showing the journey of mother and calf humpback whales as they migrate across the globe. They face many challenges in the oceans, including overfishing/ghost fishing nets, noise, vessel strikes, and plastic pollution, which needs to be addressed by a global effort to push biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction (BBNJ) in effect and build ocean sanctuaries, so that we can “protect at least 30% of oceans before 2030”.
Curated by the Greenpeace Oceans are Life team in Beijing, this animation seeks to amplify the problems facing the oceans. The oceans are connected, and all countries must cooperate to help to create the protected areas.
How do we get children involved in the climate movement? Lina and the Rainbow Friends will tag them along and show them how there are different environmental threats to our planet and biodiversity.
Urban October is a month long series of activities and events which explore how creating safe, clean, resilient cities can improve the lives of millions of people, and the health of our planet.⁣
To celebrate World Habitat Day last year, Greenpeace Indonesia released a series on different themes. Nature does not end where cities begin , extreme weather events and communities transforming cities , Cities bring people together, communities bring them to life ,
These animations highlight that nature doesn’t end where cities begin. Nature blooms in the air we breathe, the water we drink, the singing of birds, the green spaces that surround us, and the communities that thrive together. Cities are a vital part of nurturing and protecting nature.⁣
Safina Okumu is a content editor with Greenpeace International.
