Category: Greenpeace
From powerful images from the red carpet at the Cannes film festival to Cologne, here are a few of our favourite images from Greenpeace’s work around the world this week.
🇺🇸 Texas – A portrait of Dallas Indigenous dancer Desi in front of the Reunion Tower after a powerful sunset shoot capturing movement, regalia, and song as symbols of resistance and cultural strength.
🇩🇪 Germany—In cooperation with Bianca Heinicke, Greenpeace activists transformed an Edeka store in Cologne into a pigsty to protest against Edeka’s branded meat from farms that do not respect animal welfare. The activists cover the supermarket with photos of one of the company’s suppliers from North Rhine-Westphalia. Photos of injured, sick, immobile or dead pigs from 10 fattening stables had been handed to Greenpeace. Half of the stables supply Germany’s largest supermarket retailer Edek.
🇫🇷 France – Greenpeace France deployed limestone boulders at the bottom of the Golf of Lion Marine Park, off the coast of Occitania. Transported aboard the Arctic Sunrise, the boulders, each weighing one to two tons, are being placed in a grid pattern to prevent bottom trawling. With this action, Greenpeace aims to denounce the French government’s inaction and calls on it to commit to banning bottom trawling in all marine protected areas by the upcoming UNOC summit in June 2025.
🇫🇷 Cannes —Greenpeace India partnered with two Indian influencers, Juhi Vyas and Mohini Sharma, to step into the spotlight in solidarity. Their appearance at the Cannes Film Festival 2025 was more than a fashion moment. It was a statement about climate justice , heatwaves , plastic pollution , and the urgent need to protect our oceans by ratifying the Global Oceans Treaty .
Greenpeace has been a pioneer of photo activism for more than 50 years, and remains committed to bearing witness and exposing environmental injustice through the images we capture.
To see more Greenpeace Photo and Video, please visit our Media Library .
