Category: Social and Economic Systems
Across the world, right now, billionaires, oligarchs, and corporations are using their wealth to silence dissent, undo decades of social and environmental progress, and manipulate the game in their favour. In the first 100 days of his second term, President Trump has actively dismantled and weakened environmental protection and gone after those who fight to protect our nature and climate, with relentless attacks on democratic institutions and public protections, putting corporate profits and power for him and his billionaire friends ahead of people and planet and our future.
The Trump administration has not only left the Paris Climate agreement and offered Alaskan wilderness to oil drilling . He has also opened up pristine and protected marine ecosystems in the Pacific to industrial fishing and wants to launch deep sea mining in US and International waters . And while he exempted oil and gas products from the universal tariff earlier in April, he has ended investments in clean energy and instead boosted coal, oil and gas by weakening regulations and removing obstacles to the fossil fuel industry. [1]

Trump’s biggest allies are a handful of billionaires, and the fossil fuel companies who are knowingly burning the planet, polluting our waters, and hurting families and communities around the world. These corporate bullies will stop at nothing to keep their oil and gas empire alive – even weaponising the legal system to crush dissent and silence environmental activism. A key weapon being used by the oligarchy against those advocating for a green, just future is SLAPP lawsuits, like the one waged against Greenpeace in the US and Greenpeace International by the fossil fuel pipeline giant Energy Transfer – a company headed by billionaire and Trump donor Kelcy Warren. In a deeply disappointing verdict, a US jury found Greenpeace International and Greenpeace in the US liable for over $660 million to Energy Transfer . For the billionaires and big oil companies, this is not about the money. They simply want to silence the uncomfortable truth: their business models are the root cause of climate change and environmental destruction. Make no mistake: this is a direct attack on our rights and freedoms, on the climate movement and peaceful protest. But we will fight back. Our supporters and allies number in the millions, and fight environmental polluters in every corner of the world. Neither a fossil fuel company nor any other corporate bully will silence us. 100 days have gone by. The next 100 days are time for action: it is time to resist Trump and his billionaire bullies. Will you join us?
1. Learn more about the some of the other climate destroying actions Trump has taken in his first 100 Days.
Daniel Bengtsson is the Head of Communications for Greenpeace Nordic.
