We all know how important each country or region’s local context is in terms of our individual rights as human beings.
Elena Makurina is Head of the Visual Solutions team at Greenpeace Russia .
This blog was translated from Russian by Anastasia Nikitinskaya, Volunteer Unit Head Greenpeace Russia.
I am 42, and I remember all kinds of different times. In a short period of time in the 90s, Russia was trying to redefine itself. Then there was more hope and more freedom for people like me.
But since the beginning of 2000s, the situation has been getting worse, both laws-wise and in terms of the society’s general attitude towards gay people. At the moment our basic rights are not being respected: we can be fired from our jobs, we don’t have the right to marry who we love, and even our right to speak openly about ourselves is questioned. In some parts of Russia, the mere rumour of you being gay might lead to arrests and physical harm.
Pride for us here in Russia is still about fighting for your rights and justice. Having to fight for equality offline is out of the question – even without the pandemic, pride parades are not allowed in Russia. But despite all of the horrible things 2020 has brought to us, it also introduced us to a new norm of communication, and consequently has allowed us to unite digitally.
This year we – a group of LGBTQ+ and allied staff members – have initiated and held a digital Pride month at Greenpeace Russia. We aimed to become more visible at least within our office, to make sure our colleagues learn more about LGBTQ+ and, of course, to celebrate Pride and equality. Each week of June, we offered colleagues to take part in fun challenges and read selected articles. We watched and discussed LGBTQ+ themed movies and TV-shows together. We also created a bunch of visual materials to brighten up this month, such as rainbow photo frames, email signatures, and ZOOM background images, so that everyone had the ability to show solidarity and support.
We continue to believe that this is the only way to build trust and achieve a deep understanding of Greenpeace’s Diversity and Inclusion principles, starting with an internal communication amongst colleagues. Only in a safe, accepting, loving and transparent environment we can work effectively from day to day, knowing that you have the right people by your side.
Greenpeace works in different parts of the world, including those that are not so gay-friendly. That is why it is so important that we support each other. And that is also why I am so happy that our bright rainbow flag, made by Greenpeace Russia’s visuals team, flies proudly in Greenpeace International social media .
We will continue to do what we can do, because we are who we are, and nothing will change that. Greenpeace has taught us not to give up and draw strength from each brand new day, from each challenge we face, and from the hearts of those who share our values, understand and support us.
Peace and love, and greetings to all the Rainbow Warriors out there!