
 

Climate Change 1992 
THE SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT TO THE IPCC SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENT 

 

C l i m a t e C h a n g e 
1 9 9 2 
The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment 
Edited by 
J.T.HOUGHTON, B.A.CALLANDER and S.K.VARNEY 
Published 
for the 
Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate 
Change 
C A M B R I D G E 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge 
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 IRP 
40 West 20th Street, New York, N Y 10011-4211, USA 
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Victoria 3166, Australia 
© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1992 
First published 1992 
Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data available 
ISBN 0 521 43829 2 paperback 
Cover illustration: Fjord in Southern Greenland © Simon Fraser, Science Photo Library 

INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
C L I M A T E 
C H A N G E 
1 9 9 2 
T h e S u p p l e m e n t a r y 
R e p o r t t o 
t h e 
I P C C S c i e n t i f i c 
A s s e s s m e n t 
Report Prepared for IPCC by Working Group I 
Edited by JT.Houghton, B.A.Callander and S.K.Varney 
(Meteorological Ojfice, Bracknell, United Kingdom) 

 

Contents 
Foreword 
ix 
Preface 
xi 
1992 Supplement 
1 
A 
Greenhouse Gases 
23 
R . T . 
W A T S O N 
(COORDINATOR) 
A l Sources and Sinks 
25 
R . T . 
W A T S O N , 
L . G . M E I R A 
F I L H O , E . S A N H U E Z A & A . 
J A N E T O S 
A 2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
47 
I . S . A . I s A K S E N , V . R A M A S W A M Y , H . R O D H E & T . M . L . 
W I G L E Y 
A3 Emissions Scenarios for IPCC: A n Update 
69 
J . 
L E G G E T T , W . J . P E P P E R & R . J . 
S W A R T 
B 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction and Model Validation 
97 
W . L . 
G A T E S , J . F . B . 
M I T C H E L L , G . J . B O E R , U . C U B A S C H & V . P . M E L E S H K O 
C 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
135 
C . K . F o L L A N D , T . R . 
K A R L , 
N . N I C H O L L S , B . S . 
N Y E N Z I , 
D . E . 
P A R K E R 
& K . Y A . 
V I N N I K O V 
Annex 
171 
Appendix 1 Organization of IPCC and Working Group I 
177 
Appendix 2 Contributors to the IPCC WGI Report 
179 
Appendix 3 Reviewers of the IPCC WGI Report 
183 

yiii 
Contents 
Appendix 4 Acronyms 
193 
Appendix 5 Units 
197 
Appendix 6 Chemical Symbols 
199 

Foreword 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
was jointly established by our two organizations in 1988, 
under the Chairmanship of Professor Bert Bolin. The Panel 
formed three Working Groups: 
(a) to assess the available scientific information on 
climate change, 
(b) to assess the environmental and socio-economic 
impacts of climate change, and 
(c) to formulate response strategies. 
The Panel also established a Special Committee on the 
Participation of Developing Countries to promote the 
participation of those countries in its activities. 
The IPCC First Assessment Report was completed in 
August 1990 and consists of the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, the IPCC Impacts Assessment, the IPCC 
Response Strategies, the Policymakers' Summary of the 
IPCC Special Committee and the IPCC Overview. The 
Report has now become a standard work of reference, 
widely used by policymakers, scientists and other experts, 
and encompasses a remarkable coordinated effort by 
hundreds of specialists from all over the world. 
Anticipating the need in 1992 for the latest information 
on climate change, in the context of the ongoing 
negotiations on the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change and the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development (Rio de Janeiro, June 
1992), the Panel in 1991 requested its three Working 
Groups to produce updates to their 1990 Reports, 
addressing the key conclusions of the 1990 Assessment in 
the light of new data and analyses. The current publication 
is the result of the effort of Working Group I to produce an 
update of the IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
As in 1990, success in producing this Report has 
depended upon the enthusiasm and cooperation of 
scientists worldwide. We admire, applaud, and are grateful 
for their commitment to the IPCC process. We also take 
this opportunity to express our gratitude to Professor Bolin 
for his very able leadership of the IPCC, and once again 
congratulate Sir John Houghton, Chairman of Working 
Group I, and his secretariat for another job well done. 
G.O.P. Obasi 
Secretary-General 
World Meteorological Organization 
U.K. Tolba 
Executive Director 
United Nations Environment Programme 

 

Preface 
The first Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
prepared by Working Group I (WGI) of the IPCC"' was 
published in June 1990^^;. That report was a compre-
hensive statement of the state of scientific knowledge 
concerning climate change and mankind's role therein, and 
resulted from almost two years' work by 170 scientists 
worldwide. A further 200 scientists were involved in its 
peer review. 
' 
In the eighteen months since then, scientific activity has 
continued to focus on the problem of climate change and 
significant progress has been made in a number of 
important areas. The purpose of this Supplement is to 
update the 1990 report, paying particular attention to its 
key conclusions and to new issues which have appeared in 
the scientific debate. The Supplement does not cover the 
full range of topics addressed by the 1990 report and 
should be read in conjunction with, rather than in place of, 
that report. 
The conclusions presented in the Supplement are based 
entirely on the supporting scientific material published 
here, which has been prepared by leading scientists and 
exposed to a widespread and thorough peer review. To 
assist in the preparation of the report and the background 
papers a number of workshops were held, each devoted to 
one of the main topics being addressed. Generation of the 
background papers involved, either as lead authors or 
contributors, 118 scientists from 22 countries. A further 
380 scientists from 63 countries and 18 U N or non-
governmental organizations participated in the peer 
review of both the background material and the 
Supplement. The text of the Supplement was agreed in 
January 1992 at a plenary meeting of WGI held in 
Guangzhou, China, attended by 130 delegates from 47 
countries. It can therefore be considered as an authoritative 
statement of the contemporary views of the international 
scientific community. 
We are pleased to acknowledge the contributions of so 
many, in particular the Lead Authors who have given so 
freely of their expertise and time in the preparation of this 
report, together with the data and modelling centres who 
have provided so much information. We would also like to 
thank the core team at the Meteorological Office in 
Bracknell, which was responsible for organizing most of 
the workshops and for coordinating the activities of the 
very large number of contributing scientists. Members of 
the team and those who particularly contributed to its work 
were Bruce Callander, Shelagh Varney, Bob Watson, John 
Mitchell, Chris Folland, David Parker, Mavis Cook, Mavis 
Martin and Flo Ormond. Financial support for the team's 
work was provided by the United Kingdom's Department 
of the Environment. 
Thanks are also due to all the members of the IPCC 
central secretariat at WMO, Geneva, under the direction of 
Dr. N . Sundararaman, for their friendly and tireless 
f^'-' 
Organizational details of IPCC and Working Group I are 
shown in Appendix 1. 
1^2' 
Climate Change. The IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (Eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, 1990, pp365. 

xii 
assistance in workshop organization and coordination with 
the other IPCC working groups. 
We are confident that this 1992 Supplement will assist 
Sir John Houghton 
Chairman, IPCC Working Group I 
Meteorological Office 
United Kingdom 
Preface 
further in building the firm scientific foundation necessary 
for the formulation of a rational and comprehensive 
response by mankind to the issue of climate change. 
Prof Bert Bolin 
Chairman, IPCC 
Stockholm University 
Sweden 
February 1992 

The 1992 IPCC Supplement: 
Scientific Assessment 
Prepared by IPCC Working Group I 

 

CONTENTS 
1 
Current Task 
5 
2 Our Major Conclusions 
5 
Gases and Aerosols 
5 
Scenarios 
6 
Modelling 
6 
Climate Observations 
6 
Box - How does the climate system work? 
7 
3 How has our Understanding of the Sources and 
Sinics of Greenhouse Gases and Aerosols Changed? 
8 
Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends of 
Long-lived Greenhouse Gases 
8 
Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends of 
Other Gases that Influence the Radiative Budget 
8 
Sources and Sinks of Carbon Dioxide 
8 
Sources of Methane 
9 
Sources of Nitrous Oxide 
9 
Sources of Halogenated Species 
9 
Stratospheric Ozone Depletion 
9 
Sources of Precursors of Tropospheric Ozone 
9 
Sources of Aerosols 
9 
4 Scenarios of Future Emissions 
9 
Scenario Results 
10 
Carbon Dioxide 
10 
Halocarbons 
10 
Methane, Nitrous Oxide, Ozone Precursors and 
Sulphur Gases 
10 
5 Relationship Between Emissions and Atmospheric 
13 
Concentrations and the Influence on Radiative Budget 
Carbon Cycle Models 
13 
Atmospheric Gas Phase Chemistry Models 
13 
Atmospheric Sulphate Aerosol Models 
13 
6 
How has our Understanding of Changes in Radiative 
Forcing Changed? 
14 
Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Stratospheric 
Ozone 
14 
Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Tropospheric 
Ozone 
14 
Radiative Effects of Sulphur Emissions 
14 
Global Warming Potentials 
14 
Direct Global Warming Potentials 
14 
Indirect Global Warming Potentials 
14 
Influence of Changes in Solar Output 
15 
7 Confidence in Model Predictions 
15 
8 Simulated Rates of Change in Climate and their 
Geographical Distribution 
15 
Box - What tools do we use? 
16 
9 What Would We Now Estimate for Climate Change? 17 
10 The Updated Record of Global Mean Temperatures 
17 
11 Are There any Trends in Other Climatically 
Important Quantities? 
19 
12 Are the Observed Temperature Changes Consistent 
with Predicted Temperature Changes? 
19 
13 Key Uncertainties and Further Work Required 
19 
Annex: 
21 
Progress in the Development of an IPCC Methodology for 
National Inventories of Net Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 

 

7992 IPCC Supplement 
5 
1. Current Task 
The fifth session of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) (Geneva, March 1991) adopted 
six tasks for the ongoing work of its three working groups. 
While successful completion of these tasks required 
cooperation between all three groups, particular 
responsibility fell to the Scientific Assessment working 
group (WGI) for Tasks 1, 2 and 6: 
Task 1: Assessment of net greenhouse gas emissions. 
Sub-section 1: Sources and sinks of greenhouse 
gases. 
Sub-section 2: Global Warming Potentials. 
Task 2: Predictions of the regional distributions of 
climate change and associated impact studies; 
including model validation studies. 
Task 6: Emissions scenarios. 
The tasks were divided into long- and short-term 
components. The purpose of the short-term workplan, 
whose results are reported in the present document, was to 
provide an update to the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
addressing some of the key issues of that report. This 
update is by definition less comprehensive than the 1990 
report • for example sea level rise apart from the effect of 
thermal expansion is not included. It is against the 
background of that document that the findings of this 
update should be read. 
This assessment, in order to incorporate as much recent 
material as possible, necessarily includes discussion of 
new results which have not yet been through, or are 
currently undergoing, the normal process of peer review. 
Where such is the case the provisional nature of the results 
has been taken into account. 
A brief progress report on the preparation of guidelines 
for the compilation of national inventories of greenhouse 
gas emissions, part of WGI's long-term work under Task 
1, appears as an Annex to this Supplement. 
2. Our Major Conclusions 
Findings of scientific research since 1990 do not affect our 
fundamental understanding of the science of the 
greenhouse effect and either confirm or do not justify 
alteration of the major conclusions of the first IPCC 
Scientific Assessment, in particular the following: 
• 
emissions resulting from human activities are 
substantially increasing the atmospheric concen-
trations of the greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, 
methane, chlorofluorocarbons, and nitrous oxide; 
• 
the evidence from the modelling studies, from 
observations and the sensitivity analyses indicate 
that the sensitivity of global mean surface temp-
erature to doubling C O 2 is unlikely to lie outside the 
range 1.5 to4.5''C; 
• 
there are many uncertainties in our predictions 
particularly with regard to the timing, magnitude and 
regional patterns of climate change; 
• 
global mean surface air temperature has increased by 
0.3 to 0.6°C over the last 100 years; 
• 
the size of this warming is broadly consistent with 
predictions of climate models, but it is also of the 
same magnitude as natural climate variability. Thus 
the observed increase could be largely due to this 
natural variability; alternatively this variability and 
other human factors could have offset a still larger 
human-induced greenhouse warming; 
• 
the unequivocal detection of the enhanced green-
house effect from observations is not likely for a 
decade or more. 
There are also a number of significant new findings and 
conclusions which we summarize as follows: 
Gases and Aerosols 
• 
Depletion of ozone in the lower stratosphere in the 
middle and high latitudes results in a decrease in 
radiative forcing which is believed to be comparable 
in magnitude to the radiative forcing contribution of 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) (globally-averaged) 
over the last decade or so. 
• 
The cooling effect of aerosols f'^-' resulting from 
sulphur emissions may have offset a significant part 
of the greenhouse warming in the Northern 
Hemisphere (NH) during the past several decades. 
Although this phenomenon was recognized in the 
1990 report, some progress has been made in 
quantifying its effect. 
• 
The Global Warming Potential (GWP) remains a 
useful concept but its practical utility for many gases 
depends on adequate quantification of the indirect 
effects as well as the direct. We now recognize that 
there is increased uncertainty in the calculation of 
GWPs, particularly in the indirect components and, 
whilst indirect GWPs are likely to be significant for 
some gases, the numerical estimates in this 
Supplementary Report are limited to direct GWPs. 
• 
Whilst the rates of increase in the atmospheric 
concentrations of many greenhouse gases have con-
tinued to grow or remain steady, those of methane 
and some halogen compounds have slowed. 
'^'^^ The scientific definition of 'aerosol' is an airborne particle or 
collection of particles, but the word has become associated, 
erroneously, with the propellant used in 'aerosol sprays'. 
Throughout this report the term 'aerosol' means airborne 
particle or particles. 

6 
1992 IPCC Supplement 
• 
Some data indicate that global emissions of methane 
from rice paddies may amount to less than pre-
viously estimated. 
Scenarios 
• 
Steps have been taken towards a more comprehen-
sive analysis of the dependence of future greenhouse 
gas emissions on socio-economic assumptions and 
projections. A set of updated scenarios have been 
developed for use in modelling studies which 
describe a wide range of possible future emissions in 
the absence of a coordinated policy response to 
climate change. 
Modelling 
• 
Climate models have continued to improve in respect 
of both their physical realism and their ability to 
simulate present climate on large scales, and new 
techniques are being developed for the simulation of 
regional climate. 
• 
Transient (time-dependent) simulations with coupled 
ocean-atmosphere models (CGCMs), in which 
neither aerosols nor ozone changes have been 
included, suggest a rate of global warming that is 
consistent, within the range of uncertainties, with the 
0.3°C per decade warming rate quoted by IPCC 
(1990) for Scenario A of greenhouse gas emissions. 
• 
The large-scale geographical patterns of warming 
produced by the transient model runs with CGCMs 
are generally similar to the patterns produced by the 
earlier equilibrium models except that the transient 
simulations show reduced warming over the northern 
North Atlantic and the southern oceans near 
Antarctica. 
• 
CGCMs are capable of reproducing some features of 
atmospheric variability on intra-decadal time-scales. 
• 
Our understanding of some climate feedbacks and 
their incorporation in the models has improved. In 
particular, there has been some clarification of the 
role of upper tropospheric water vapour. The role of 
other processes, in particular cloud effects, remains 
unresolved. 
Climate Observations 
• 
The anomalously high global mean surface temp-
eratures of the late 1980s have continued into 1990 
and 1991 which are the warmest years in the record. 
• 
Average warming over parts of the Northern 
Hemisphere mid-latitude continents has been found 
to be largely characterized by increases in minimum 
(night-time) rather than maximum (daytime) 
temperatures. 
• 
Radiosonde data indicate that the lower troposphere 
has warmed over recent decades. Since meaningful 
trends cannot be assessed over periods as short as a 
decade, the widely reported disagreements between 
decadal trends of air temperature from satellite and 
surface data cannot be confirmed because the trends 
are statistically indistinguishable. 
• 
The volcanic eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991 is 
expected to lead to transitory stratospheric warming. 
With less certainty, because of other natural influ-
ences, surface and tropospheric cooling may occur 
during the next few years. 
• 
Average warming over the Northern Hemisphere 
during the last four decades has not been uniform, 
with marked seasonal and geographic variations; this 
warming has been especially slow, or absent, over 
the extratropical north west Atlantic. 
• 
The consistency between observations of global 
temperature changes over the past century and model 
simulations of the warming due to greenhouse gases 
over the same period is improved if allowance is 
made for the increasing evidence of a cooling effect 
due to sulphate aerosols and stratospheric ozone 
depletion. 
The above conclusions have implications for future 
projections of global warming and somewhat modify the 
estimated rate of warming of 0.3°C per decade for the 
greenhouse gas emissions Scenario A of the IPCC 1990 
Report. If sulphur emissions continue to increase, this 
warming rate is likely to be reduced, significantly in the 
Northern Hemisphere, by an amount dependent on the 
future magnitude and regional distribution of the 
emissions. Because sulphate aerosols are very short-lived 
in the atmosphere, their effect on global warming rapidly 
adjusts to increases or decreases in emissions. It should 
also be noted that while partially offsetting the greenhouse 
warming, the sulphur emissions are also responsible for 
acid rain and other environmental effects. There is a 
further small net reduction likely in the rate of global 
warming during the next few decades due to decreases in 
stratospheric ozone, partially offset by increases in 
tropospheric ozone. 
Research carried out since the 1990 IPCC Assessment 
has served to improve our appreciation of key uncertain-
ties. There is a continuing need for increased monitoring 
and research into climate processes and modelling. This 
must involve, in particular, strengthened international 
collaboration through the World Climate Research 
Programme (WCRP), the International Geosphere 
Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the Global Climate 
Observing System (GCOS). 

1992 IPCC Supplement 
7 
H O W DOES T H E C L I M A T E S Y S T E M W O R K , A N D W H A T I N F O R M A T I O N DO W E NEED T O 
E S T I M A T E F U T U R E C H A N G E S ? 
How does the climate system work? 
The Earth absorbs radiation from the Sun, mainly at the surface. This energy is then redistributed by the atmosphere and ocean and 
re-radiated to space at longer ('thermal', 'terrestrial' or 'infrared') wavelengths. Some of the thermal radiation is absorbed by 
radiatively-active ('greenhouse') gases in the atmosphere, principally water vapour, but also carbon dioxide, methane, the CFCs, 
ozone and other greenhouse gases. The absorbed energy is re-radiated in all directions, downwards as well as upwards such that the 
radiation that is eventually lost to space is from higher, colder levels in the atmosphere (see diagram below). The result is that the 
surface loses less heat to space than it would do in the absence of the greenhouse gases and consequently stays warmer than it would 
otherwise be. This phenomenon, which acts rather like a 'blanket' around the Earth, is known as the greenhouse effect. 
What factors can change climate? 
Any factor which alters the radiation received from the Sun or lost to space, or which alters the redistribution of energy within the 
atmosphere, and between the atmosphere, land and ocean, will affect climate. 
The Sun's output of energy is known to change by small amounts over an 11-year cycle, and variations over longer periods may 
occur. On time-scales of tens to thousands of years, slow variations in the Earth's orbit have led to changes in the seasonal and 
latitudinal distribution of solar radiation; these changes have played an important part in controlling the variations of past climate. 
Increases in the concentration of the greenhouse gases will reduce the efficiency with which the Earth cools to space and will tend 
to warm the lower atmosphere and surface. The amount of warming depends on the size of the increase in concentration of each 
greenhouse gas, the radiative properties of the gases involved, and the concentration of other greenhouse gases already present in the 
atmosphere. It also can depend on local effects such as the variation with height of the concentration of the greenhouse gas, a 
consideration that may be particularly germane to water vapour which is not uniformly mixed throughout the atmosphere. The effect 
is not a simple one and the balance which is struck between these factors depends on many aspects of the climate system. 
Aerosols (small particles) from volcanoes, emissions of sulphates from industry and other sources can absorb and reflect radiation. 
Moreover, changes in aerosol concentrations can alter cloud reflectivity through their effect on cloud properties. In most cases 
aerosols tend to cool climate. In general, they have a much shorter lifetime than greenhouse gases so their concentrations respond 
much more quickly to changes in emissions. 
Any changes in the radiative balance of the Earth, including those due to an increase in greenhouse gases or in aerosols, will tend 
to alter atmospheric and oceanic temperatures and the associated circulation and weather patterns. However, climate varies naturally 
on all time-scales due to both external and internal factors. To distinguish man-made climate variations from those natural changes, 
it is necessary to identify the man-made 'signal' against the background 'noise' of natural climate variability. 
A necessary starting point for the prediction of changes in climate due to increases in greenhouse gases and aerosols is an estimate 
of their future concentrations. This requires a knowledge of both the strengths of their sources (natural and man-made) and also the 
mechanisms of their eventual removal from the atmosphere (their sinks). The projections of future concentrations can then be used 
in climate models to estimate the climatic response. We also need to determine whether or not the predicted changes will be 
noticeable above the natural variations in climate. Finally, observations are essential in order to monitor climate, to study climatic 
processes and to help in the development and validation of models. 

8 
1992 IPCC Supplement 
3. 
How has our Understanding of the Sources and 
Sinks of Greenhouse Gases and Aerosols 
Changed? 
During the last eighteen months there have been a number 
of important advances in our understanding of greenhouse 
gases and aerosols. These advances include an improved 
quantitative understanding of the atmospheric distri-
butions, trends, sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, 
their precursors and aerosols, and an improved under-
standing of the processes controlling their global budgets. 
Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends of Long-lived 
Greenhouse Gases: 
The atmospheric concentrations of the major long-lived 
greenhouse gases [carbon dioxide (CO2), methane ( C H 4 ) , 
nitrous oxide (NiO), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and 
carbon tetrachloride (CCI4)] continue to increase because 
of human activities. While the growth rates of most of 
these gases have been steady or increasing over the past 
decade, that of C H 4 and some of the halocarbons has been 
decreasing. The rate for C H 4 has declined from about 20 
ppbv/yr in the late 1970s to possibly as low as 10 ppbv/yr 
in 1989. While a number of hypotheses have been 
forwarded to explain these observations, none is 
completely satisfactory. 
Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends of Other Gases 
that Influence the Radiative Budget: 
Ozone (O3) is an effective greenhouse gas both in the 
stratosphere and in the troposphere. Significant decreases 
have been observed during the last one to two decades in 
total column O3 at all latitudes - except the tropics - in 
spring, summer and winter. The downward trends were 
larger during the 1980s than in the 1970s. These decreases 
have occurred predominantly in the lower stratosphere 
(below 25km), where the rate of decrease has been up to 
10% per decade depending on altitude. In addition, there is 
evidence to indicate that O3 levels in the troposphere up to 
10km altitude above the few existing ozonesonde stations 
at northern middle latitudes have increased by about 10% 
per decade over the past two decades. Also, the abundance 
of carbon monoxide (CO) appears to be increasing in the 
N H at about 1% per year. However, there is little new 
information on the global trends of other tropospheric O3 
precursors, (non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHC) and 
oxides of nitrogen (NOj^)). 
Sources and Sinks of Carbon Dioxide: 
The two primary sources of the observed increase in 
atmospheric C O 2 are combustion of fossil fuels and land-
use changes; cement production is a further important 
source. 
The emission of C O 2 from the combustion of fossil fuels 
grew between 1987 and 1989. Preliminary data for 1990 
indicate similar emissions to 1989. The best estimate for 
global fossil fuel emissions in 1989 and 1990 is 6.010.5 
GtC (f>, compared to 5.7±0.5 GtC in 1987 (IPCC, 1990). 
The estimated total release of carbon in the form of C O 2 
from oil well fires in Kuwait during 1991 was 0.065 GtC, 
about 1% of total annual anthropogenic emissions. 
The direct net flux of C O 2 from land-use changes 
(primarily deforestation), integrated over time, depends 
upon the area of land deforested, the rate of reforestation 
and afforestation, the carbon density of the original and 
replacement forests, and the fate of above-ground and soil 
carbon. These and other factors are needed to estimate 
annual net emissions but significant uncertainties exist in 
our quantitative knowledge of them. Since IPCC (1990) 
some progress has been made in reducing the uncertainties 
associated with the rate of deforestation, at least in Brazil. 
A comprehensive, multi-year, high spatial resolution 
satellite data set has been used to estimate that the average 
rate of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazonian forest 
between 1978 and 1989 was 2.1 million hectares (Mha) 
per year. The rate increased between 1978 and the mid-
1980s, and has decreased to 1.4 Mha/yr in 1990. The Food 
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), using information 
supplied by individual countries, recently estimated that 
the rate of global tropical deforestation in closed and open 
canopy forests for the period 1981-1990 was about 17 
Mha/yr, approximately 50% higher than in the period 
1976-1980. 
Despite the new information regarding rates of defor-
estation, the uncertainties in estimating C O 2 emissions are 
so large that there is no strong reason to revise the IPCC 
1990 estimate of annual average net flux to the atmosphere 
of 1.6+1.0 GtC from land-use change during the decade of 
the 1980s. 
Since IPCC (1990) particular attention has focussed on 
understanding the processes controlling the release and 
uptake of C O 2 from both the terrestrial biosphere and the 
oceans, and on the quantification of the fluxes. Based on 
models and the atmospheric distribution of COi, it appears 
that there is a small net addition of carbon to the 
atmosphere from the equatorial region, a combination of 
outgassing of C O 2 from warm tropical waters and a 
terrestrial biospheric component that is the residual 
between large sources (including deforestation) and sinks. 
There appears to be a strong Northern Hemisphere sink, 
containing both oceanic and terrestrial biospheric com-
^'^^ 1 GtC (gigatonne of carbon) equals one billion (one thousand 
million (10^)) tonnes of carbon 

1992 IPCC Supplement 
9 
ponents, and a weak Southern Hemisphere (SH) sink. The 
previous IPCC global estimate for an ocean sink of 2.0±0.8 
GtC per year is still a reasonable one. The terrestrial 
biospheric processes which are suggested as contributing 
to the sinks are sequestration due to forest regeneration, 
and fertilization arising from the effects of both CO2 and 
nitrogen (N), but none of these can be adequately 
quantified. This implies that the imbalance (of order 1-2 
GtC/yr) between sources and sinks, i.e., "the missing 
sink", has not yet been resolved. This fact has significant 
consequences for estimates of future atmospheric 
CO2 concentrations (see Section 5) and the analysis of 
the concept of the Global Warming Potential (see Section 
6). 
Sources of Methane: 
A total (anthropogenic plus natural) annual emission of 
CH4 of about 500Tg can be deduced from the magnitude 
of its sinks combined with its rate of accumulation in the 
atmosphere. While the sum of the individual sources is 
consistent with a total of 500Tg CH4, there are still many 
uncertainties in accurately quantifying the magnitude of 
emissions from individual sources. Significant new 
information includes a revised rate of removal of CH4 by 
atmospheric hydroxyl (OH) radicals (because of a lower 
rate constant), a new evaluation of some of the sources 
(e.g., from rice fields) and the addition of new sources 
(e.g., animal and domestic waste). Recent CH4 isotopic 
studies suggest that approximately lOOTg CH4 (20% of the 
total CH4 source) is of fossil origin, largely from the coal, 
oil, and natural gas industries. Recent studies of C H 4 
emissions from rice agriculture, in particular Japan, India, 
Australia, Thailand and China, show that the emissions 
depend on growing conditions, particularly soil 
characteristics, and vary significantly. While the overall 
uncertainty in the magnitude of global emissions from rice 
agriculture remains large, a detailed analysis now suggests 
significantly lower annual emissions than reported in IPCC 
(1990). The latest estimate of the atmospheric lifetime of 
CH4 is about 11 years. 
Sources of Nitrous Oxide: 
Adipic acid (nylon) production, nitric acid production and 
automobiles with three-way catalysts have been identified 
as possibly significant anthropogenic global sources of 
nitrous oxide. However, the sum of all known anthro-
pogenic and natural sources is still barely sufficient to 
balance the calculated atmospheric sink or to explain the 
observed increase in the atmospheric abundance of N2O. 
Sources of Halogenated Species: 
The worldwide consumption of CFCs 11, 12, and 113 is 
now 40% below 1986 levels, substantially below the 
amounts permitted under the Montreal Protocol. Further 
reductions are mandated by the 1990 London Amendments 
to the Montreal Protocol. As CFCs are phased out, HCFCs 
and HFCs will substitute, but at lower emission rates. 
Stratospheric Ozone Depletion: 
Even if the control measures of the 1990 London 
Amendments to the Montreal Protocol were to be imple-
mented by all nations, the abundance of stratospheric 
chlorine and bromine will increase over the next several 
years. The Antarctic ozone hole, caused by industrial 
halocarbons, will therefore recur each spring. In addition, 
as the weight of evidence suggests that these gases are also 
responsible for the observed reductions in middle and 
high latitude stratospheric O3, the depletion at these 
latitudes is predicted to continue unabated through the 
1990s. 
Sources of Precursors of Tropospheric Ozone: 
Little new information is available regarding the tropo-
spheric ozone precursors (CO, NMHC, and NO^), all of 
which have significant natural and anthropogenic sources. 
Their detailed budgets therefore remain uncertain. 
Source of Aerosols: 
Industrial activity, biomass burning, volcanic eruptions, 
and sub-sonic aircraft contribute substantially to the 
formation of tropospheric and stratospheric aerosols. 
Industrial activities are concentrated in the Northern 
Hemisphere where their impact on tropospheric sulphate 
aerosols is greatest. Sulphur emissions, which are due in 
large part to combustion effluents, have a similar 
emissions history to that of anthropogenic CO2. Estimates 
of emissions of natural sulphur compounds have been 
reduced from previous figures, thereby placing more 
emphasis on the anthropogenic contribution. 
4. Scenarios of Future Emissions 
Scenarios of net greenhouse gas and aerosol precursor 
emissions for the next 100 years or more are necessary to 
support study of potential anthropogenic impacts on the 
climate system. The scenarios provide inputs to climate 
models and assist in the examination of the relative 
importance of relevant trace gases and aerosol precursors 
in changing atmospheric composition and climate. 
Scenarios can also help in improving the understanding of 
key relationships among factors that drive future 
emissions. 
Scenario outputs are not predictions of the future, and 
should not be used as such; they illustrate the effect of a 
wide range of economic, demographic and policy 
assumptions. They are inherently controversial because 
they reflect different views of the future. The results of 
scenarios can vary considerably from actual outcomes 


»3 
u 
u 
u 
"S. 
a, 
3 
SJD 
01 
e 
o 
O 
s 
s s 
o 
B 
O 
S 
O 
B 
u 
lis 
c 
a X 
O 
Z 
g 
•S O 
•a 00 
§ § 
I F 
s -a 
lO 
O 
(N 
O 
O 
<N (N 
6 6 
ON ON 
E 
.•s o 
B ^ 
. 
8 g o 
3 g | 
I I I 
g a « 
c — o 
(U 
Cd 
(D 
G E c« 
S° ^ 1 
oo" r-" Z 
3 
O 
(N 
<N 
O 
O 
^ 
<N (N 
S8 
o 
o 
o 
0\ OS 
0\ ON 
2§ 
•a m 
1= 
OS 
2§ 
•a m 
OS 
V3 
U 
o 
E2 
3 (N 
m 
so 
u 
OS 
•a 
OS 
i 
00 
o 
i3 ,o 
5 £0 
I I 
w 3 
o t3 C 
P-1 
s i 
ON OS 
2§ 
•a oa 
OS 
31 
4> 
U 
£8 
I S 
OS 
a. 
>, 
c o 
C 
3 a 
T3 
6 S3 
G 
E -
^ OS 
•a :S 
t» E 
o 
w 3 c/: O 
c o 
s l l 
S O bp 
r- M TO 
I 2 
o - S 
c 
OS ^ =« 
05 o C 
U ^ * 
6 2 '3) 
.-e a s 
> OS g-
a-
•o o 
1- 
— 
(U 
ra o) ^ 
00 
u O 
1-
tu o 
S o 
(U 
0 0 
^ p 
ON .t: 
" I 
I] 
a a 
—3 
^ I ~ 
5^ O 
^ — 
,S E -2 : i 
s i 
1 8 § 
H <; 
H 
•3 5 
- E d 
1 
5d - O 
^1 

u 
CS 
> 
Hi 
s 
o 
e 
11 
u 
b 
ca 
« S .2 
U 
Z 
M 
S 
e 2 
. s i 
.S oi 
~ ? 
V a. 
M 
C 
U 
t/3 
2 00 
p S 
r~ r- r^. 
(N — 
00 M 
o\ oo q 
fN ir> 
ON r-
O v-i — 
u-, VO O 
(N r^, 
r-' (N O 
oo 
5S 5 
oo oc 
^ CI 
d 
d 
oo o 
d —' 
ON r-~ 
NO ON 
o 
— 
oo t--
d 
d 
ON O 
d — 
in 
o 
S 2 
ON ON 
.a 
ON 
!2 p: 
ON NO 
OO 
oo NO 
oo ^ 
S 8 
ND 
00 <N 
(N NO 
t— NO 
d 
d 
NO t~-
d 
d 
u 
IT) 
o^ d 
o 
— 
CN) IT) 
NO 
ON 
d 
d 
oo 00 
d 
d 
•o 
ON 
(/3 
NO to 
— CNl 
NO ON' 
§ 8 
CN) INI 
00 
Jo 5 
o 
o 
o 
rNi 
( M 
d 
d 
ON t/5 
5 i 
NO ON 
NO — 
^ NO 
•* NO 
g 2 
lO 
NO 
CN OO 
r~ NO 
d 
d 
OO o 
d — 
CNl 
ON 

1992 IPCC Supplement 
13 
Figure 1: C O 2 emissions from energy, cement production and deforestation. 
Methane emissions from rice paddies are lower, and 
emissions from animal waste and domestic sewage have 
been added. N2O emission factors for stationary sources 
and biomass burning have been revised downwards. 
Adipic and nitric acid have been included as additional 
sources of N2O. Preliminary analysis of the emissions of 
volatile organic compounds and sulphur dioxide suggests 
that the global emissions of these substances are likely to 
grow in the coming century if no new limitation strategies 
are implemented. 
5. 
Relationship Between Emissions and Atmospheric 
Concentrations and the Influence on the Radiative 
Budget 
A key issue is to relate emissions of greenhouse gases, 
greenhouse gas precursors and aerosol precursors to future 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols in order 
to assess their impact on the radiative balance. A number 
of different types of model have been developed. 
Carbon Cycle Models: 
While there is a variety of carbon cycle models (including 
3-D ocean-atmosphere models, 1-D ocean-atmosphere box-
diffusion models, and box models that incorporate a 
terrestrial biospheric sink) all such models are subject to 
considerable uncertainty because of an inadequate 
understanding of the processes controlling the uptake and 
release of CO2 from the oceans and terrestrial ecosystems. 
Some models assume a net neutral terrestrial biosphere, 
balancing fossil fuel emissions of CO2 by oceanic uptake 
and atmospheric accumulation, others achieve balance by 
invoking additional assumptions regarding the effect of 
CO2 fertilization on the different parts of the biosphere. 
However, even models that balance the past and 
contemporary carbon cycle may not predict future 
atmospheric concentrations accurately because they do not 
necessarily represent the proper mix of processes on land 
and in the oceans. The differences in predicted changes in 
CO2 concentrations are up to 30%. This does not represent 
the major uncertainty in the prediction of future climate 
change compared with uncertainties in estimating future 
patterns of trace gas emissions, and in quantifying climate 
feedback processes. A simple empirical estimate can be 
based on the assumption that the fraction of emissions 
which remains in the atmosphere is the same as that 
observed over the last decade; i.e. 46±7%. 
Atmospheric Gas Phase Chemistry Models: 
Current tropospheric models exhibit substantial differences 
in their predictions of changes in O 3 , in the hydroxyl 
radical (OH) and in other chemically active gases due to 
emissions of C H 4 , non-methane hydrocarbons, CO and, in 
particular, NO^. These arise from uncertainties in the 
knowledge of background chemical composition and from 
our inability to represent small-scale processes occurring 
within the atmosphere. These deficiencies limit the 
accuracy of predicted changes in the abundance and 
distribution of tropospheric O 3 , and in the lifetimes of a 
number of other greenhouse gases, including the HCFCs 
and HFCs, all of which depend upon the abundance of the 
OH radical. Increases in C H 4 , NMHCs, and CO all lead to 
increases in O 3 , and decreases in OH, thus leading to an 
increase in radiative forcing. On the other hand, because 
increases in NO^ lead to an increase in both O 3 and OH, 
the net effect of NO^ on radiative forcing is uncertain. 
Atmospheric Sulphate Aerosol Models: 
The atmospheric chemistry of sulphate aerosols and their 
precursors has been extensively studied in relation to the 


/ 992 IPCC Supplement 
15 
Table 3: Direct GWPsfor 100-year Time Horizon 
Gas 
Direct Global Warming Potential 
(GWP) 
Sign of the Indirect Component of the 
GWP 
Carbon dioxide 
1 
none 
Methane 
11 
positive 
Nitrous oxide 
270 
uncertain 
CFC-11 
3400 
negative 
CFC-12 
7100 
negative 
HCFC-22 
1600 
negative 
HFC-134a 
1200 
none 
them can be recommended. Although we are not yet in a 
position to recommend revised numerical values, we 
know, however, that the indirect GWP for methane is 
positive and could be comparable in magnitude to its direct 
value. In contrast, based on the sub-section above, the 
indirect GWPs for chlorine and bromine halocarbons are 
likely to be negative. The concept of a GWP for short-
lived, inhomogeneously distributed constituents, such as 
CO, NMHC, and NO^ may prove inapplicable, although, 
as noted above, we know that these constituents will affect 
the radiative balance of the atmosphere through changes in 
tropospheric ozone and OH. Similarly, a GWP for SO2 is 
viewed to be inapplicable because of the non-uniform 
distribution of sulphate aerosols. 
Influence of Changes in Solar Output: 
The 
existence 
of strong 
correlations 
between 
characteristics of the solar activity cycle and global mean 
temperature has been reported. The only immediately 
plausible physical explanation of these correlations 
involves variabihty of the sun's total irradiance on time-
scales longer than that of the 11-year activity cycle. Since 
precise measurements of the irradiance are only available 
for the last decade, no firm conclusions regarding the 
intfuence of solar variability on climate change can be 
drawn. 
There has been some clarification of the nature of water 
vapour feedback, although the radiative effects of clouds 
and related processes continue to be the major source of 
uncertainty and there remain uncertainties in the predicted 
changes in upper tropospheric water vapour in the tropics. 
Biological feedbacks have not yet been taken into account 
in simulations of climate change. 
Increased confidence in the geographical patterns of 
climate change will require new simulations with 
improved coupled models and with radiative forcing 
scenarios that include aerosols. 
Confidence in regional climate patterns based directly 
on G C M output remains low and there is no consistent 
evidence regarding changes in variability or storminess. 
G C M results can be interpolated to smaller scales using 
statistical methods (correlating regional climate with the 
large-scale flow) or a nested approach (high-resolution, 
regional climate models driven by large-scale G C M 
results). Both methods show promise but an insufficient 
number of studies have yet been completed to give an 
improved global picture of regional climate change due to 
increases in greenhouse gases; in any event both 
interpolation methods depend critically on the quality of 
the large-scale flow in the G C M . Given our incomplete 
knowledge of climate, we cannot rule out the possibility of 
surprises. 
7. Confidence in Model Predictions 
There continues to be slow improvement in the ability of 
models to simulate present climate, although further 
improvements in the model resolution and the 
parametrization of physical processes are needed. Since 
the last report, further evidence has accumulated that 
atmospheric models are capable of reproducing a range of 
aspects of atmospheric variability. Coupled ocean-
atmosphere models produce variability on decadal time-
scales similar in some respects to that observed, and ocean 
models show longer term fluctuations associated with 
changes in the thermohaline circulation. 
8. 
Simulated Rates of Change in Climate and their 
Geographical Distribution 
Results of General Circulation Models (GCMs) available 
to the 1990 report mainly concerned 
equilibrium 
simulations. Only one transient model run (i.e., where the 
time-varying response of the climate to steadily increasing 
greenhouse gas concentrations is simulated) had been 
completed. 
Since then many papers have appeared in the refereed 
literature concerned with climate models and their results. 
Significant progress has been made in the area of transient 
models, with four modelling groups having carried out 


1992 IPCC Supplement 
17 
climate simulations for up to 100 years using coupled 
atmosphere-ocean global climate models (CGCMs) which 
incorporate a detailed description of the deep ocean and 
therefore can simulate the climate lag induced by the deep 
ocean circulation. These models require substantial 
adjustments to fluxes of heat and fresh water in order to 
achieve a realistic simulation of present climate and this 
may distort the models' response to small perturbations 
such as those associated with increasing greenhouse gases. 
For simulations of future climate with these models, 
carbon dioxide concentrations have been increased at rates 
close to 1% per year (approximately the equivalent 
radiatively to the current rate of increase of greenhouse 
gases). 
Internal variability obscures the geographical patterns of 
change during the first few decades of the experiments. 
However, once these patterns become established, they 
vary relatively little as the integrations progress and are 
similar to those produced by equilibrium models in a 
number of ways, for instance: 
(i) 
surface air temperatures increase more over land 
than over oceans; 
(ii) 
precipitation increases on average at high latitudes, 
in the monsoon region of Asia and in the winter at 
mid-latitudes; 
(iii) over some mid-latitude continental areas values of 
soil moisture are lower on average in summer. 
The transient CO2 simulations, however, show that over 
the northern North Atlantic and the southem oceans near 
Antarctica the warming is reduced by 60% or more relative 
to equilibrium simulations at the time of doubling CO2. 
Much further development and validation of coupled 
models is required. 
9. What Would We Now Estimate for Climate Change? 
The new simulations using coupled ocean-atmosphere 
GCMs, which do not include the effects of sulphates and 
ozone depletion, generally confirm the IPCC (1990) 
estimates of future warming at rates of about 0.3°C/decade 
(range 0.2 to 0.5°C/decade) over the next century for IPCC 
1990 Scenario A . Because G C M s do not yet include 
possible opposing anthropogenic influences, including the 
forcing from sulphate aerosols and stratospheric ozone 
depletion, the net rate of increase in surface temperature is 
expected to be less, at least during the period for which 
sulphur emissions continue to increase, than would be 
expected from greenhouse gas forcing alone. However, the 
globally averaged magnitude of the effect of sulphate 
aerosols has not yet been calculated accurately and further 
work is needed. 
The simulated rate of change of sea level due to oceanic 
thermal expansion only ranges from 2 to 4cm/decade, 
again consistent with the previous report. 
New IPCC 1992 emissions scenarios (IS92a-f; see 
Section 4) have been derived in the light of new 
information and international agreements. In order to 
provide an initial assessment of the effect of the new 
scenarios, the change in surface temperature has been 
estimated with the simple climate model used in the IPCC 
1990 report which has been calibrated against the more 
comprehensive coupled ocean-atmosphere models (see 
page 16 for a description of models). These calculations 
include, in the same way as did the 1990 calculations, the 
direct radiative forcing effects of all the greenhouse gases 
included in the scenarios. The effect of stratospheric ozone 
depletion and of sulphate aerosols have not been included, 
which again parallels the 1990 calculations. Figure 2 (see 
page 18) shows (a) the temporal evolution of surface 
temperature for IS92a, assuming the high, "best estimate" 
and low chmate sensitivities (4.5, 2.5 and 1.5°C), and (b) 
the temperature changes for the six 1992 IPCC scenarios 
and the 1990 Scenario A, assuming the "best estimate" of 
climate sensitivity (see page 16 for the definition of 
climate sensitivity). 
10. The Updated Record of Global Mean 
Temperatures 
Continuing research into the nineteenth century ocean 
temperature record has not significantly altered our 
calculation of surface temperature warming over the past 
100-130 years of 0.45+0.15 °C. Furthermore, global surface 
temperatures for 1990 and 1991 have been similar to those 
of the warmest years of the 1980s and continue to be 
warmer than the rest of the record. The research has, 
however, led to a small adjustment in hemispheric 
temperatures. The long-term warming trends assessed in 
each hemisphere are now more nearly equal, with the 
Southern Hemisphere marginally warmer in the late 
nineteenth century and the Northern Hemisphere trend 
unchanged from previous estimates. 
A notable feature over considerable areas of the 
continental land masses of the Northern Hemisphere is that 
warming over the last few decades is primarily due to an 
increase of night-time rather than daytime temperatures. 
These changes appear to be partly related to increases in 
cloudiness but other factors cannot be excluded such as a 
direct cooling effect of aerosols on maximum temperatures 
in sunny weather, an influence of increasing concen-
trations of greenhouse gases and some residual influence 
of urbanization on minimum temperatures. A more 
complete study is needed as only 25% of the global land 
area has been analysed. In this regard, regional changes in 
maximum, minimum and mean temperature related to 
changes in land use (e.g., desertification, deforestation or 
widespread irrigation) may need to be identified 
separately. 


1992 IPCC Supplement 
19 
amounts of aerosol into the stratosphere by the eruptions of 
El Chichon (1982) and Mt. Pinatubo (1991). Globally, 
temperature rises in the lower stratosphere were about T C 
and 1.3°C respectively; stratospheric warming due to El 
Chichon lasted nearly two years while that due to Mt. 
Pinatubo is still underway. The longer radiosonde record, 
however, shows a significant global cooling trend of about 
0.4°C per decade since the middle 1960s in the lower 
stratosphere. 
11. Are There any Trends in Other Climatically 
Important Quantities? 
Precipitation variations of practical significance have been 
documented on many time and space scales, but due to 
data coverage and inhomogeneity problems nothing can be 
said about global-scale changes. An apparent increase of 
water vapour in the tropics parallels the increase in lower 
tropospheric temperature but it is not yet possible to say to 
what extent the changes are real and whether they are 
larger than natural variability. 
A small, irregular, decrease of about 8% has been 
observed in annually averaged snow cover extent over the 
Northern Hemisphere since 1973 in a new, improved, 
compilation of these data. The reduction is thought to be 
real because annual values of snow cover extent and 
surface air temperatures over the extratropical Northern 
Hemisphere land have a high correlation of -0.76. 
There is evidence that, regionally, relatively fast 
(sometimes called abrupt) climate changes can occur. 
These changes may persist for up to several decades but 
are often a function of season. These fast changes are 
poorly understood, but can be of considerable practical 
importance. 
12. Are the Observed Temperature Changes 
Consistent with Predicted Temperature Changes? 
CGCMs, which do not yet take into account changes in 
aerosols, predict a greater degree of warming in the 
Northern Hemisphere (NH) than in the Southern 
Hemisphere (SH), a result of the greater extent of land in 
the N H which responds more rapidly to forcing. The 
observed larger warming of the SH in recent decades 
(0.3°C between 1955 and 1985) than in the N H (which 
hardly warmed at all over the same period) is at first sight 
in conflict with this prediction. Recently, however, the N H 
has started to warm quite rapidly. The reasons for the 
differences in observed warming rates in the two 
hemispheres are not known though man-made aerosols 
(see Section 6) and changes in ocean circulation may have 
played a part. 
Furthermore, increases in CFCs may have reduced 
ozone levels sufficiently to offset in a globally-averaged 
sense the direct greenhouse effect of CFCs. Consequently, 
the estimates of warming over the last 100 years due to 
increases in greenhouse gases made in the original report 
may be somewhat too rapid because they did not take 
account of these cooling influences. Taking this into 
account could bring the results of model simulations closer 
to the observed changes. 
Individual volcanic eruptions, such as that of E l 
Chichon, may have led to surface cooling over several 
years but should have negligible effect on the long-term 
trend. Some influence of solar variations on time-scales 
associated with several sunspot cycles remains unproven 
but is a possibihty. 
The conclusion of the 1990 report remains unchanged: 
"the size of this warming is broadly consistent with 
predictions of climate models, but it is also of the 
same magnitude as natural climate variability. Thus 
the observed increase could be largely due to this 
natural variability; alternatively this variability and 
other human factors could have offset a still larger 
human-induced greenhouse warming". 
13. Key Uncertainties and Further Work Required 
The prediction of future climate change is critically 
dependent on scenarios of future anthropogenic emissions 
of greenhouse gases and other climate forcing agents such 
as aerosols. These depend not only on factors which can be 
addressed by the natural sciences but also on factors such 
as population and economic growth and energy policy 
where there is much uncertainty and which are the concern 
of the social sciences. Natural and social scientists need to 
cooperate closely in the development of scenarios of future 
emissions. 
Since the 1990 report there has been a greater 
appreciation of many of the uncertainties which affect our 
predictions of the timing, magnitude and regional patterns 
of climate change. These continue to be rooted in our 
inadequate understanding of: 
• 
sources and sinks of greenhouse gases and aerosols 
and their atmospheric concentrations (including their 
indirect effects on global warming) 
• 
clouds (particularly their feedback effect on 
greenhouse-gas-induced global warming, also the 
effect of aerosols on clouds and their radiative 
properties) and other elements of the atmospheric 
water budget, including the processes controlling 
upper level water vapour 
• 
oceans, which through their thermal inertia and 
possible changes in circulation, influence the timing 
and pattern of climate change 
• 
polar ice sheets (whose response to climate change 
also affects predictions of sea level rise) 
• 
land surface processes and feedbacks, including 
hydrological and ecological processes which couple 


1992 IPCC Supplement 
21 
ANNEX 
Progress in tiie Development of an IPCC Methodology 
for National Inventories of Net Emissions of 
Greenhouse Gases 
Scientific assessment is primarily concerned with sources 
and sinks at the global, and large region level but, in order 
to support national and international responses to climate 
change, it is necessary to estimate emissions and sinks at 
the national level in an agreed and consistent way. 
IPCC (1991) has estabhshed a work programme to: 
(i) 
develop an approved detailed methodology for 
calculating national inventories of greenhouse gas 
emissions and sinks 
(ii) 
assist all participating countries to implement this 
methodology and provide results by the end of 1993. 
This programme is based on preliminary work 
sponsored by the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development ( O E C D , 1991). O E C D and the 
International Energy Agency (lEA) are continuing to 
provide technical support to the IPCC work programme. 
The programme will manage the development and 
approval of inventory methods and procedures, and the 
collection and evaluation of data. It will collaborate with 
other sponsors including the Global Environment Facility 
(GEF), the Asian Development Bank, the European 
Community, U N E C E and individual donor countries, to 
encourage funding of technical cooperation projects in 
greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories. 
The IPCC requested that participating countries provide 
any available G H G emissions inventory data to the IPCC 
by the end of September 1991. As of January 1992, 18 
countries have submitted complete or partial G H G 
inventories (see Table below); most relate to average 
emissions over one, two or three years in the period 1988 
to 1990. This process has been particularly useful in 
identifying problems in coverage and consistency of 
currently available inventories. 
An IPCC Workshop on National GHG Inventories, held 
in Geneva from 5 to 6 December 1991, provided guidance 
on needed improvements in the draft methodology and 
priorities for the work programme. Numerous improve-
ments to the methodology were agreed upon, and priorities 
were proposed for the work programme and for technical 
cooperation activities. As a result of the preliminary data 
collection, the workshop, and other comments received, 
the following major priorities for the IPCC work 
programme have been established: 
Methodology 
• 
Develop a simpler methodology and streamlined 
"workbook" document to assist users in its 
implementation 
• 
Work with experts to develop a new and simpler 
method for calculating CO2 emissions from forestry 
and land-use change 
• 
Establish technical expert groups to improve the 
methodology for C H 4 from rice and fossil fuel 
production, and other key gases and source types 
• 
Work with experts to include halocarbons in the 
GHG inventory starting with data available from the 
Montreal Protocol process 
• 
Develop and disseminate regionally-applicable 
emissions factors and assumptions. 
Annex Table: Countries which have submitted complete or partial inventories of national greenhouse 
gas emissions (by January 1992) 
Australia 
Germany 
Sweden 
Belgium 
haly 
Switzerland 
Canada 
Netherlands 
Thailand 
Denmark 
New Zealand 
Vietnam 
Finland 
Norway 
United Kingdom 
France 
Poland 
United States 


A 
Greenhouse Gases 
Coordinating Author: 
R.T. WATSON 

 

Al 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
R.T. WATSON, L.G. MEIRA FILHO, E. SANHUEZA, A. JANETOS 
Contributors: 
P.J. Fraser'^; I.J. Fung; M.A.K. Khalil; M. Manning; A. McCulloch; A.P. Mitra; 
B. Moore; H. Rodhe; D. Schimel; U. Siegenthaler; D. Skole; R.S. Stolarskit 
f - Chairs for Chapters 1 and 2 of WMO/UNEP Science Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1991 (WMO, 1992), therefore 
representing a number of other contributors who are not listed here. 

 

CONTENTS 
Executive Summary 
29 
A l . l Introduction 
31 
A1.2 Carbon Dioxide 
31 
A 1.2.1 Introduction 
31 
A 1.2.2 Atmospheric Abundances and Trends 
31 
Al.2.3 Sources 
31 
Al.2.3.1 Combustion 
31 
Al.2.3.2 Land-Use Changes 
31 
A1.2.3.2.1 Recent estimates of deforestation rates 32 
A 1.2.3.2.2 Carbon density and ecosystem 
processes 
33 
Al.2.3.2.3 Annual average fluxes 
33 
Al.2.4 Sinks 
33 
A 1.2.4.1 Oceans 
33 
Al.2,4.2 Terrestrial Biosphere 
33 
A 1.2.5 Models and Predictions 
34 
A1.3 Methane 
35 
A 1.3.1 Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends 
35 
Al.3.2 Sinks 
35 
Al.3.3 Sources 
36 
A1.4 Nitrous Oxide 
37 
A 1.4.1 Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends 
37 
A 1.4.2 Sinks 
37 
A 1.4.3 Sources 
37 
A1.5 Halogenated Species 
38 
Al.5.1 Atmospheric Trends 
38 
Al.5.2 Sinks 
38 
Al.5.3 Sources 
38 
AL6 Ozone 
39 
A 1.6.1 Observed Trends in Total Column Ozone 
39 
A 1.6.2 Observed Trends in the Vertical Distribution 
of Ozone 
39 
A1.6.3 Future Levels of Stratospheric Ozone 
40 
A1.7 Tropospheric Ozone Precursors: Carbon Monoxide, 
Non-Methane Hydrocarbons and Nitrogen Oxides 40 
A 1.7.1 Trends 
40 
A 1.7.2 Sources and Sinks 
40 
A1.8 Sulphur-Containing Gases 
40 
Al.8.1 Sources 
40 
Al.8.2 Atmospheric Gas-Particle Conversion 
41 
Al.8.3 Transport and Distribution 
42 
Al.8.4 Removal 
42 
Al.8.5 Stratospheric Aerosols 
42 
References 
42 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
There have been no major changes in our understanding of 
greenhouse gases since the 1990 Scientific Assessment for the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 1990). 
While most of the key uncertainties identified in IPCC (1990) 
remain unresolved, there have been a number of important 
advances. 
Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends of Long-lived 
Greenhouse Gases: 
The atmospheric concentrations of the major long-lived 
greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide ( C O 2 ) , methane ( C H 4 ) , nitrous 
oxide ( N 2 O ) , chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and carbon 
tetrachloride ( C C I 4 ) continue to increase because of human 
activities. While the growth rates of most of these gases have 
been steady or increasing over the past decade, that of CH4 and 
some of the halocarbons has been decreasing. The rate for CH4 
has declined from about 20 ppbv/yr in the late 1970s to possibly 
as low as 10 ppbv/yr in 1989. 
Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends of Other Gases that 
Influence the Radiative Budget: 
Ozone ( O 3 ) is an effective greenhouse gas in the upper 
troposphere and lower stratosphere. Significant decreases in total 
column O3 have been observed throughout the year during the 
last one to two decades, and at all latitudes except the tropics, 
with the trends being larger during the 1980s than during the 
1970s. These decreases have occurred predominantly in the lower 
stratosphere, below 25km, where the rate of decrease has been up 
to 10% per decade depending on altitude. In addition, there is 
evidence from the few existing ozonesonde stations that, at 
northern mid-latitudes, O3 levels in the troposphere up to 10km 
altitude have increased by about 10% per decade over the past 
two decades. Also, the abundance of carbon monoxide (CO) 
appears to be increasing in the Northern Hemisphere at about 1 % 
per year. There is little new information on the global trends of 
other tropospheric O3 precursors (non-methane hydrocarbons 
(NMHC) and oxides of nitrogen (NO^)). 
Sources and Sinks of Carbon Dioxide: 
The best estimate for global fossil fuel emissions in 1989 and 
1990 is 6.0+0.5 GtC, compared to 5.7+0.5 GtC in 1987. The 
estimated total release of C O 2 from oil well fires in Kuwait 
during 1991 was 0.065 GtC. The United Nations Food and 
Agriculture Organization (FAO), using information supplied by 
individual countries, recently estimated that the rate of global 
tropical deforestation in closed and open canopy forests for the 
period 1981-1990 was about 17 million hectares (Mha) per year, 
approximately 50% higher than that for the period 1976-1980. A 
comprehensive, multi-year, high spatial resolution satellite data 
set has been used to estimate that the average rate of deforestation 
in the Brazilian Amazonian forest between 1978 and 1989 was 
2.1 Mha/yr, and that the rate increased between 1978 and the 
mid-1980s, and decreased to 1.4 Mha/yr in 1990. Despite the new 
information suggesting higher rates of deforestation globally, the 
uncertainties in estimating C O 2 emissions are so large that there 
is no convincing reason to revise the IPCC (1990) estimate of 
annual average net flux to the atmosphere of 1.6+1.0 GtC from 
land-use change during the decade of the 1980s. 
Based on models and the atmospheric distribution of C O 2 . it 
appears that: (i) there is a small net addition of carbon to the 
atmosphere from the equatorial region, a combination of 
outgassing of C O 2 from warm tropical waters and a terrestrial 
biospheric component that is the residual between large sources 
(deforestation) and sinks; (ii) there is a strong Northern 
Hemisphere sink, containing both oceanic and terrestrial 
biospheric components, and a weak Southern Hemisphere sink; 
(iii) an ocean sink of 2.0+0.8 GtC per year is still reasonable; and 
(iv) terrestrial biospheric processes are sequestering C O 2 due to 
forest regeneration, and fertilization arising from the effects of 
both C O 2 and nitrogen (N). 
Sources and Sinks of Methane: 
A total annual emission of CH4 of about 500Tg can be deduced 
from the magnitude of its sinks combined with its rate of 
atmospheric accumulation. New information includes a revised 
rate of removal of CH4 by atmospheric hydroxyl (OH) radicals 
(because of a lower rate constant), a new evaluation of some of 
the sources (e.g., from rice fields) and the addition of new 
sources (e.g., animal and domestic waste). Recent CH4 isotopic 
studies suggest that approximately 100 TgCH4 is of fossil origin, 
largely from the coal, oil, and natural gas industries. Recent 
studies of CH4 emissions from rice agriculture show that the 
emissions depend on growing conditions, vary significantly, and 
are significantly lower than reported in IPCC (1990). The latest 
estimate of the atmospheric lifetime of CH4 is about 11 years. 

30 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
Sources and Sinks of Nitrous Oxide: 
Adipic acid (nylon) production, nitric acid production and 
automobiles with three-way catalysts have been identified as 
possibly significant anthropogenic global sources of nitrous 
oxide. However, the sum of all known anthropogenic and natural 
sources is still barely sufficient to balance the calculated 
atmospheric sink or to explain the observed increase in the 
atmospheric abundance of N2O. 
Sources of Halogenated Species: 
The worldwide consumption of CFCs 11, 12, and 113 is now 
40% below 1986 levels, substantially below the amounts 
permitted under the Montreal Protocol. Further reductions are 
mandated by the 1990 London Amendments to the Montreal 
Protocol. As CFCs are phased out, HCFCs and HFCs will 
substitute, but at lower emission rates. 
Stratospheric Ozone: 
Even if the control measures of the 1990 London amendments to 
the Montreal Protocol were to be implemented by all nations, the 
abundance of halocarbons will increase over the next several 
years. As the weight of evidence suggests that these gases are 
responsible for the observed reductions in stratospheric O3, the 
rate of depletion at middle and high latitudes is predicted to 
increase during the 1990s. 
Precursors of Tropospheric Ozone: 
Little new information is available regarding the tropospheric 
ozone precursors (CO, NMHC, and NO^), all of which have 
significant, but uncertain, natural and anthropogenic sources. 
Aerosols: 
Industrial activity, biomass burning, volcanic eruptions, and sub-
sonic aircraft contribute substantially to the formation of 
tropospheric and stratospheric aerosols. Industrial emissions are 
especially important to the tropospheric burden of aerosols; the 
Northern Hemisphere is particularly affected but so are any 
regions having a concentration of industrial activity. Sulphur 
emissions, which are due in large part to combustion effluents, 
have a similar emissions history to that of anthropogenic CO2. 
Estimates of emissions of natural sulphur compounds have been 
reduced from previous figures, thereby placing more emphasis on 
the anthropogenic contribution. 

Al Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
31 
A l . l Introduction 
This section updates Chapter 1 of the 1990 IPCC Scientific 
Assessment. The key issues are to quantify the atmos-
pheric distributions, trends, sources and sinks of green-
house gases and their precursors, and to understand the 
processes controlling their global budgets in order to relate 
their emissions quantitatively to atmospheric con-
centrations. 
A1.2 Carbon Dioxide 
Al.2.1 
Introduction 
The atmospheric accumulation of CO2 is the balance 
between fossil fuel and land-use change emissions, and the 
uptake due to oceanic and terrestrial sinks. The key issue is 
to understand the processes controlling the global carbon 
budget in order to relate anthropogenic emissions of CO2 
quantitatively to atmospheric concentrations. Two 
concerns have dominated scientific debate since the first 
IPCC Science Assessment: (a) the global rate of land-use 
change, especially deforestation, and (b) the fluxes of 
carbon and the processes controlling its release and uptake 
in both the terrestrial biosphere and the oceans. 
Al.2.2 Atmospheric Abundances and Trends 
IPCC (1990) assigned a value of 353 ppmv to the global 
annual average concentration of CO2 in 1990, based on an 
extrapolation of the most recent measurements available at 
that time. For 1991, the best global estimate is 
approximately 355 ppmv, given the recent observed rate of 
increase of 1.8 ppmv/yr. There is a small, but coherent 
gradient in concentration from the South Pole to the Arctic 
basin of about 3 ppmv (KeeUng et al., 1989a; Heimann et 
al., 1989), that depends on the distribution of both 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion and the distribution 
of terrestrial and oceanic sources and sinks (IPCC, 1990). 
The gradient implies a continuous flux of CO2 from the 
Northern Hemisphere, where about 90% of the fossil fuel 
emissions occur, to the Southern Hemisphere, where part 
of the net uptake by the oceans takes place. The 
concentrations of CO2 and its stable isotope ^^C02 show 
clearly that the wide and regular seasonal variability at 
most stations, with substantially higher amplitudes in the 
Northern Hemisphere, is dominated by the activity of the 
terrestrial biosphere in the Northern Hemisphere, rather 
than by seasonal changes in ocean PCO2 or fossil sources. 
The atmospheric adjustment time (IPCC, 1990) of CO2 
depends on the different time constants of many processes. 
A rather rapid adjustment takes place between the 
atmosphere, the surface layer of the oceans, and the 
terrestrial biosphere when anthropogenic CO2 is added to 
or removed from the atmosphere. However, the long-term 
response of the atmospheric concentration of CO2 to 
anthropogenic emissions depends primarily on the 
processes that control the rate of storage of CO2 in the 
deep ocean and in forest biomass and soil organic matter, 
which have characteristic time-scales of several decades to 
centuries. 
Al.2.3 
Sources 
Updates of emissions from fossil fuel combustion, 
including oil wells set alight in Kuwait, and changes in 
land-use are summarized below. 
Al.2.3.1 Combustion 
Marland and Boden (1991) have recently updated their 
estimates of CO2 industrial emissions to include data 
through 1989. The updated best estimate for the global 
emission in both 1989 and 1990 is 6.010.5 GtC, compared 
to 5.7 GtC in 1987 (IPCC, 1990); (GtC: 1 Gt = lO^t = 
lOlSg; 1 ppmv CO2 of the global atmosphere 
2.12 GtC 
and 7.8 Gt CO2). The estimates rely primarily on energy 
data published by the United Nations with supplemental 
data on cement production from the US Bureau of Mines 
and on gas flaring from the US Department of Energy. 
In recent months, concerns have been raised over the 
possible magnitude of emissions from oil well fires lit at 
the end of the war in Kuwait. About 600 naturally 
pressurized oil wells were set alight in Kuwait in late 
February 1991, but by the beginning of November all the 
wells had been capped. The pre-war production rate of 
Kuwait was about 1.6 million barrels per day (MBd"'). 
Airborne measurements of the chemical composition of the 
plumes were made in late March 1991 (Johnson et al., 
1991); the major pollutants observed were particulates 
(smoke), CO2, sulphur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen oxides 
(NOjj^), and unbumt hydrocarbons. Based on the sulphur 
composition of the oil, the oil burning rate was estimated 
to be equivalent to 3.9+1.6 million barrels per day. The 
estimated total emissions of carbon (C) as CO2 during 
1991 was 65Tg, or about 1% of the estimated annual 
global fossil fuel emissions; uncertainty in this figure is 
approximately ±50%. 
A 1.2.3.2 Land-Use Changes 
The net flux of C to the atmosphere from land-use change 
(primarily, though not exclusively due to deforestation in 
the tropics) depends on the area converted, carbon density 
per ha, the fate of the altered land and the ecosystem 
processes that control fluxes of carbon. The IPCC (1990) 
esrimate for the flux in 1980 was 0.6-2.5 GtC, with 
suggestions that the annual flux was higher in 1990 than in 
1980. Houghton (1991) has recently calculated that the 
release of C to the atmosphere from land-use change in 
1990 was 1.1-3.6 GtC, somewhat higher than the 1980 
estimate of 0.6-2.5 GtC. The IPCC (1990) estimate of net 
average annual emissions for the decade 1980-1989 was 
1.6±1.0 GtC, which is consistent with Houghton's figure 
within the limits of uncertainty. 

32 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
Table Al.l: 
Summary of Global Annual Deforestation Estimates (1(P ha) 
Reference 
Myers 
FAO/UNEP 
Myers 
FAO 
WRI 
1980 
1981 
1989 
1991 
1990 
Year of Deforestation 
1979 
1976-1980 
1989 
1981-1990 
late 1980's 
Closed Canopy Forest Only 
7.3 
7.3 
13.9 
14.0 
16.5 
Closed and Open Canopy Forests 
- 
11.3 
- 
17.0 
20.4 
Table A1.2: Summary of Brazilian Annual Deforestation Estimates (1(P ha) 
Reference 
FAO/UNEP 
Myers 
WRI 
Feamside et al. 
INPE 
1981 
1989 
1990 
1990 
1991 
Year of Deforestation 
1976-1980 
1989 
late 1980s 
1978 1989 
1987-1988 
1989 
Estimate 
1.4 
5.0 
8.0 
2.1 
1.9 
1.4 
A 1.2.3.2.1 Recent estimates of deforestation rates 
The increase in Houghton's net flux estimate was 
primarily due to the use of Myers' (1989) new estimate of 
global deforestation in closed canopy forests in the late 
1980s (13.9 Mha/yr for 1989), which is 90% higher than 
the earlier estimate (Myers, 1980) of 7.3 Mha/yr for the 
late 1970s. In addition, the World Resources Institute 
(WRI, 1990) estimated global deforestation in closed 
canopy forests in the late 1980s at 16.5 Mha/yr, and there 
is a preliminary estimate of 14.0 Mha/yr during the 1980s 
by F A O (1990, 1991) based on country estimates. The 
Myers (1989) value assumed that the rate of deforestation 
in Brazil was 5.0 Mha/yr, while the WRI (1990) value 
assumed a rate of deforestation in Brazil of 8.0 Mha/yr. 
The assumed rates of deforestation in Brazil were based on 
work of Setzer and Pereira (1991), who used saturated 
thermal infrared A V H R R Channel 3 data to estimate the 
rate of deforestation in 1987 (8.0 Mha/yr) and 1988 (5.0 
Mha/yr). However, the resuhs of Setzer and Pereira (1991) 
are now thought to be incorrect (Fearnside et al., 1990) 
because of inadequate spatial resolution, and questionable 
assumptions about the relationship between the rate of 
forest clearing and the incidence of fires. Feamside et al., 
(1990) used comprehensive L A N D S A T high-spatial 
resolution data sets from 1978, 1987, 1988, and 1989 to 
estimate that the mean rate of deforestation in the Brazilian 
Amazonian forest was 2.1 Mha/yr between 1978 and 1989, 
and that the rate from 1987 (1/3 data)/1988 (2/3 data) to 
1989 was 1.9 Mha/yr. INPE (1991) has recently included 
data for 1990 and concluded that the rate of deforestation 
from 1989 to 1990 was 1.4 Mha/yr. It appears that the rate 
of deforestation in Brazil reached a peak sometime in the 
second half of the 1980s. An ongoing analysis of "wall-to-
wall" L A N D S A T data for 1975, 1978, 1985, and 1988-
1991 should provide a much improved historical record of 
deforestation in Brazil. In addition, similar data for the 
period 1985 to 1991 is currently being analysed for all of 
tropical South America. The Myers (1989) and WRI 
(1990) global estimates of deforestation could both be 
revised downward to approximately 10.5 to II.O Mha/yr 
assuming that the actual rate of deforestation in Brazil was 
close to 2 Mha/yr for the late 1980s. Tables A l . l and A 1.2 
summarize estimates of deforestation globally and in 
Brazil. Each of these studies used different methodologies, 
covered slightly different time periods, and the difference 
in the estimated increase in rates between the late 1970s 
and late 1980s is unresolved. 
FAO (1990, 1991) has released a preliminary estimate, 
based on country submissions, of global deforestation in 
closed and open canopy forests for the period 1981-1990 
of 17 Mha/yr, 50% higher than their estimate of 11.3 
Mha/yr for 1976-1980. However, FAO acknowledges that 
some of the apparent increase may be due to under-
estimates of deforestation in the earlier time period. FAO 
has indicated that a rate of 6.8 Mha/yr has been estimated 
for tropical South America, and that the rate assumed for 
the Brazilian Amazonian forest was that reported by 
Fearnside et al., (1990), i.e., 2.1 Mha/yr. This seems to 
ascribe a very high proportion (about 70%) of the total 
deforestation in South America in the late 1980s to the 
region outside of the Brazilian Amazonia, even though this 
region accounts for very littie of the total amount of forest 
on the continent. 

Al Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
33 
It seems likely that the area deforested globally in 1990 
was higher than the area deforested in 1980, since the 
major global estimates show increases in rates of 50% 
(FAO, 1990, 1991) to 90% (Myers, 1989). However, the 
data quality for southem Asia and Africa are poor, and the 
results for tropical South America, which strongly 
influence the global estimates, are at the same time the 
most intensively studied and yet still uncertain. There are 
no global estimates of deforestation in the peer-reviewed 
scientific literature derived from studies using common 
methodologies, especially using high spatial resolution 
satellite data, such as LANDSAT and SPOT, which have 
the most potential for resolving this issue. 
Al.l.3.2.2 
Carbon density and ecosystem processes 
Critical variables to take into account for calculating the 
net carbon released from deforestation and its distribution 
among CO2, CO and CH4 include the relative contribution 
of above-ground and below-ground carbon; the distri-
bution between immediate releases and the effects of 
deforestation on the processes controlling the subsequent 
fluxes of carbon; the fate of deforested land; and the final 
carbon density of the land compared to its original carbon 
density. Several of these factors are poorly known locally, 
and depend on the sampling methods used. For example, 
carbon density values based on ecological data from small 
plots generally provide higher estimates than those from 
forest inventories (e.g., 328 Mg biomass/ha versus 175 
Mg/ha for tropical closed forests. Brown and Lugo, 1984). 
All the factors are poorly known globally. Such problems 
must be reconciled in order to make reasonable estimates 
on global scales (Brown and Lugo, 1991). 
In situ degradation of forest stands by selective removal 
of the largest or most valuable trees also affects net flux 
from deforestation, since the biomass at deforestation is 
lower than for undisturbed stands (Lugo and Brown, 
1992). Other environmental factors have the potential to 
influence carbon density or ecosystem processes 
controlling carbon fluxes. For example, recovery from 
fires is accompanied by increasing biomass, but damage 
from air pollution may decrease biomass and reduce 
carbon fixation. However, there is no strong evidence to 
suggest that the frequency, intensity, or global significance 
of these factors has changed over the past several decades. 
Al.2.3.2.3 Annual average fluxes 
The estimates of average annual net flux of carbon 
released to the atmosphere from land-use change still 
appear to be among the most uncertain numbers in the 
carbon cycle. Houghton's (1991) estimate for 1990 
suggests that the average annual net flux for the 1980s is 
higher than the IPCC's previous estimate. However, 
measurement uncertainties in the total area deforested and 
its average carbon density prevent accurate estimates of 
changes in average annual net fluxes from being made. 
The conclusion is that there is no strong evidence to 
revise the IPCC (1990) estimate of annual average net flux 
to the atmosphere from land-use change during the decade 
of the 1980s. The likeliest scenario is that annual fluxes 
increased during the early part of the decade, peaked in the 
middle years, and may have fallen since, based on our best 
understanding of deforestation rates in closed forests. 
While this state of affairs is unsatisfying, it is within the 
range of measurement error, and is representative of the 
present degree of scientific uncertainty. 
Al.2.4 Sinks 
This section summarizes new information on sinks of 
carbon in the oceans and the terrestrial biosphere. 
Al.2.4.1 Oceans 
The IPCC (1990) estimate of the global annual ocean sink, 
2.0±0.8 GtC, is still reasonable. Global ocean sinks in the 
neighbourhood of I.O GtC/yr or smaller (Tans et al., 1990) 
appear less likely, but are still within measurement error. 
Estimates of the strength of the ocean sink depend on air-
sea exchange, which is a function of wind speed and 
temperature, the difference in the partial pressure of CO2 
between the water and the air (~pC02), and on the initial 
assumptions of the ocean models. A quantitatively 
significant role for carbon transport by rivers would imply 
that ocean uptake estimates based primarily on ~pC02 will 
be underestimates. 
Direct measurements of the relative decline in '-^c/'Zc 
ratios in dissolved inorganic carbon in ocean waters and in 
atmospheric CO2 yield an estimate of 2.3 GtC/yr for the 
global ocean sink for the period between 1970 and 1990 
(Quay era/., 1992). 
While widespread episodes of coral bleaching are of 
regional concern for the integrity of marine ecosystems, 
there is no evidence that they are influencing the ocean's 
carbon budget in any significant way. Their abundance and 
distribution in the world's oceans compared to the total 
amount of carbon stored in the ocean is far too small to be 
significant. 
Al.2.4.2 Terrestrial Biosphere 
A major issue reported in IPCC (1990) was due to the Tans 
et al. (1990) analysis, which suggested a terrestrial sink in 
the north temperate latitudes, of the order of 1.6-2.4 
GtC/yr during the decade of the 1980s. This result was 
obtained through inversion of the observed atmospheric 
CO2 distribution combined with an atmospheric tracer 
model from which was derived a distribution of sources 
and sinks of carbon at the surface, constrained by oceanic 
PCO2 data. The IPCC analysis used a value of 1.6+1.4 
GtC/yr as the net imbalance in the carbon cycle during the 
decade of the 1980s, but did not specify whether it might 

34 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
be found in the teirestrial biosphere or in the oceans. The 
Tans and IPCC analyses have received considerable 
attention over the last year, primarily because of the 
difficulty of accounting simultaneously for very large 
carbon sinks in the terrestrial biosphere in northern 
temperate latitudes and a very small global oceanic sink. 
Keeling et al. (1989a,b), Heimann et al. (1989), 
Heimann and Keeling (1989), Heimann (1991), Enting and 
Mansbridge (1991), and Tans et al. (1990) agree that a 
strong Northern Hemisphere sink and an apparently weak 
Southern Hemisphere sink must exist. The Northern 
Hemisphere sink must contain both oceanic and terrestrial 
biospheric components. The models disagree on the 
meridional distribution of total sources and sinks, and the 
allocation of those sinks to oceans and the terrestrial 
biosphere (Heimann, 1991). Tans et al. (1990) partitioned 
the northern sink of carbon between land and ocean, based 
on the data compiled on pC02 in surface waters. Recent 
measurements have shown large CO2 drawdown in spring 
blooms in the North Atlantic (Watson et al., 1991; Kempe 
and Pegler, 1991). On die other hand. Murphy et al. (1991) 
found less CO2 flux into the South Pacific Ocean in austral 
spring than estimated by Tans et al. (1990). How these 
regional estimates combine to give an improved globally 
and annually averaged net flux between the atmosphere 
and ocean is still to be resolved. Keeling et al. (1989b) 
concluded that a large fraction of the Northern 
Hemispheric sink is due to a natural imbalance in the 
oceanic carbon cycle, consisting of a net transfer from the 
Northern to Southern Hemispheres, balanced by a return 
flux through the atmosphere, suggesting a much smaller 
northern terrestrial sink than calculated by Tans et al. 
(1990). 
Models and atmospheric CO2 concentration data suggest 
that there is a relatively small net addition of carbon to the 
atmosphere from the equatorial region, which is a 
combination of outgassing of carbon from warm tropical 
waters and a biospheric component. While land-use 
change in the tropics is an increasing and significant 
source of CO2 to the atmosphere. Keeling et al. (1989a,b) 
conclude that about 50% of the terrestrial sink due to CO2 
fertilization may occur in this region, thus reducing the net 
flux of CO2 from this region. These conclusions need to be 
tested, but it is clear that the net carbon added to the 
atmosphere in the tropics is less than expected simply from 
deforestation. 
The likeliest terrestrial biospheric processes contri-
buting to large sinks are enhancement in productivity due 
to atmospheric CO2 increases, N fertilization from 
atmospheric deposition, and forest regrowth. Enhancement 
of photosynthesis, reduction in respiration, and increased 
water-use efficiency due to enhanced CO2 concentrations 
have all been found in laboratory and field experiments 
(Bazzaz, 1990). Quantifying a net ecosystem response in 
terms of carbon storage is more difficult, and no field 
studies of natural forests have yet been done. Experiments 
in wetlands (Drake and Leadley, 1991) show net C 
accumulation. Analogous experiments in Arctic tundra 
show contrasting results, from acclimation due to the 
variability of the effects of CO2 on individual species 
(Prudhomme et al., 1984; Oechel and Strain, 1985; Tissue 
and Oechel, 1987) to a small net accumulation (Grulke et 
al., 1990). The conclusion is that while the individual 
effects of CO2 enhancement on plant growth and 
physiology are well-documented, the net ecosystem 
consequences of CO2 increases under natural conditions 
depend on many other factors and cannot currently be 
quantified. Nevertheless, in models with active biospheres, 
global estimates of net carbon accumulation from the 
physiological effects of increased CO2 are often made in 
order to account for a missing sink. 
Fertilization of the northern temperate latitudes through 
increased N deposition due to air pollution and increased 
fertilizer use is possibly of sufficient magnitude to 
sequester an additional 1.0 GtC/yr during the decade of the 
1980s (IPCC, 1990; Thomley et al., 1991). However, the 
N deposition data are poorly known, and the extent of any 
increase in growth rates of forests and grasslands must be 
weighed against the possibility of other pollutants 
adversely affecting physiological processes, either directly 
(e.g., O 3 pollution) or indirectly (acid deposition affecting 
soil nutrients over decades). The possible adverse effects, 
while suspected to be important on regional scales in 
eastern North America and Europe, are insufficiently 
quantified to provide global estimates. 
Forest regrowth in temperate latitudes may currently be 
responsible for net C accumulation in the terrestrial 
biosphere. Regeneration seen in such areas as the eastern 
US, Europe and China often reflects recovery of land 
previously deforested or degraded in the late nineteenth to 
mid-twentieth centuries. 
Al.2.5 Models and Predictions 
While there are a variety of carbon cycle models, including 
3-D ocean-atmosphere models, 1-D ocean-atmosphere 
box-diffusion models, and box models that incorporate a 
terrestrial biospheric sink, all such models are subject to 
considerable uncertainty because of an inadequate 
understanding of the processes controlling the uptake and 
release of CO2 from the oceans and terrestrial ecosystems. 
Some models assume a net neutral terrestrial biosphere, 
balancing fossil fuel emissions of CO2 by oceanic uptake 
and atmospheric accumulation; others achieve balance by 
invoking additional assumptions regarding the effect of 
CO2 fertilization on the different parts of the biosphere. 
However, even models that balance the past and contem-
porary carbon cycle will not predict future atmospheric 
concentrations accurately unless they represent the proper 

Al Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
35 
mix of processes on land and in the oceans, and how these 
processes will evolve along with changes in atmospheric 
CO2 and climate. For a given emissions scenario, the 
differences in predicted changes in CO2 concentrations, 
neglecting biospheric feedbacks, are up to 30%, but this is 
unlikely to represent the major uncertainty in the 
prediction of future climate change compared to 
uncertainties in estimating future patterns of trace gas 
emissions, and in quantifying physical climate feedback 
processes. Future atmospheric CO2 concentrations 
resulting from given emissions scenarios may be estimated 
by assuming that the same fraction remained airborne as 
has been observed during the last decade, i.e., 46+7%. 
Great strides have been made in developing models that 
adequately simulate the terrestrial carbon budget. Regional 
models that simulate the response of ecosystems to CO2 
and N fertilization now exist and are being implemented 
for global studies (Raich et al, 1991; Parton et al, 1987; 
Thomley et al, 1991). The current challenge lies more in 
the development of data sets adequately describing the 
heterogeneity of natural ecosystem types and land use, 
and of techniques for validation over large areas. 
Improvement in the estimates of present and future global 
ocean uptake will require better understanding of the 
contribution of high-frequency PCO2 fluctuations to the 
global mean and a better description of the vertical mixing 
rate in the ocean. 
Table A1.3: Estimated Sources and Sinks of Methane 
(Tg CH4 per year) 
Sources 
Natural 
• Wetlands 
• Termites t 
• Ocean 
• Freshwater 
• CH4 Hydrate 
Anthropogenic 
115 
20 
10 
5 
5 
(100-200) 
(10-50) 
(5-20) 
(1-25) 
(0-5) 
• Coal Mining, Natural Gas 
100 
(70-120) 
& Pet. Industty t 
• Rice Paddies t 
60 
(20-150) 
• Enteric Fermentation 
80 
(65-100) 
• Animal Wastes t 
25 
(20-30) 
• Domestic Sewage 
25 
? 
Treatment t 
• Landfills t 
30 
(20-70) 
• Biomass burning 
40 
(20-80) 
Sinks 
Atmospheric (tropospheric + 
470 
(420-520) 
stratospheric) removal t 
Removal by soils 
30 
(15-45) 
Atmospheric Increase 
32 
(28-37) 
t indicates revised estimates since IPCC 1990 
A1.3 Methane 
Methane (CH4) is an important greenhouse gas. Chemical 
reactions involving CH4 in the troposphere can lead to 
ozone production, and reaction with the hydroxyl radical 
(OH) in the stratosphere results in the production of water 
vapour. Both tropospheric ozone, especially in the upper 
troposphere, and stratospheric water vapour are significant 
greenhouse gases. The final oxidation product of CH4 is 
CO2 which is also a greenhouse gas. One of the major 
removal mechanisms for O H is reaction with CH4, 
therefore, as the levels of CH4 increase the levels of OH 
could decrease. This could lead to increased lifetimes of 
CH4 and other important greenhouse gases, e.g., 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). 
A 1.3.1 Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends 
The present atmospheric concentration of CH4 is 1.72 
ppmv globally averaged, more than double its pre-
industrial value of about 0.8 ppmv. The abundance in the 
Northern Hemisphere is almost 0.1 ppmv greater than in 
the Southern Hemisphere. Recent data, which were 
carefully reviewed in WMO (1992), verify that the rate of 
growth of the atmospheric concentration of CH4 slowed 
during the last decade or so from a rate of about 20 ppbv 
per year (about 1.3% per year: Blake and Rowland, 1988) 
in the late 1970s, to a rate of about 12-13 ppbv per year 
(about 0.75% per year) in the mid-1980s, to possibly as 
low as 10 ppbv per year (about 0.6% per year) in 1989 
(Steele et al, 1992). A range of 10-13 ppbv per year is 
reported in Table A1.3. There are no convincing 
explanations for this decline in CH4 growth rates. It could 
be due to a decrease in emission rates from natural or 
anthropogenic sources, an increase in its loss rate due to an 
increase in the concentration of tropospheric OH, which 
has been suggested by Prinn et al, (1992), or a combin-
ation of the two. 
Al.3.2 Sinks 
The main sink of CH4 is reaction with die OH radical in 
the troposphere, so any estimate of the magnitude of this 
sink requires knowledge of the rate constant and the 
atmospheric abundance of OH. Current estimates of 
lifetime and global sources must be viewed with caution 
until more reliable values of the atmospheric abundances 
of O H are derived. Vaghjiani and Ravishankara (1991) 
have shown that the rate constant for CH4 reacting with 
OH had been overestimated by up to 25%. Using this new 
rate constant data, Crutzen (1991) and Fung et al, (1991) 
estimated the annual current removal of CH4 by OH to be 

36 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
420±80 TgCH4. Crutzen (1991) also estimated an 
additional sink of 10+5 TgCH4 due to photochemical 
removal in the stratosphere. Prinn et al., (1992) have 
estimated higher atmospheric concentrations of OH using 
the A L E / G A G E methyl chloroform (CH3CCI3) data, and 
with the new O H + CH4 rate constant data have deduced a 
lifetime for CH4 of 11.1 (+1.4, -1.1) years and a net CH4 
source of 470±50Tg per year for the period 1978-1990. 
The Prinn et al. (1992) estimate of Ufetime, and hence of 
source strength, includes both tropospheric and 
stratospheric chemical removal. The annual magnitude of 
an additional sink, i.e., uptake by soils, has been estimated 
to be 30±15 TgCH4 (IPCC, 1990; Whalen and Reeburg, 
1990). Recent CH4 soil flux measurements indicate that 
changes in land use (Keller et al., 1990; Scharffe et al., 
1990) or enhanced nitrogen fertilizer input (Mosier et al., 
1991) are decreasing the CH4 uptake by soils. While the 
current magnitude of the soil sink is relatively small, the 
importance of this sink may change in the future if changes 
in climatic conditions result in significant changes in soil 
moisture. The Ufetime of CH4 is presently estimated to be 
about 11+2 years. 
Al.3.3 Sources 
A total annual global emission of CH4 of about 500 
TgCH4 can be deduced from the magnitude of its sinks and 
its rate of accumulation in the atmosphere. Although the 
emission rates from most of the individual sources are still 
quite uncertain, there is a fairly good balance between the 
sum of the individual sources and the deduced global 
emission rate. The natural and anthropogenic sources of 
CH4 were discussed in detail in IPCC (1990), and in most 
cases the current estimated global source strengths are 
unchanged. Table A1.3, which summarizes the best cuiTent 
estimates of emissions from individual sources, clearly 
shows that anthropogenic sources dominate (-2:1) over 
natural sources, consistent with a more than doubling of 
the atmospheric abundance of CH4 since pre-industrial 
times. There has been a revaluation of some of the sources, 
particularly from rice, and the addition of new sources 
such as animal and domestic waste. 
The proportion of CH4 produced from sources related to 
fossil carbon can be estimated from studies of the carbon-
14 content of atmospheric CH4. Three independent 
esrimates are: 21+3% (Whalen et al., 1989), 25+4% 
(Manning et al., 1990) and 16±12% (Quay et al., 1991). 
Table A1.4: Measured Methane Emissions During the Growing Season From Rice Paddies 
Flux 
Annual rate 
Comments 
mg m-2 h" • 
g m-2 y r 1 
California (') 
10 
25-42 
1982 growing season 
Spain 
(Andalucia) 
4 
12 
Affected by sulphate from sea water 
Italy (3) 
12(6-16) 
14-77 
7 fertilization treatments 3 veg. periods 
Japan 
(Ibaraki-prefec.) 
16.2 
45 
Peat soil 
2.9-15.4 
8-43 
Gley soil 
<0.4-4.2 
<1-13 
Andosol 
China (5) (Tu Zu, Sczhuan 
60(10-120) 
170 
4 rice fields, 6 plots each site, local 
Province) 
fertilization practices; 2 veg. periods, range 
due, in part, to seasonal variation 
China <6) (Hangzhou, 
28.6 
55-97 
Late rice 
Zhajiang Provinces) 
7.8 
14-18 
Early rice 
China 
(Beijing) 
15-50 
-
Rice after wheat; 5 different methods of 
management; 1 veg. period 
China 
(Nanjing) 
11(3-14) 
-
5 different managements 
India 
0.1-27.5 
7.5-22.5 
Includes irrigated and rainfed fields; acidic 
and non-acid soils 
Texas (10) 
2.5-8.7 
5-16 
-
Australia (11) 
3.8 
-
Micrometeorological measurements 
Thailand (12) 
3.7-19.6 
8-42 
-
(1) Cicerone and Shelter 1981; Cicerone era/., 1983; (2) Seller et al., 1984; (3) Holzapfel-Pschorn and Seller, 1986; 
Schutz etai, 1989; (4) Yagi and Minami, 1990; (5) Khalil and Rasmussen, 1991; (6) Wang etal, 1989; (7) Zongliang 
era/., 1992; (8) Debo efa/., 1992; (9) Parashar e/a/., 1991; Mitra, 1992; (10) Sass ef a/., 1990; (11) Denmead and 
Freney, 1990; (12) Yagi, unpubUshed. 

Al Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
37 
Thus, about 20% (lOOTg) of total annual C H 4 emissions 
are from fossil carbon sources, primarily coal-mining 
operations, 
and oil and natural gas 
production, 
transmission, distribution and use. A very small part of this 
may also be due to release of old C H 4 from hydrate 
destabilization (0-5Tg), and a warmer climate could lead to 
a significant increase in the magnitude of this source. The 
latest estimates of global annual emissions for coal-mining 
range from 25 to 47Tg (Okken and Kran, 1989; Bams and 
Edmonds, 1990; Boyer et al., 1990; Hargraves, 1990); for 
the gas industry from 25 to 42Tg (Okken and Kran, 1989; 
Barns and Edmonds, 1990); and for the oil industry from 5 
to 30Tg (Okken and Kran, 1989). Emissions from these 
three sources are broadly consistent with a total annual 
emission of lOOTg. 
Emissions from wetlands are the largest natural source 
of C H 4 to the atmosphere. Although the recent estimate is 
in the range of the IPCC (1990) estimate, the latitudinal 
distribution of the emissions has been revised. Emissions 
from high-latitude peat bogs are about half of that 
previously estimated, while inclusion of bubbling tends to 
enhance the estimates of emissions from tropical swamps. 
The 1990 IPCC estimate of the C H 4 flux from rice 
paddies was based on a very limited amount of data. Table 
A 1.4 summarizes C H 4 emission rates from rice cultivation, 
including a substantial amount of new information from 
Japan, Australia, Thailand and, in particular, India and 
China. Very large variations in emissions are observed 
between different rice paddies. These differences are 
probably due to several factors including irrigation and 
fertilization practices, 
soil/paddy 
characteristics 
(particularly redox potential), cultivation history, 
temperature, and season. While W M O (1992) decided to 
retain the same quantitative emission estimate of lOOTg as 
IPCC (1990), a detailed analysis of the available data, 
particularly that from India, suggests a global annual 
emission nearer the lower end of the range. 
While the estimate of C H 4 emissions from landfills has 
been slightly reduced because of observed high 
C H 4 
oxidation rates in landfill cover soils (Whalen et al., 1990), 
two "waste" sources of C H 4 were not included in the 
previous IPCC assessment, i.e., emissions from animal 
waste (Casada and Safley, 1990) and domestic sewage 
treatment (Harriss, 1991). Based on recent studies (Khalil 
et al., 1990; Rouland et al., 1991) the annual emission 
from termites was scaled down to 20Tg. Carbon-13 studies 
(Stevens, 1988; Quay et al., 1991; Lasaga and Gibbs, 
1991) indicate that the contribution from biomass burning 
is in the upper part of the range given in Table A 1.3. 
A1.4 Nitrous Oxide 
Nitrous oxide is an important long-lived greenhouse gas. 
In addition, it is the primary source of the oxides of 
nitrogen in the stratosphere, which play a critical role in 
controlling the abundance and distribution of stratospheric 
ozone. 
Al.4.1 Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends 
Numerous new data confirm that the present-day 
atmospheric concentration of nitrous oxide (N2O) is about 
310 ppbv; about 8% greater than during the pre-industrial 
era, and it is increasing at a rate of 0.2-0.3% per year 
(WMO, 1992). This observed rate of increase represents an 
annual atmospheric growth rate of about 3 to 4.5TgN. 
Al.4.2 Sinks 
The major atmospheric loss processes for N2O are 
stratospheric photo-dissociation and stratospheric photo-
oxidation. Consumption in soils may represent a small sink 
but, to date, this has not been evaluated. The atmospheric 
N2O lifetime is about 130 (110-168) years (WMO, 1992). 
Al.4.3 Sources 
The sources of N2O were previously discussed in detail in 
IPCC (1990). A revised budget is given in Table A1.5 
based on new information on soil fluxes from tropical 
ecosystems (Sanhueza et al., 1990; Matson et al., 1990) 
and temperate forests (Bowden et al., 1990); detailed 
evaluations of cultivated soils (Bouwman, 1990; Eichner, 
1990); and new estimates of emissions from biomass 
burning (Lobert et al., 1990; Cofer et al., 1991). Large 
tropical sources are required to explain the N2O latitudinal 
Table Al.5: Estimated Sources and Sinks of Nitrous 
Oxide (Tg N per year) 
Sources 
Natural 
•Oceans 
1.4-2.6 
• Tropical Soils 
• Wet forests 
2.2-3.7 
• Dry savannas 
0.5-2.0 
• Temperate Soils 
• Forests 
0.05-2.0 
• Grasslands 
? 
Anthropogenic 
• Cultivated Soils 
0.03-3.0 
• Biomass Burning 
0.2-1.0 
• Stationary Combustion 
0.1-0.3 
• Mobile Sources 
0.2-0.6 
• Adipic Acid Production 
0.4-0.6 
• Nitric Acid Production 
0.1 -0.3 
Sinks 
Removal by soils 
? 
Photolysis in the Stratosphere 
7-13 
Atmospheric Increase 
3-4.5 

38 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
gradient determined using 10 years of A L E / G A G E NjO 
data. The analysis shows specifically that emissions into 
the latitude bands 90°N-30°N, 30°N-equator, equator-30°S, 
and 30°S-90°S, account for about 22-24%, 32-39%, 20-
29%, and 11-15%, respectively, of the global total (Prinn 
et al, 1990). The impact of tropical deforestation on the 
emissions of N2O is unclear; one study indicates an 
enhancement after conversion of humid forest to pasture, 
whereas other studies conclude that forest degradation 
(Sanhueza et al., 1990) or conversion to pasture (Keller, 
1992) reduces the emissions. 
Several recent publications (i.e., De Soete, 1989; Linak 
et al., 1990; Yokoyama et al., 1991) reconfirm that N2O 
emissions from stationary combustion sources are very 
low. Fluidized bed combustion systems produce larger 
quantities of N2O than the traditional coal combustors (De 
Soete, 1989), but because of their present limited 
application their contribution is negligible (CONCAWE, 
1991). 
Several smaller, but important, anthropogenic sources of 
N2O have now been identified. Efforts should continue to 
identify as yet unidentified sources. Thiemens and Trogler 
(1991) estimate that adipic acid production (for nylon 66) 
results in annual atmospheric emissions of 0.4TgN per 
year (industrial estimates suggest that it might be as high 
as 0.6TgN). The annual emission from nitric acid 
production (mainly for N-fertilizer) is 0.1 to 0.3TgN 
(McCuUoch, 1991). Three-way catalyst controlled vehicles 
have higher N2O emissions than uncontrolled vehicles (De 
Table A1.6: Atmospheric Concentrations and Trends of 
Halocarbons 
Species 
Annual Mean 
Trend (pptv/yr) 
Concentration 
1987 
1989 
(pptv), 1989 
WMO (1989) WMO (1992) 
CFC-11 
255 t 
9-10 
9- 10 
CFC-12 
453 t 
16- 17 
17-18 
CFC-113 
64 t 
5 
6 
CCI4 
107 t 
2 
1 -1.5 
HCFC-22 
110 
7 
5-6 
CH3CCI3 
150 t,¥ 
6 
4-5 
CBrClFj 
1.8-3.5 
0.2 
0.4 - 0.7 
CBrFj 
1.6-2.5 
0.3 
0.2 - 0.4 
t 
based on GAGE data (Prinn et al, 1991 and references 
therein) 
¥ 
the 1987 mean CH3CC13 concentration was 140 pptv, not 
150 pptv as reported in WMO (1989). 
Soete, 1989) and recent annual estimates of emissions vary 
between 0.2 and 0.6TgN. 
While the estimated source strengths are quite uncertain, 
it appears that emissions from soils dominate the N2O 
budget. Since the total annual emission rate of N2O 
appears to be between 10 and 17.5TgN, deduced from the 
magnitude of its sinks and its rate of accumulation in the 
atmosphere, and the estimated annual sources are between 
5.2 and 16.1TgN, it seems that the strengths of some of the 
identified sources have been underestimated or that there 
are unidentified sources. It has been suggested that 
agricultural development may stimulate biological 
production and account for the missing emissions. 
Although large changes in land use are occurring in the 
tropics no evaluation of the impact of the increasing use of 
nitrogen fertilizers has been made for this region. 
A 1.5 Halogenated Species 
A 1.5.1 Atmospheric Trends 
The major halogenated source gases, i.e., CFCs, HCFC-22, 
the halons, methyl chloroform (CH3CCI3) and carbon 
tetrachloride (CCI4), continue to grow in concentration in 
the background troposphere of both Hemispheres even 
though the consumption of most of these gases has 
decreased significantiy in recent years (Section A 1.6.2). 
The data are summarized in Table A1.6. The fully 
fluorinated species, tetrafluoromethane (CF4), hexa-
fluoroethane (C2F6), and sulphur hexafluoride (SFg) have 
been measured in the atmosphere, with CF4 being the most 
abundant species (70-80 pptv). 
Al.5.2 Sinks 
The only significant sink for the fully halogenated CFCs is 
photolysis in the stratosphere, whereas the primary sink for 
the partially halogenated chemicals is reaction with OH in 
the troposphere. 
AI.5.3 Sources 
The worldwide consumption of CFCs 11, 12 and 113 
decreased by 40% between 1986 and 1991. At this rate, 
developed country consumption will be reduced by 50% in 
1992 - a three-year advance on the requirements of the 
London Amendments to the Montreal Protocol on 
Substances diat Deplete the Ozone Layer, which calls for a 
50% reduction by 1995, 85% reduction by 1997, and a 
complete phaseout by the year 2000. Major reductions 
have been made by using hydrocarbons as aerosol 
propellants and as blowing agents for flexible foams. 
Solvent users are turning to aqueous and seini-aqueous 
systems, no-clean technologies, alcohol, and other 
solvents. Refrigeration and air conditioning sectors are 
recovering and recycling CFC refrigerants and increasing 
the use of HCFCs and ammonia. Insulating foams have a 
lower CFC content with little energy penalty. 

Al Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
Table A1.7: Total Ozone Trends in Percent per Decade with 95% Confidence Limits 
39 
TOMS: 1979-1991 
Ground-based: 26°N - 64°N 
45°S 
Equator 
45°N 
1979-1991 
1970-1991 
Dec-Mar 
-5.211.5 
+0.3 + 4.5 
-5.6 ±3.5 
-4.7+0.9 
-2.7+0.7 
May-Aug 
-6.2 + 3.0 
+0.1+5.2 
-2.9 ±2.1 
-3.3 + 1.2 
-1.3 ±0.4 
Sep-Nov 
-4.4 ±3.2 
+0.3 ±5.0 
-1.7 ±1.9 
-1.2 ±1.6 
-1.2 + 0.6 
Emissions of halocarbons will decrease further because 
reductions are mandated by the 1990 London Amendments 
to the Montreal Protocol. In addition, many countries and 
some industries have called for an even faster phase-out of 
the controlled substances. UNEP (1991) reported that it is 
technically feasible to almost completely phase out 
controlled substances in developed countries by 1995 -
1997 through a number of measures that are technically 
feasible, many either economically advantageous or at no 
economic cost, others at a "modest" economic cost. A 
more rapid phase-out depends on the extent of recycling 
and technical feasibility of equipment retrofit, on the 
availability of HCFC and HFC replacements and on their 
toxicological and environmental acceptability, on a 
regulatory regime which allows profitable investment in 
their production, on vigorous and effective management of 
the halon bank, and on the very rapid dissemination and 
adoption of technologies for the replacement of CH3CCI3 
by small users. 
The main sources for the fully fluorinated chemicals are 
not well understood. Production of aluminium and use in 
electrical equipment are probably some of the most 
important sources (Stordal and Myhre, 1991). 
A1.6 Ozone 
Ozone (O3) is a particularly effective greenhouse gas in the 
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere, and also plays a 
key role in absorbing solar ultraviolet radiation. About 
90% of the total column of ozone resides in the 
stratosphere, and the remaining 10% in the troposphere. 
The current scientific and policy concerns are reduction of 
stratospheric ozone by chlorine- and bromine-containing 
chemicals, and production of tropospheric ozone by carbon 
monoxide, hydrocarbons, and oxides of nitrogen (see 
Section A.2.6). This section is a summary of a very 
extensive international scientific assessment (WMO, 
1992), which should be read for a more comprehensive 
discussion and for all key references. 
Al.6.1 Observed Trends in Total Column Ozone 
Marked Antarctic O3 holes have continued to occur and, in 
four of the past five years, have been deep and extensive in 
area. This contrasts to the situation in the mid-1980s, 
where the depth and area of the O3 hole exhibited a quasi-
biennial modulation. Recent laboratory research and re-
interpretation of field measurements have strengthened the 
evidence that the Antarctic O3 hole is primarily due to 
chlorine- and bromine-containing chemicals. While no 
extensive O3 losses have occurred in the Arctic 
comparable to those observed in the Antarctic, localized 
Arctic O3 losses have been observed in winter concurrent 
with observations of elevated levels of reactive chlorine. 
Recent ground-based and satellite observations 
(Stolarski et al., 1991) show evidence for significant 
decreases of total column O3 throughout the year in both 
the Northern and Southern Hemispheres at middle and 
high latitudes (Table A 1.7). No trends in O3 have been 
observed in the tropics. These downward trends were 
larger during the 1980s than during the 1970s. 
The observed decreases in total column ozone comprise 
a decrease in the stratosphere, possibly offset to some 
degree by an increase in the troposphere (see next section). 
Al.6.2 
Observed Trends in the Vertical Distribution of 
Ozone 
Ground-, balloon-, and satellite-based measurements show 
that the observed total column O3 decreases during the last 
one to two decades are predominantly due to O3 
concentration decreases in the lower stratosphere (between 
the tropopause and 25km altitude or lower). The rate of 
decrease at middle latitudes in both hemispheres, and high 
latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere has been up to 10% 
per decade depending on altitude. Ozone decreases 
exceeding 90% have been observed in the lower 
stratosphere within the springtime Antarctic ozone hole. In 
addition, there is evidence of small decreases globally in 
the upper stratosphere. 
Measurements indicate that above the few existing 
balloonsonde stations at northern middle latitudes in 
Europe O3 levels in the troposphere up to 10km altitude 
have increased by about 10% per decade over the past two 
decades. However, the data base for O3 trends in the upper 
troposphere is sparse and inadequate for quantifying its 
contribution to the global radiative balance. 

40 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
Al.6.3 Future Levels of Stratospheric Ozone 
The weight of evidence suggests that the observed middle-
and high-latitude O 3 losses are largely due to chlorine and 
bromine. Therefore, as the atmospheric abundances of 
chlorine and bromine increase in the future, significant 
additional losses of O3 are expected. Even if the control 
measures of the amended Montreal Protocol (London, 
1990) were to be implemented by all nations, the current 
abundance of stratospheric chlorine (3.3-3.5 ppbv) is 
estimated to increase during the next decade, reaching a 
peak of about 4.1 ppbv around the turn of the century. 
With these increases, additional middle-latitude O3 losses 
during the 1990s are expected to be comparable to those 
observed during the 1980s. Hence, by the year 2000 O3 
depletions are expected to be about 6% in summer and 
about 10% in winter. In addition, there is the possibility of 
incurring widespread losses in the Arctic. Enhanced levels 
of stratospheric sulphate aerosols from natural (e.g., Mt. 
Pinatubo) or anthropogenic sources could possibly lead to 
even greater ozone losses by increasing the catalytic 
efficiency of chlorine- and bromine-containing chemicals 
through heterogeneous chemical processes. 
A reduction in the peak chlorine and bromine levels, and 
a hastening of the subsequent decline of these levels, hence 
reducing future levels of O3 depletion, can be accom-
plished in a variety of ways, including an accelerated 
phaseout of controlled substances and limitations on 
currently uncontrolled halocarbons. 
A1.7 Tropospheric Ozone Precursors: Carbon 
Monoxide, Non-Methane Hydrocarbons and 
Nitrogen Oxides 
Tropospheric O3 is predicted to increase with increasing 
emissions of nitrogen oxides (NO^), and with increasing 
emissions of carbon monoxide (CO), CH4 and non-
methane hydrocarbons (NMHC) when the atmospheric 
abundance of N O ^ is greater than 20-30 pptv. The 
magnitude of ozone changes are predicted to exhibit 
marked variations with latitude, altitude and season. 
Differences between model calculations of O3 increases 
from NO^ emissions are large (factor of ~3), but moderate 
from CH4 emissions (-50%). The differences in the 
predicted spatial and temporal distributions of O 3 changes 
are particularly large for N O ^ emissions but again 
moderate for CH4 emissions. It should also be noted that 
increases in CH4, CO and N M H C emissions lead to 
reduced OH values, while increased NO,;^ emissions lead to 
enhanced OH levels. As a result of these opposing effects, 
the sign of future OH changes cannot be predicted reliably. 
Uncertainties in present and future tropospheric O H 
concentrations lead to corresponding uncertainties in the 
lifetimes of many tropospheric species, e.g., CH4, HCFCs 
and HFCs. 
Al.7.1 Trends 
There is little new information on the trends of these 
tropospheric O3 precursors. Because of their relatively 
short atmospheric lifetimes, coupled with inadequate 
monitoring networks, the determination of their long-term 
trends and the spatial and temporal variability of their 
atmospheric distribution is very difficuh. The atmospheric 
abundance of CO appears to be increasing in the Northern 
Hemisphere at about 1% per year (Khalil and Rasmussen, 
1990), but there is no evidence of a significant trend in the 
Southern Hemisphere (Khalil and Rasmussen, 1990; 
Brunke et al., 1990). There is also no evidence for trends 
in the atmospheric concentrations of NO^ or N M H C , 
except for ethane in the Northern Hemisphere (0.9±0.3% 
per year: Ehhah ef a/., 1991). 
Al.7.2 Sources and Sinks 
While it is clear that CO, N M H C , and NO^ all have 
significant natural and anthropogenic sources (IPCC, 
1990) their budgets remain uncertain. Recent data 
(Leleiveld and Crutzen, 1991) suggests that the oxidation 
of HCHO in the liquid phase does not produce CO, but 
CO2 directly, therefore the estimates of CO production 
from hydrocarbon oxidation may need to be revised 
downward. Hameed and Dignon (1992) report that NO^ 
emissions have increased by about 30% over the period 
1970-1986. Tables A1.8 and A1.9 show both natural and 
anthropogenic sources of CO and NO^. 
A1.8 Sulphur-Containing Gases 
Sulphur-containing gases emitted into the atmosphere 
through natural and anthropogenic processes affect the 
Earth's radiative budget by being transformed into 
sulphate aerosol particles that: (i) scatter sunlight back to 
space, thereby reducing the radiation reaching the Earth's 
surface; (ii) possibly increase the number of cloud 
condensation nuclei, thereby potentially altering the 
physical characteristics of clouds; and (iii) affect 
atmospheric chemical composition, e.g., stratospheric O3, 
by providing surfaces for heterogeneous chemical 
processes (see Section A2.6 for a fuller discussion). 
Sulphate aerosols are important in both the troposphere 
where they have lifetimes of days to a week or so, as well 
as in the stratosphere where they have lifetimes of several 
years. 
Al.8.1 
Sources 
Spiro et al. (1991) have prepared a detailed global 
inventory of the geographic distribution (1° by 1°) of 
natural and anthropogenic sulphur emissions. The 
estimated emissions of sulphur dioxide (SO2) from 
biomass burning and of reduced sulphur gases from soils 
and vegetation have been reduced (Andreae, 1990; Hao et 

Al Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
Table A1.8: Estimated Sources and Sinks of Carbon Monoxide (Tg CO per year) 
41 
WMO 
(1985) 
Seller & Conrad 
(1987) 
Khalil & 
Rasmussen (1990) 
Crutzen & 
Zimmerman (1991) 
Primary Sources 
• Fossil Fuel 
440 
640+200 
400-1000 
500 
• Biomass Burning 
640 
1,000+600 
335-1400 
600 
• Plants 
-
75+25 
50-200 
-
• Oceans 
20 
100+90 
20-80 
-
Secondary Sources 
• NMHC oxidation 
660 
900+500 
300-1400 
600 
• methane oxidation 
600 
600+300 
400-1000 
630 
Sinks 
• OH reaction 
900+700 
2000+600 
2200 
2050 
• Soil uptake 
256 
390+140 
250 
280 
• Stratos. oxidation 
-
110+30 
100 
-
Table A1.9: Estimated Sources of Nitrogen Oxides 
(Tg N per year) 
Natural 
• Soils 
5-20 (1) 
• Lightning 
2-20 (2) 
• Transport from Stratosphere 
~1 
Antliropogenic 
• Fossil Fuel Combustion 
24 (3) 
• Biomass Burning 
2.5-13 (4) 
• Tropospheric Aircraft 
0.6 
(1) Dignon e? a/., 1991; (2) Atherton etal., 1991; 
(3) Hameed and Dignon, 1992; (4) Dignon and Penner, 1991 
Table ALIO: Estimated Sources of Short-lived Sulphur 
Gases (Tg S per year) 
Anthropogenic emissions (mainly SO2) 
70-80 
Biomass buming (SO2) 
0.8-2.5 
Oceans (DMS) 
10-50 
Soils and plants (DMS and H2S) 
0.2-4 
Volcanic emissions (mainly SO2) 
7-10 
al., 1991; Bates et al., 1991; Spiro et al., 1991). The best 
estimate of the magnitude of annual global anthropogenic 
emissions of SO2 is between 70Tg and 80Tg (Semb 1985; 
Hameed and Dignon, 1988; Languor and Rodhe, 1991; 
Spiro et al., 1991). Recent estimates of the annual global 
emissions of dimethyl sulphide (DMS) from the oceans 
(10-50TgS) (Bates etal., 1987; Bates etal, 1991; Langner 
and Rodhe, 1991; Spiro et al., 1991) are significantly 
lower than given by IPCC (1990). Table A L I O 
summarizes known emissions of key short-lived sulphur 
gases. 
Al.8.2 Atmospheric Gas-Particle Conversion 
Oxidation of SO2 to aerosol sulphate occurs in the gas 
phase and in cloud droplets (aqueous-phase oxidation). 
The former may generate new particles or the newly 
formed H2SO4 may add to existing particles increasing 
their mass but not their number. Aqueous-phase oxidation 
does not result in new particle formation but only adds to 
the mass of sulphate. The dissolved sulphate may remain 
in the atmosphere as an aerosol particle upon cloud droplet 
evaporation (this appears to be the more frequent situation) 
or may be removed from the atmosphere in precipitation. 
The rates of these atmospheric oxidation reactions depend 
on the concentrations of OH for the gas-phase reaction and 
of oxidants (hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and O3) for the 
aqueous-phase reactions. The rates of the aqueous-phase 
reactions increase with cloud liquid-water content, increase 
with decreasing temperature, as a consequence of 
temperature dependent gas solubilities, and for the O3 
reaction, decrease with decreasing cloud water pH. The 
decrease in pH as the reaction proceeds can lead to a self 
limitation of that reaction. While the extent of the H2O2 
oxidation may be limited by the amount of H2O2 present, 
the amount of O3 is rarely limiting to the extent of 
oxidation by that species. Detailed description of the rate, 
extent and spatial distribution of these reactions depends 
on knowledge of the concentrations of the reagent species 
and, in the case of the aqueous-phase reactions, of the 
pertinent cloud properties. 
In addition to the mass concentration of the sulphate 

42 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
aerosol it is necessary to have information about the size 
distribution of the aerosol particles, since this size 
distribution affects the radiative and cloud nucleating 
properties of the aerosol. The evolution of the size 
distribution of an aerosol (in clear air) is the resultant of 
new particle formation and coagulation and removal 
processes. These processes depend, in a complex and 
incompletely understood way, on the properties of the 
existing aerosol and the rate of generation of new 
condensable material. The size distribution is a strong 
function of relative humidity, shifting to larger sizes with 
increasing relative humidity (Charlson et al., 1987; 
d'Almmeida et al., 1991). The size distribution is also 
greatly influenced by cloud processes (Hoppel et al, 1990; 
Hegg et al, 1990). 
Al.8.3 Transport and Distribution 
The atmospheric lifetimes of SO2, D M S and hydrogen 
sulphide (H2S) are a few weeks at most, and their 
atmospheric distributions are largely controlled by the 
distributions of their sources. The mean residence time of 
sulphate aerosols formed by gas-particle conversion in the 
troposphere is about a week. Two consequences of the 
short lifetimes are that the resulting distribution of 
tropospheric aerosols is inhomogeneous, and that these 
gases are not significant contributors to the stratospheric 
sulphate layer. To assess the climatic impact of these 
aerosols it is necessary to know dieir spatial distribution in 
much more detail than is the case for the longer-lived 
greenhouse gases, (a) because the radiative forcing due to 
aerosols varies spatially, (b) because cloud microphysical 
processes are nonlinear in the concentration of aerosol 
particles, and (c) because cloud forcing is nonlinear in the 
concentration of cloud droplets. 
Al.8.4 Removal 
Removal of submicrometer aerosol particles contributing 
to the radiative effects occurs largely by the precipitation 
process (e.g., Slinn, 1983). These particles are the 
dominant particles on which cloud particles form (cloud 
condensation nuclei, CCN); once a cloud droplet (of 
diameter of a few up to 20 micrometres) is formed, it is 
much more susceptible to scavenging and removal in 
precipitation than is the original submicrometre particle. 
The fraction of aerosol particles incorporated in cloud 
droplets on cloud formation is the subject of active current 
research. Earlier work has yielded a fairly wide spread in 
this fractional incorporation, based in part on limitations of 
then-existing techniques and in part on the absence of a 
single definition of incorporation efficiency (ten Brink et 
al, 1987). More recent work indicates a high fractional 
incorporation at low concentrations of aerosol particles 
decreasing as the aerosol particle loading increases (Gillani 
et al., 1992). Model calculations of the efficiency of 
incorporation of aerosol particles into cloud droplets and 
precipitation are highly sensitive to assumptions and 
approach (Jenson and Charlson, 1984; Flossmann et al, 
1985; Hand, 1987; Ahr et al, 1989; Albeit et al, 1990). 
Al.8.5 Stratospheric Aerosols 
Volcanic injections of sulphur are a major contributor to 
the stratospheric aerosol layer. Krueger (1991) used 
Nimbus 7 TOMS data to estimate that the eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991 added about 20 million 
tons of SO2 direcdy to the stratosphere, about 50% more 
than the eruption of Mt. E l Chichon. Anthropogenic 
emissions add to stratospheric sulphur and their magnitude 
needs to be evaluated. Carbonyl sulphide (COS), a 
significant source, is produced by the oxidation of carbon 
disulphide (CS2) in the troposphere but its origins are 
anthropogenic. In addition, Hofmann (1990, 1991) has 
suggested that the abundance of stratospheric sulphate 
aerosols had increased during the last decade, possibly due 
to aircraft emissions of SO2. 
References 
Ahr, M., A.I. Flossmann and H.R. Pruppacher, 1989: A 
comparison between two formulations for nucleation 
scavenging. Beitr. Phys. Atmosphere, 62, 321-326. 
Alheit, R.R., A.I. Flossmann and H.R, Pruppacher, 1990: A 
theoretical study of the wet removal of atmospheric pollutants 
- Part IV: The uptake and redistribution of aerosol particles 
through nucleation and impaction scavenging by growing 
cloud drops and ice particles. J. Atmos. Sal, 47, 870-887. 
Andreae, M.O., 1990: Ocean-atmosphere interactions in the 
global biogeochemical sulphur cycle. Mar. Chem., 30, 1-29. 
Atherton, C.S., J.E. Penner and J.J. Walton, 1991: The role of 
lightning in the tropospheric nitrogen budget: model 
investigations. Geophys. Res. Lett. (To be submitted). 
Barns, D.W. and J.A. Edmonds, 1990: An evaluation of the 
relationship between the production and use of energy and 
atmospheric methane emissions, US Department of Energy, 
DOE/NBB-0088P. 
Bates, T.S., J.D. Cline, R.H. Gammon and S.R. Kelly-Hansen, 
1987: Regional seasonal variations in the flux of oceanic 
dimethylsulphide to the atmosphere. Geophys. Res., 92, 2930-
2938. 
Bates, T.S., B.K. Lamb and A. Guenther, I99I: Sulphur 
emissions to the atmosphere from natural sources. / Atmos. 
Chem. (Submitted). 
Bazzaz, F.A., 1990: The response of natural ecosystems to the 
rising global COj levels. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst., 21, 67-196. 
Blake, D.R. and F.S. Rowland, 1988: Continuing worldwide 
increase in tropospheric methane, 1978-1987. Science, 239, 
1129-1131, 

AJ Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
43 
Bouwman, A.F., 1990: Exchange of greenhouse gases between 
terrestrial ecosystems and the atmosphere. In: Soil and the 
greenhouse effect. A.F. Bouwman (Ed.). Wiley, pp62-125. 
Bowden, R.D., P.A. Steudler, J.M. Melillo and J.D. Durham, 
1990: Annual nitrous oxide fluxes from temperate forest soils 
in the northeastern United States. 
Geophys. Res., 95, 13,997-
14,005. 
Boyer, C M . , J.R. Kelafant, V.A. Kuuskraa and K.C. Manger, 
1990: Methane emissions from coal mining: Issues and 
opportunities for reduction. US Environmental Protection 
Agency, EPA.400/9-90/008. 
Brown, S. and A.E. Lugo, 1984: Biomass of tropical forests: A 
new estimate based on forest volumes. Science, 223, 1290-
1293. 
Brown, S. and A.E. Lugo, 1991: Biomass of tropical forests of 
south and southeast Asia. Can. J. For. Res., 21, 111-117. 
Brunke, E., H. Scheele and W. Seller, 1990: Trends of 
tropospheric CO, N2O and CH4 as observed at Cape Point, 
South Africa. Atmos. Environ., 24A, 585-595. 
Casada, M.E. and L.M. Safley, 1990: Global methane emissions 
from livestock and poultry manure. Report to the Global 
Change Division, US Environmental Protection Agency, 
Washington, D.C. 
Charlson, R.J., I.E. Lovelock, M.O. Andreae and S.G. Warren, 
1987: Oceanic phytoplankton, atmospheric sulfur, cloud 
albedo and climate. Nature, 326, 655-661. 
Cicerone, R.J. and J.D. Shetter, 1981: Sources of atmospheric 
methane: Measurements in rice paddies and a discussion. /. 
Geophys. Res., 86, 7203-7209. 
Cicerone, R.J., J.D. Shetter and C.C. Delwiche, 1983: Seasonal 
variation of methane flux from a California rice paddy. /. 
Geophys. Res., 88, 11,022-11,024. 
Cofer III, W.R., J.S. Levine, E.L. Winstead and B.J. Stocks, 
1991: New estimates of nitrous oxide emission from biomass 
buming. Nature, 349, 689-691. 
CONCAWE, 1991: An EC-12/world inventory of greenhouse 
gas emissions from fossil fuel use. CONCAWE, Report No. 
91/54, Brussels. 
Crutzen, P.J. and P.H. Zimmermann, 1991: The changing 
photochemistry of the troposphere. Tellus, 43, 136-151. 
Crutzen, P.J., 1991: Methane's sinks and sources. Nature, 350, 
380-381. 
d'AImmeida, G.A., P. Koepke and E.P. Shettle, 1991: 
Atmospheric aerosols: Global climatology and radiative 
characteristics. Deepak Publishing, Hampton, Virginia 
De Soete, G., 1989: Updated evaluation of nitrous oxide 
emissions from industrial fossil fuel combustion. Report to the 
European Atomic Energy Community. Institut Francais du 
Petrole, Ref. 37-559. 
Debo, L., Z. Jiwu, L. Weixing, Y. Fei, 1992: Monitoring and 
controlling of C H 4 emissions from the rice paddy field near 
Nanjing, China. In: Climate-Biosphere Interactions: Biogenic 
Emissions and Environmental Effects of Climate Change. R.G. 
Zepp (Ed.), Wiley, New York. (In press). 
Denmead, O.T. and J.R. Freney, 1990: Micrometeorological 
measurements of methane emissions from flooded rice. Poster 
paper, SCOPE/IGBP Workshop on Trace Gas Exchange in a 
Global Perspective, Feb. 19-23, Sigtuna, Sweden. 
Dignon, J. and J.E. Penner, 1991: Biomass buming: A source of 
nitrogen oxides in the atmosphere. In: Global Biomass 
Burning: Atmospheric, Climatic and Biospheric Implications. 
J.S. Levine (Ed.), MIT Press. 
Dignon, J., J.E. Penner, C.S. Atherton and J.J. Walton, 1991: 
Atmospheric reactive nitrogen: a model study of natural and 
anthropogenic sources and the role of microbial soil emissions. 
Presented at CHEMRAWN VII, Baltimore, Maryland, 
December 2-6. 
Drake, B.G. and P.W. Leadley, 1991: Canopy photosynthesis of 
crops and native communities exposed to long-term elevated 
CO2. Plant, Cell and Environment, 14, 853-860. 
Ehhalt, D.H., U. Schmidt, R. Zander, P. Demoulin and C P . 
Rinsland, 1991: Seasonal cycle and secular trend of the total 
and tropospheric column abundance of ethane above the 
Jungfraujoch. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 4985-4994. 
Eichner, M.J., 1990: Nitrous oxide emissions from fertilized 
soils: Summary of available data. /. Environ. Qual, 19,272-280. 
Enting, I.G. and J.V. Mansbridge, 1991: Latitudinal distribution 
of sources and sinks of CO2: results of an inversion study. 
Tellus, 43B, 156-170. 
FAO, 1990: Interim report on forest resources assessment 1990 
project. Committee on Forestry, Tenth Session, FAO, Rome. 
FAO, 1991: Second interim report on the state of tropical forests. 
IQth World Forestry Congress, Paris, France. 
FAO/UNEP, 1981: Tropical Forest Resources Assessment 
Project. FAO, Rome. 
Fearnside, P.M., A.T. Tardin and L.G. Meira Filho, 1990: 
Deforestation rate in Brazilian Amazonia. National Secretariat 
of Science and Technology, Brazilia, 8pp. 
Flossmann, A.I., W.D. Hall and H.R. Pruppacher, 1985: A 
theoretical study of the wet removal of atmospheric pollutants 
- Part I: The redistribution of aerosol particles captured 
through nucleation and impaction scavenging by growing 
cloud drops. /. Atmos. Sci., 42, 583-606. 
Fung, I., J. John, J. Lemer, E. Matthews, M. Prather, L.P. Steele 
and P.J. Fraser, 1991: Three-dimensional model synthesis of 
the global methane cycle. /. Geophys. Res., D7, 13,033-
13,065. 
Gillani, N.V., P.H. Daum, S.E. Schwartz, W.R. Leaitch, J.W. 
Strapp and G.A. Isaac, 1992: Fractional activation of 
accumulation-mode particles in warm continental stratiform 
clouds. In: Precipitation scavenging and atmosphere-surface 
exchange. S.E. Schwartz and W.G.N. Slinn (Coordinators). 
Hemisphere, Washington D.C. 
Grulke, N.E., G.H. Reichers, W.C Oechel, U. Hjelm and C. 
Jaeger, 1990: Carbon balance in tussock tundra under ambient 
and elevated atmospheric CO2. Oecologia, 83,485-494. 
Hameed, S. and J. Dignon, 1988: Changes in the geographical 
distributions of global emissions of NO^ and SO^ from fossil 
fuel combustion between 1966 and 1980. Atmos. Environ., 22, 
441-449. 
Hameed, S. and J. Dignon, 1992: Global emissions of nitrogen 
and sulfur oxides in fossil fuel combustion 1970-1986. /. of Air 
and Waste Management Assoc., 42. 
Hanel, G., 1987: The role of aerosol properties during the 
condensational growth of cloud: A reinvestigation of numerics 
and microphysics. Beitr. Phys. Atmosphere, 60, 321-339. 

44 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
Hao, W.M., M.H. Lie and P.J. Crutzen, 1991: Estimates of 
annual and regional releases of CO2 and other trace gases to 
the atmosphere from fires in the tropics based on the FAO 
statistics for the period 1975-1980. In: Fire In the Tropical 
Biota. J.G. Goldammer (Ed.). Springer Verlag, Berlin, 440-462. 
Hargraves, A.J., 1990: Coal seam gas and the atmosphere. In: 
Greenhouse and Energy. D.J. Swaine (Ed.). Melbourne, 
AustraUa, 147-156. 
Harriss, R. 1991: Personal communication. 
Hegg, D.A., L.F. Radke and P.V. Hobbs, 1990: Particle 
production associated with marine clouds. J. Geophys. Res., 
95, 13,917-13,926, 
Heimann, M., 1991: Modelling the global carbon cycle. In: First 
Demetra Meeting on Climate Variability and Global Change. 
Unpublished manuscript. 
Heimann, M, and C D . Keeling, 1989: A three-dimensional 
model of atmospheric COT transport based on observed winds: 
2. Model description and simulated tracer experiments. In: 
Aspects of climate variability in the Pacific and the Western 
Americas. D.H. Peterson (Ed.). Geophysical Monograph, 55, 
AGU, Washington (USA), 237-275. 
Heimann, M., C D . Keeling and C.J. Tucker, 1989: A three-
dimensional model of atmospheric CO2 transport based on 
observed winds: 3. Seasonal cycle and synoptic time-scale 
variations. In: Aspects of climate variability in the Pacific and 
the Western Americas. D.H. Peterson (Ed.). Geophysical 
Monograph, 55, AGU, Washington (USA), 277-303. 
Hofmann, D.J., 1990: Increase in the stratospheric background 
sulphuric acid aerosol mass in the past 10 years. Science, 248, 
996-1000. 
Hofmann, D.J., 1991: Aircraft sulphur emissions. A'afure, 349, 659. 
Holzapfel-Pschorn, A. and W. Seller, 1986: Methane emission 
during a cultivation period from an Italian rice paddy. J. 
Geophys. Res., 91, 11,803-11,814. 
Hoppel, W.A., J.W. Fitzgerald, C M . Frick, R.E. Larson and E.J. 
Mack, 1990: Aerosol size distributions and optical properties 
found in the marine boundary layer over the Atlantic Ocean. J. 
Geophys. Res., 95, 3659-3686. 
Hougliton, R.S., 1991: Tropical deforestation and atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. Climatic Change. (In press). 
INPE, 1991: Unpublished data. Institute Nacional de Pesquisas 
Espaciais, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change, The IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
WMO/UNEP. J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums 
(Eds,). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (UK), pp365. 
Jenson, J.B. and R.J. Charlson, 1984: On the efficiency of 
nucleation scavenging. Tellus, 36B, 367-375, 
Johnson, D,W„ C G , Kilsby, D.S. McKenna, R.W, Saunders, 
G.J. Jenkins, F,B, Smith and J,S, Foot, 1991: Airborne 
observations of the physical and chemical characteristics of the 
Kuwait oil smoke plume. Nature, 353, 617-621. 
Keeling, C D . , R.B. Bacastow, A.F. Carter, S.C Piper, T.P. 
Whorf', M. Heimann, W.G, Mook and H, Roeloffzen, 1989a: A 
three-dimensional model of atmospheric CO2 transport based 
on observed winds: 1. Analysis of observational data. In: 
Aspects of climate variability in the Pacific and the Western 
Americas, D,H. Peterson (Ed.). Geophysical Monograph, 55, 
AGU, Washington (USA), 165-236. 
Keeling, CD., S.C. Piper and M. Heimann, 1989b: A three-
dimensional model of atmospheric CO2 transport based on 
observed winds: 4. Mean annual gradients and interannual 
variations. In: Aspects of climate variability in the Pacific and 
the Western Americas. D.H. Peterson (Ed.). Geophysical 
Monograph, 55, AGU, Washington (USA), 305-363. 
Keller, M., 1992: Controls on the soil-atmosphere fluxes of 
nitrous oxide and methane: Effects of tropical deforestation. 
In: Climate-Biosphere Interactions: Biogenic Emissions and 
Environmental Effects of Climate Change. R.G. Zepp (Ed.). 
Wiley, New York. (In press). 
Keller, M., M.E. Mitre and R.F. Stallard, 1990: Consumption of 
atmospheric methane in soils of Central Panama: Effects of 
agricultural development. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 4, 21-27. 
Kempe, S. and K, Pegler, 1991: Sinks and sources of CO2 in 
coastal seas: the North Sea, Tellus, 43B, 224-235. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1990: The global cycle of 
carbon monoxide: Trends and mass balance. Chemosphere, 20, 
227-242. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1991: Methane emissions 
from rice fields in China. Environ. Sci. TechnoL, 25, 979-981. 
Khalil, M.A.K., R.A. Rasmussen, J.R.J. French and J.A. Holt, 
1990: The influence of termites on atmospheric trace gases; 
CH4, COj, CHCI3, N2O, CO, H2 and light hydrocarbons. J. 
Geophys. Res., 95D, 3619-3634. 
Krueger, A., 1991: Unpublished TOMS satellite data. 
Langner, J. and H. Rodhe, 1991: A global three-dimensional 
model of the tropospheric sulphur cycle. /. Atmos. Chem., 13, 
225-263. 
Lasaga, A . C and G.V. Gibbs, 1991: Ab initio studies of the 
kinetic isotope effect of the CH4 + OH atmospheric reaction. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 1217-1220. 
Leleiveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1991: The role of clouds in 
tropospheric photochemistry. / Atmos. Chem., 12, 229-267, 
Linak, W,P,, J,A, McSorley, R,E. Hall, J.V. Ryan, R.K. 
Srivastava, J.O.L, Wendt and J,B. Mereb, 1990: Nitrous oxide 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 
7533-7541. 
Lobert, J.M., D.H. Scharffe, W.M., Hao and P.J. Crutzen, 1990: 
Importance of biomass burning in the atmospheric budgets of 
nitrogen-containing gases. Nature, 346, 552-556, 
Lugo, A,E, and S, Brown, 1992: Tropical forests as sinks of 
atmospheric carbon. Unpublished manuscript. 
Manning, M.R., D.C Lowe, W. Melhuish, R. Spaarks, G. 
Wallace, C.A.M. Brenninkmeijer and R.C McGill, 1990: The 
use of radiocarbons measurements in atmospheric studies. 
Radiocarbons, 32, 37-58. 
Marland, G. and T, Boden, 1991: Unpublished data. 
Matson, P.A., P.M. Vitousek, G.P. Livingston and N.A. 
Swanberg, 1990: Sources of variation in nitrous oxide flux 
from Amazonian ecosystems. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 16,789-
16,798. 
McCulloch, A., 1991: Personal communication. 
Mitra, A.P., 1992: Global change: Greenhouse gas emissions in 
India. Scientific Report #2. Prepared for the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research and Ministry of 
Environment and Forests. 

Al Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks 
45 
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, 
Final Act, 1987: United Nations Environment Programme, 
Na.87-6106. Available from UNEP Ozone Secretariat, Nairobi, 
Kenya. (1990 London Amendments to Protocol also available). 
Mosier, A., D. Schimel, D. Valentine, K. Bronson and W. 
Parton, 1991: Methane and nitrous oxide fluxes in native, 
fertilized and cultivated grasslands. Nature, 350, 330-332. 
Murphy, P.P., R.A. Feely, R.H. Gammon, D.E. Harrison, K.C. 
Kelly and L.S. Waterman, 1991: Assessment of the Air-Sea 
Exchange of CO2 in the South Pacific during Austral Autumn. 
J. Geophys. Res., 96, 20,455-20,465. 
Myers, N., 1980: Conversion of tropical moist forest. US 
National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC. 
Myers, N., 1989: Deforestation rates in tropical forests and their 
climatic implications. Friends of the Earth, London, UK. 
Oechel, W.C. and B.R. Strain, 1985: Native species responses to 
increased carbon dioxide concentration. In: Direct Effects of 
Increasing Carbon Dioxide on Vegetation. B.R. Strain and J.D. 
Cure (Eds.). US Department of Energy, NTIS, Springfield, 
Virginia, ppl 17-154. 
Okken, P.A. and T. Kran, 1989: CH4/CO emissions from fossil 
fuels-global potential. Prepared for lEA/ETSAP Workshop, 
Paris, June 1989. Petten, The Netherlands: Energieonderzoek 
Cenuum ESC. 
Parashar, D . C , J. Rai, P.K. Gupta and N. Singh, 1991: 
Parameters affecting methane emission from paddy fields. 
Indian Journal of Radio and Space Physics, 20, 12-17. 
Parton, W.J., D.S. Schimel, C.V. Cole and D.S. Ojima, 1987: 
Analysis of factors controlling soil organic matter levels in 
Great Plains grasslands. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Journal , 51, 
1173-1179. 
Prinn, R., D. Cunnold, R. Rasmussen, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea, 
A. Crawford, P. Fraser and R. Rosen, 1990: Atmospheric 
emissions and trends of nitrous oxide deduced from 10 years of 
ALE-GAGE data. J. Geophys. Res.. 95, No. D l l , pl8,369-
18,385. 
Prinn, R., F. Alyea, D. Cunnold, P. Fraser and P. Simmonds, 
1991: Unpublished data from the ALE-GAGE network. 
Prinn, R., D. Cunnold, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea, R. Boldi, A. 
Crawford, P. Fraser, D. Gutzler, D. Hartley, R. Rosen and R. 
Rasmussen, 1992: Global average concentration and trend for 
hydroxyl radicals deduced from ALE/GAGE trichloroethane 
(methyl chloroform) data for 1978-1990. J. Geophys. Res. 
(Submitted). 
Prudhomme, T.I., W.C. Oechel, S.J. Hastings and W.T. 
Lawrence, 1984: Net ecosystem gas exchange at ambient and 
elevated carbon dioxide concentrations in tussock tundra at 
Toolik Lake, Alaska: an evaluation of methods and initial 
results. In: The Potential Effects of Carbon Dioxide-Induced 
Climatic Changes in Alaska: Proceedings of a Conference 
School of Agricultural and Land Resources Management. J.H. 
McBeath (Ed.). University of Alaska, Fairbanks, Alaska. 
Quay, P.O., S.L. King, J. Stutsman, D.O. Wilbur, L. P. Steele, 1. 
Fung, R.H. Gammon, T.A. Brown, G.W. Farwell, P.M. 
Grootes and F.H. Schmidt, 1991; Carbon isotopic composition 
of atmospheric CH4: Fossil and biomass burning source 
strengths. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 5, 25-47. 
Quay, P.D., B. Tilbrook and C.S. Wong, 1992: Oceanic uptake 
of fossil fuel CO2: Carbon-13 evidence. Unpublished 
manuscript. 
Raich, J,W„ E.B. Rastetter, J.M. Melillo, D.W, Kicklighter, PA. 
Steudler, B.J. Peterson, A.L. Grace, B. Moore III and C.J. 
Vorosmarty, 1991: Potential net primary production in South 
America: application of a global model. Ecol. AppL, 1, 399-429. 
Rouland, C , A. Brauman. M . Labat, M. Lepage and J.C 
Mennaut, 1991: Poster paper presented at the NATO 
Advanced Research Workshop. The Atmospheric Methane 
Cycle: Sources, Sinks, Distribution and Role in Global 
Change. Portland, Oregon, 6-11 October 1991. 
Sanhueza, E., W.M. Hao, D. Scharffe, L. Donoso and P.J. 
Crutzen, 1990: N2O and NO emissions from soils of the 
Northern part of the Guayana Shield, Venezuela. /. Geophys. 
Res., 95, 22,481-22,488. 
Sass, R.L., F.M. Fisher, P.A. Narcombe and F.T. Turner, 1990: 
Methane production and emission in Texas rice field. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 4, 47-68. 
Scharffe. D., W.M. Hao, L. Donoso, P.J. Crutzen and E. 
Sanhueza, 1990: Soil fluxes and atmospheric concentration of 
CO and CH4 in the Northern part of the Guayana Shield, 
Venezuela. J Geophys. Res., 95, 22,475-22,480. 
Schutz, H., A. Holzapfel-Pschorn, R. Conrad, H. Rennenberg 
and W. Seller, 1989: A 3-year continuous record on the 
influence of daytime, season and fertilizer treatment on 
methane emission rates from an Italian rice paddy. / Geophys. 
Res., 94, 16,405-16,416. 
Seller, W. and R. Conrad, 1987: Contribution of tropical 
ecosystems to the global budget of trace gases, especially CH4, 
H2, CO and N2O. In: The Geophysiology of Amazonia. R. 
Dickenson (Ed.). John Wiley, New York. 133-160. 
Seller, W., A. Holzapfel-Pschorn, R. Conrad and D. Scharffe, 
1984: Methane emission from rice paddies. / Atmos. Chem., 1, 
241-268. 
Semb, A. 1985: Circumpolar SO2 emission survey. Norwegian 
Institute for Research, Lillestrom, Norway. NILU OR 69/85. 
Setzer, A.W. and M . C Pereira, 1991: Amazonia biomass 
burnings in 1987 and an estimate of their tropospheric 
emissions. AmWo, 20, 19-22. 
Slinn, W.G.N., 1983: Air to sea transfer of particles. In: Air-Sea 
Exchange of Gases and Particles. P.S. Liss and W.G.N. Slinn 
(Eds.). D. Reidel, Dordrecht. pp299-405. 
Spiro, P.A., D.J. Jacob and J.A. Logan, 1991: Global inventory 
of sulphur emissions with Txl" resoludon. J. Geophys. Res. 
(Submitted). 
Steele, L.P., E.J. Dlugokencky, P.M. Lang, P.P. Tans, R.C 
Mardn and K.A. Masarie, 1992: Slowing down of the global 
accumulation of atmospheric methane during the 1980s. 
Nature. (Submitted). 
Stevens, C M . , 1988: Atmospheric methane. Chem. Geology, 71, 
11-21. 
Stolarski, R.S., P. Bloomfield, R.D. McPeters and J.R. Herman, 
1991: Total ozone trends deduced from Nimbus 7 TOMS data. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 1015-1018. 
Stordal, F. and G. Myhre, 1991: Greenhouse Effect and 
Greenhouse Warming Potential for SFg. Norwegian Institute 
for Air Research. NILU OR:74/91, 0-91065. 

46 
Greenhouse Gases: Sources and Sinks Al 
Tans, P.P., I.Y. Fung and T. Takahashi, 1990: Observational 
constraints on the global atmospheric carbon dioxide budget. 
Science,24n, 1431-1438. 
ten Brink, H., S. Schwartz and P.H. Daum, 1987: Efficient 
scavenging of aerosol sulfate by liquid-water clouds. Atmos. 
Environ., 21, 2035-2052. 
Tiiiemens, M.H. and W.C. Trogler, 1991: Nylon production: An 
unknown source of atmospheric nitrous oxide. Science, 251, 
932-934. 
Thomley, J.H.M., D. Fowler and M.G.R. Cannell, 1991: 
Terrestrial carbon storage resulting from COT and nitrogen 
fertilization in temperate grasslands. Plant, Cell and 
Environment, 14, 1007-1011. 
Tissue, D.T. and W.C. Oechel, 1987: Response of Eriophorum 
vaginatum to elevated CO2 and temperature in the Alaskan 
tussock tundra. Ecology, 68, 401-410. 
UNEP, 1991: Montreal Protocol 1991 Assessment Report of the 
Technology and Economic Assessment Panel, December 1991. 
Vaghjiani, G.L. and A.R. Ravishankara, 1991: New 
measurement of the rate coefficient for the reaction of OH with 
methane. Nature, 350, 406-409. 
Wang, M.-X., D. Aiguo, S. Renxing, H. Schutz, H. Rennenberg, 
W. Seller and W. Haibao, 1989: CH4 emission from a Chinese 
rice paddy field. Acta Meteorologica Sinica, 4, 265-275. 
Watson, A.J., C. Robinson, J.E. Robinson, P.J. le B. Williams 
and M.J.R. Fasham, 1991: Spatial variability in the sink for 
atmospheric carbon dioxide in the North Atlantic. Nature, 350, 
50-53. 
Whalen, M. and W. Reeburg, 1990: Consumption of atmospheric 
methane by tundra soils. Nature, 346, 160-162. 
Whalen, M., N. Takata, R. Henry, B. Deck, J. Zeglen, J.S. 
Vogel, J. Southon, A. Shemesh, R. Fairbanks and W. 
Broecker, 1989: Carbon-14 in methane sources and in 
atmospheric methane: The contribution from fossil carbon. 
Science, 245, 286-290. 
Whalen, M . , W. Reeburg and K. Sandbeck, 1990: Rapid 
methane oxidation in a landfill cover soil. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol, 56, 3045-3411. 
WMO, 1985: Atmospheric Ozone 1985. Chapter 15, WMO 
Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project, Report No. 
16, Geneva. 
WMO, 1989: Report of the International Ozone Trends Panel 
1988. WMO Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project, 
Report No. 18, Geneva. 
WMO, 1992: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1991. 
WMOAJNEP, WMO Global Ozone Research and Monitoring 
Project, Report No. 25, Geneva 
WRI, 1990: World Resources 1990-1991. World Resources 
Institute and United Nations Development Programme. Oxford 
University Press, New York. 
Yagi, K. and K. Minami, 1990: Effect of organic matter 
application on methane emission from some Japanese paddy 
field. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr, 36, 599-610. 
Yagi, K., 1991: Unpublished data. 
Yokoyama, T., S. Nishinomiya and H. Matsuda, 1991: NjO 
emission from fossil fuel fired power plants. Environ. Sci. 
Technol, 25, 347-348. 
Zongliang, C , S. Kesheng and W. Bujun, 1992: Methane 
emissions from different cultivation practices of rice paddies in 
Beijing. In: Climate-Biosphere Interactions: 
Biogenic 
Emissions and Environmental Effects of Climate Change. R.G. 
Zepp (Ed.). Wiley, New York. (In press). 

A2 
Radiative Forcing of Climate 
I.S.A. ISAKSEN, V. RAMASWAMY, H. RODHE, T.M.L. WIGLEY 
Contributors: 
R. Charlson; I. Kami; J. Lelieveld; C.B. Leovy; S.E. Schwartz; K.P. Shine; 
R.T. Watson; D.J. Wuebbles; B.A. Callander 

 

CONTENTS 
Executive Summary 
51 
A2.1 Introduction 
53 
A2.2 Radiative Forcing 
53 
A2.3 Tiie Global Warming Potential (GWP) Concept 
53 
A2.3.1 Definition 
53 
A2.3.2 Reference Molecule 
54 
A2.3.3 Time Horizons for GWPs 
54 
A2.3.4 Limitations of Present GWPs 
54 
A2.3.5 Direct GWPs of Well-Mixed Trace Gases 
55 
A2.3.6 Indirect GWPs of Well-Mixed Trace Gases 
55 
A2.4 Radiative Forcing due to Stratospheric Ozone 
55 
A2.4.1 Lower Stratospheric Losses 
55 
A2.4,2 The Greenhouse Effect of Ozone Losses 
58 
A2.4.3 Ozone Depletion and Stratospheric Temperature 
Changes 
58 
A2.5 Radiative Forcing due to Gases in the Troposphere 59 
A2.5.1 Introduction 
59 
A2.5.2 Chemical Processes and Changes in O3 and OH 59 
A2.5.3 Sensitivity of Radiative Forcing to Changes in 
Tropospheric Ozone 
60 
A2.5.4 Indirect Effects due to C H 4 Emissions 
60 
A2.5.4.1 Changes in Lifetimes due to Changes 
in OH 
60 
A2.5.4.2 Radiative Forcing Changes from 
CH4-Induced Changes in Ozone 
60 
A2.5.4.3 Effects of CH4 on Stratospheric Water 
Vapour 
61 
A2.5.4.4 Oxidation to CO2 
61 
A2.5.4.5 Indirect GWP for CH4 
61 
A2.5.5 NO^ Emissions 
61 
A2.5.6 CO and NMHC Emissions 
61 
A2.5.7 Summary 
61 
A2.6 Radiative Forcing due to Aerosol Particles 
62 
A2.6.1 Tropospheric Particles 
62 
A2.6.1.I Background 
62 
A2.6.1.2 New Findings 
62 
A2.6.1.3 Discussion 
63 
A2.6.2 Stratospheric Sulphate Particles 
64 
A2.7 Forcing Due to Solar Irradiance Changes 
64 
References 
65 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Since the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment (IPCC, 1990), there 
have been significant advances in our understanding of the 
impact of ozone depletion and sulphate aerosols on radiative 
forcing and of the limitations of the concept of the Global 
Warming Potential (GWP). 
Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Stratospheric Ozone: 
Observed global depletions of ozone ( O 3 ) in the lower 
stratosphere have been used to calculate changes in the radiative 
balance of the atmosphere. Although the results are sensitive to 
atmospheric adjustments, and no General Circulation Model 
(GCM) studies of the implications of the O 3 changes on surface 
temperature have been performed, the radiative balance 
calculations indicate that the O3 reductions observed during the 
1980s have caused reductions in the radiative forcing of the 
surface-troposphere system at mid- and high latitudes. This 
reduction in radiative forcing resulting from O3 depletion could, 
averaged on a global scale and over the last decade, be 
approximately equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the 
enhanced radiative forcing due to increased chlorofluorocarbons 
(CFCs) during the same time period. 
Radiative Forcing due to Changes in Tropospheric Ozone: 
While there are consistent observations of an increase in 
tropospheric ozone (up to 10% per decade) at a limited number of 
locations in Europe, there is not an adequate global set of 
observations to quantify the magnitude of the increase in 
radiative forcing. However, it has been calculated that a 10% 
uniform global increase in tropospheric ozone would increase 
radiative forcing significantly compared to forcing by other 
greenhouse gases. 
Radiative Effects of Sulphur Emissions: 
Emissions of sulphur compounds from anthropogenic sources 
lead to the presence of sulphate aerosols which reflect solar 
radiation. This is likely to have a cooling influence on the 
Northern Hemisphere. For clear-sky conditions alone, the cooling 
caused by current rates of emissions has been estimated to be up 
to lWm-2 averaged over the Northern Hemisphere, a value which 
should be compared with the estimate of 2.5Wm-2 for the heating 
due to anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions up to the present. 
The non-uniform distribution of anthropogenic sulphur sources 
coupled with the relatively short atmospheric residence time of 
sulphur compounds produce large regional variations in their 
effects. In addition, sulphate aerosols may affect the radiation 
budget through changes in cloud optical properties. 
Global Warming Potentials: 
Gases can exert a radiative forcing both directly and indirectly: 
direct forcing occurs when the gas itself is a greenhouse gas; 
indirect forcing occurs when chemical transformation of the 
original gas produces a gas or gases which themselves are 
greenhouse gases. The concept of the Global Warming Potential 
(GWP) has been developed for policymakers as a measure of the 
possible warming effect on the surface-troposphere system 
arising from the emission of each gas relative to carbon dioxide 
(CO2). The indices are calculated for the contemporary 
atmosphere and do not take into account possible changes in 
chemical composition of the atmosphere. Changes in radiative 
forcing due to CO2 are highly non-linear with respect to changes 
in atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Hence, as CO2 levels 
increase from present values, the GWPs of the non-C02 gases 
would be higher than those evaluated here. For the concept to be 
most useful, both the direct and indirect components of the GWP 
need to be quantified. 
Direct Global Warming Potentials: 
The direct components of the GWPs have been recalculated, 
taking into account revised estimated lifetimes, for a set of time 
horizons ranging from 20 to 500 years, with CO2 as the reference 
gas. The same ocean-atmosphere carbon cycle model as used in 
IPCC (1990) has been used to relate C O 2 emission to 
concentrations. While in most cases the values are similar to the 
previous IPCC (1990) values, the GWPs for some of the 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs) have increased by 20 to 50% because of revised estimates 
of their lifetimes. The direct GWP of methane (CH4) has been 
adjusted upward, correcting an error in the previous IPCC report. 
The carbon cycle model used in these calculations probably 
underestimates both the direct and indirect GWP values for all 
non-C02 gases. The magnitude of the bias depends on the 
atmospheric lifetime of the gas, and the GWP time horizon. 
Indirect Global Warming Potentials: 
Because of our incomplete understanding of chemical processes, 
most of the indirect GWPs reported in IPCC (1990) are likely to 
be in substantial error, and none of them can be recommended. 
Although we are not yet in a position to recommend revised 

52 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
numerical values, we do know that the indirect GWP for methane 
is positive and could be comparable in magnitude to its direct 
value. In contrast, the indirect GWPs for chlorinated and 
brominated halocarbons are likely to be negative. The concept of 
a GWP for short-lived, heterogeneously distributed constituents, 
such as carbon monoxide (CO), non-methane hydrocarbons 
(NMHC), and nitrogen oxide (NO^) may prove inapplicable, 
although these constituents will affect the radiative balance of the 
atmosphere through changes in tropospheric ozone and the 
hydroxyl radical (OH). Similarly, a GWP for sulphur dioxide 
(SO2) is viewed to be inapplicable because of the non-uniform 
distribution of sulphate aerosols. 

A2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
53 
A2.1 Introduction 
This section is an update of the discussions presented in 
Section 2 of the first Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change Scientific Assessment (IPCC, 1990) concerning 
the radiatively and chemically important species in the 
atmosphere. The present update has five major objectives: 
(i) 
to extend the discussion on Global Warming 
Potentials (GWPs), and to re-evaluate their numer-
ical values in view of revisions to the lifetimes of the 
radiatively active species; 
(ii) 
to characterize the radiative impacts of the observed 
stratospheric O3 losses between 1979 and 1990; 
(iii) to discuss the changes in the concentrations of 
radiatively active gases occurring through chemical 
processes, and their implications for radiative 
forcing; 
(iv) 
to characterize the radiative forcing due to tropo-
spheric and stratospheric sulphate aerosol con-
centrations; 
(v) to extend the discussion on the radiative forcing due 
to solar irradiance variations. 
Some of the scientific details regarding the new 
developments have already appeared in the 1991 Scientific 
Assessment of Ozone Depletion (WMO, 1992). 
A2.2 Radiative Forcing 
The radiative forcing due to a perturbation in the 
concentration of a species is defined (see WMO, 1986; 
IPCC, 1990; WMO, 1992) by the net radiative flux change 
induced at the tropopause, keeping the concentrations of 
all other species constant. The change in the radiative flux 
is determined using a one-dimensional radiative transfer 
model in which the surface and tropospheric temperatures 
are held fixed at some reference values, while the 
stratospheric temperatures are allowed to relax to a new 
equilibrium in response to the perturbation. The definition 
assumes that the stratosphere undergoes a purely radiative 
adjustment, i.e., there is no change in the dynamical 
heating of the stratosphere due to the perturbation (WMO, 
1986). 
The radiative forcing is interpreted as a gain (positive) 
or loss (negative) for the surface-troposphere system as a 
whole. The motivation for this concept arises from 
radiative-convective modelling exercises, where the 
change in the global mean surface temperature can be 
related simply to the net radiative flux change at the 
tropopause (WMO, 1986). This has led to the adoption of 
the radiative forcing of the surface-troposphere system as a 
simple and convenient basis for estimating the potential 
climatic effects of various trace species. 
A2.3 The Global Warming Potential (GWP) Concept 
The aim of the GWP index is to offer a simple char-
acterization of the relative radiative effects of the well-
mixed species. It was created in order to enable 
policymakers to evaluate options that affect the emissions 
of various greenhouse gases, by avoiding the need to make 
repeated, complex calculations. IPCC (1990) discussed the 
GWP concept in considerable detail and only the salient 
features are addressed here. However, as noted below, 
there are serious limitations associated with the calculation 
of GWPs that constrain their practical utility. 
A2.3.1 Definition 
The Global Warming Potential is a measure of the relative, 
globally-averaged warming effect arising from the 
emissions of a particular greenhouse gas. 
• 
It is a relative measure in that it expresses the 
warming effect compared to that of a reference gas 
(or 'molecule'). 
• 
It is a global measure in that it is derived from the 
globally- and annually-averaged net radiative fluxes 
at the tropopause, and thus describes the effects on 
the whole surface-troposphere system. 
• 
It is a time-integrated measure of warming over a 
specified time horizon, taking account of the change 
with time of the species concentration. 
The GWP of a well-mixed gas was defined in IPCC (1990) 
as the time-integrated change in radiative forcing due to 
the instantaneous release of 1kg of a trace gas expressed 
relative to that from the release of 1kg of CO2. Calculation 
of the GWP for a particular species requires specification 
of the following: 
(i) 
the radiative forcing both of the reference gas and of 
the species, per unit mass or concentration change; 
(ii) 
the time horizon over which the forcings have to be 
integrated; 
(iii) the atmospheric lifetime both of the species and of 
the reference gas; 
(iv) 
the pathway of chemical breakdown of the species 
and the extent to which it gives rise to other 
greenhouse species, e.g., O3 production from CH4, 
NO^, CO and NMHCs; 
(v) 
the present and future chemical state of the 
atmosphere, i.e., levels of the background concen-
trations of various species throughout 
the 
troposphere; 
(vi) the present and future physical state of the 
atmosphere, i.e., values of meteorological variables 
throughout the troposphere (e.g., temperature profile, 
cloud properties). 
Factors (iii) and (iv) are intimately related to (v) and (vi) 
and are the sources of greatest uncertainty in the 

54 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
calculation of GWPs - see Section A2.3.4 below. 
It is possible to offer alternative definitions of GWP, for 
example based on sustained rather than pulse emissions 
(Wigley et al., 1990). Such alternatives can lead to 
numerical values of GWP which are different from those 
under the present definition, but in general not so different 
as to alter the relative ranking of the important species. 
A2.3.2 Reference Molecule 
Given the conceptual framework of the GWP and its 
implications for policy-making, the choice of a reference 
molecule is dictated by the need to evaluate the results in 
terms of the dominant contributor in the greenhouse gas 
problem. IPCC (1990) therefore chose C O j as the 
reference gas for the determination of GWPs. Although 
another gas or surrogate would have a simpler atmospheric 
decay behaviour compared to CO2 (e.g., CFCs; see Fisher 
et al., 1990), the evaluation of GWPs presented here 
continues, after extensive review, to use CO2 as the 
reference gas. 
To avoid the need to use a single lifetime for CO2, IPCC 
(1990) used a carbon cycle model to calculate the 
integrated radiative forcing for CO2, specifically the 
ocean-atmosphere box diffusion model of Siegenthaler and 
Oeschger (1987; see also Siegenthaler, 1983) which 
assumed a net neutral biosphere. We adopt the same model 
for the direct GWP estimates in this assessment. 
A2.3.3 Time Horizons for GWPs 
Because greenhouse gases have a variety of removal 
mechanisms they have different residence times, or 
lifetimes, in the atmosphere. The calculated value of GWP 
thus depends on the integration period chosen. There is no 
single value of integration time for determining GWPs that 
is ideal over the range of uses of this concept, though the 
choice of a time-scale for integration in the G W P 
calculation need not be totally arbitrary (see IPCC (1990) 
and W M O (1992) for a discussion on the choice of time 
horizons). In this report, GWPs are calculated over time 
horizons of 20, 100 and 500 years (as employed in IPCC, 
1990). It is believed that these three time horizons provide 
a practical range for policy applications. 
A2.3.4 Limitations of Present GWPs 
While the G W P , as defined in IPCC (1990), is a 
convenient and reasonably practical index for ranking the 
relative and cumulative impact of greenhouse gas 
emissions, it has the following limitations, some of which 
are very serious: 
(a) 
the modelling of radiative transfer within the 
atmosphere contains uncertainties, as was pointed 
out in IPCC (1990); 
(b) 
since the direct GWP is a measure of the global 
effect of a given greenhouse gas emission, it is most 
appropriate for well-mixed gases in the troposphere 
(e.g., CO2, CH4, nitrous oxide (N2O) and halo-
carbons). The radiative forcing employed in the 
determination of GWPs does not purport to 
characterize the latitudinal and seasonal dependence 
of the change in the surface-troposphere radiative 
fluxes. Different well-mixed gases can yield 
different spatial patterns of radiative forcings (Wang 
etal, 1991); 
(c) 
the GWP definition used here considers only the 
surface-troposphere radiative forcing rather than a 
particular response (e.g., surface temperature) of the 
climate system. While the surface-troposphere 
radiative flux perturbations can be related to 
temperature changes at the surface in the context of 
one-dimensional radiative-convective models 
(WMO, 1986), such a general interpretation for the 
temperature response either in three-dimensional 
General Circulation Models or in the actual surface-
atmosphere system must be approached with caution. 
Further, although the GWP of a well-mixed gas can 
be regarded as a first-order indicator of the potential 
global mean temperature change due to that gas 
relative to CO2, it is inappropriate for predicting or 
interpreting regional climate responses; 
(d) 
GWP values are sensitive to uncertainties regarding 
atmospheric residence times. Thus, revisions to 
G W P values should be expected as scientific 
understanding improves. Because CO2 is used as the 
reference gas, any revision to the calculation of its 
integrated radiative forcing over time will change all 
GWP values. GWP results are also sensitive to the 
choice of carbon cycle model used to calculate the 
time-integrated radiative forcing for CO2. In 
particular, because the Siegenthaler-Oeschger model 
has only an ocean CO2 sink, it is likely to 
overestimate the concentration changes and to lead 
to an underestimate of both the direct and the 
indirect GWPs. The magnitude of this bias depends 
on the atmospheric lifetime of the gas, and the time 
horizon; 
(e) 
as defined 
here, 
GWPs 
assume 
constant 
concentration backgrounds at current levels. The 
calculated 
GWPs depend on the assumed 
background level(s). The indices are calculated for 
the contemporary atmosphere and do not take into 
account possible changes in the chemical 
composition of the atmosphere. Changes in radiative 
forcing due to CO2, CH4 and N2O concentration 
changes are non-linear with respect to these changes. 
The net effect of these non-linearities is such that, as 
CO2 levels increase from present values, the GWPs 
of all non-C02 gases would become higher than 
those evaluated here (see WMO, 1992); 

A2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
55 
(f) 
for the GWP concept to be most useful, both the 
direct and the indirect components need to be 
quantified. However, accurate estimates of the 
indirect effects are more difficuh to obtain than those 
for the direct effects for the following reasons: 
(i) there are uncertainties in the details of the 
chemical processes as well as in the spatial and 
temporal variations of species involved in such 
transformations. As shown later, there is fair 
confidence in the sign of some of the indirect 
effects; however, precise estimates are lacking. 
Because of our incomplete understanding of 
chemical processes, it is now recognized that 
the uncertainties in the indirect components of 
GWPs reported in IPCC (1990) are so large that 
their use can no longer be recommended; 
(ii) for gases that are not well-mixed (e.g., 
tropospheric ozone precursors), the G W P 
concept may not be meaningful; 
(iii) further, while the GWP concept thus far has 
been applied to gases with perturbations only in 
the longwave spectra, it may not adequately 
account for the seasonally and latitudinally 
varying radiative effects due to inhomo-
geneously distributed species with a significant 
interaction in the solar spectrum (e.g., 
aerosols). 
In conclusion, given the above limitations, great care must 
be exercised in applying GWPs in the policy arena. 
A2. J.5 Direct GWPs of Well-Mixed Trace Gases 
New direct GWPs (i.e., ignoring any radiative effects due 
to the products of chemical transformation) of several 
well-mixed species have been determined. For CFC-13, 
CFC-14, CFC-116, CHCI3 and CH2CI2 the lifetimes and 
radiative forcings are as given by Ramanathan et al. 
(1985); for the other compounds radiative forcings are as 
before (Tables 2.2 - 2.6 of IPCC, 1990) but lifetimes have 
been updated according to W M O (1992). Note that the 
lifetime of methane is here assumed to be 10.5 years, 
which accounts for a sink mechanism in the soil (see 
IPCC, 1990). 
These new GWPs are listed in Table A2.1 for the three 
time horizons mentioned above. Changes in the lifetime 
and variations of radiative forcing with concentration 
change are neglected. Most of the new direct GWPs 
computed are generally within 20% of the values 
appearing in Table 2.8 of the IPCC (1990) study; the 
difference is entirely due to the differences in assumed 
lifetimes (WMO, 1992). HFC-125, HCFC-141b and HFC-
143a, all have increases in GWPs exceeding 20% for the 
100- and 500-year time horizons, while CF3Br (Halon 
1301) has a decrease of more than 20% for the 500-year 
time horizon; again, these differences are a manifestation 
of the changes in the lifetimes. The direct GWPs for CH4 
here are substantially higher than those that can be inferred 
from IPCC (1990) owing to a typographical error 
appearing in that report. Note that CO, N M H C and NO^ 
have a negligible direct GWP component. 
A2.3.6 Indirect GWPs of Well-Mixed Trace Gases 
Because of our incomplete understanding of chemical 
processes, and their latitudinal and temporal dependence, it 
is not possible to quantify accurately the indirect GWPs. 
As noted above, the indirect GWPs reported in IPCC 
(1990) are likely to be in error and should not be used. In 
particular, the value for NO,;^ was probably overestimated 
by a substantial amount (Johnson et a/., 1992). Although 
we are not yet in a position to calculate new indirect 
GWPs, we can estimate the sign most likely for some 
compounds based on current understanding (see Table 
A2.1). For example, the indirect GWP for methane is 
positive and could be comparable in magnitude to the 
direct value. Because the weight of evidence suggests that 
halocarbons are largely responsible for the observed global 
stratospheric ozone loss over the past decade (WMO, 
1992), chlorine- and bromine-containing compounds are 
likely to have negative indirect values. Although CO2 is 
not itself involved in chemical reactions affecting the 
concentrations of radiatively active species, it could affect 
chemical processes through its influences on the 
atmospheric thermal structure. Other compounds such as 
CO, N M H C and NO^ indirectly affect the radiative 
balance of the atmosphere through changes in tropospheric 
ozone and O H (see Section A2.5). For such short-lived 
gases, however, the GWP concept may have little practical 
applicability. 
A2.4 Radiative Forcing due to Stratospheric Ozone 
A2.4.1 Lower Stratospheric Losses 
There have been statistically significant losses of ozone in 
the middle and high latitudes between 1979 and 1990 
which have important ramifications for radiative forcing 
(for details, the reader is referred to WMO, 1992). The 
TOMS satellite data (Stolarski et al, 1991) point to a 
reduction in the column ozone, while the SAGE satellite 
data (McCormick et al, 1992) and the ozonesonde data 
(Staehelin and Schmid, 1991) indicate that these losses 
have occurred mainly below 25km in the lower 
stratosphere. The weight of evidence suggests that these 
losses, both in the polar and the middle latitudes, are due in 
large part to the anthropogenic emissions of CFCs, as well 
as to other chlorine- and bromine-containing compounds 
(WMO, 1992). 
These changes in ozone substantially perturb both solar 
and longwave radiation (WMO, 1986 and 1992). While the 
solar effects due to ozone losses are determined solely by 

1 
5(5 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
Table A2.1: Numerical estimates of the "Direct" GWP and the sign of the "Indirect" effect of several gases. The 
lifetimes of various non-C02 species follow WMO (1992) and Ramanathan et al. (1985). The carbon cycle model 
employed follows IPCC (1990). The 20, 100 and 500-year time horizons denote the time elapsed after a pulse release of 
the gas in consideration. The radiative forcing values follow IPCC (1990) and Ramanathan et al. (1985). The following 
important points should be noted regarding the entries in the Table: 
1. The lifetimes of the various species are not as precisely known as the Table indicates: they are used for the GWP calcula
primarily to ensure consistency with the lifetime values in the references cited. 
2. This assessment does not calculate the "Total" (direct + indirect) GWP as did IPCC (1990). Note that CO, NMHC and NO
short-lived gases having a negligible direct GWP component. 
3. The indirect GWPs are uncertain but could conceivably be comparable in magnitude to the direct GWPs. Only the signs o
indirect effects are estimated here, based on current understanding. The estimates of the indirect effects for the chlorin
bromine-containing compounds are based on the weight of evidence related to the observed lower stratospheric ozone de
(WMO, 1992). 
4. IPCC (1990) contained a typographical error for the indirect effect of methane which led to the inference of an incorrect va
its direct GWP. Also in that report, the indirect effect ofNO^ was probably overestimated by a large factor (Johnson et al., 1
Lifetime 
Direct Effect for Time Horizons of 
Sign of "Indirect" 
Gas 
(years) 
20 years 
100 years 
500 years 
Effect 
CO2 
t 
1 
1 
1 
t t 
none 
CH4 
10.5 
35 
11 
4 
positive 
N2O 
132 
260 
270 
170 
uncertain 
CFC-11 
55 
4500 
3400 
1400 
negative 
CFC-12 
116 
7100 
7100 
4100 
negative 
CFC-13 
400 
11000 
13000 
15000 
negative 
CFC-14 
>500 
>3500 
>4500 
>5300 
none 
HCFC-22 
15.8 
4200 
1600 
540 
negative 
CFC-113 
110 
4600 
4500 
2500 
negative 
CFC-114 
220 
6100 
7000 
5800 
negative 
CFC-115 
550 
5500 
7000 
8500 
negative 
CFC-116 
>500 
>4800 
>6200 
>7200 
none 
HCFC-123 
1.71 
330 
90 
30 
negative 
HCFC-124 
6.9 
1500 
440 
150 
negative 
HFC-125 
40.5 
5200 
3400 
1200 
none 
HFC-134a 
15.6 
3100 
1200 
400 
none ' ' ' 
HCFC-14 lb 
10.8 
1800 
580 
200 
negative 
HCFC-142b 
22.4 
4000 
1800 
620 
negative 
HFC-143a 
64.2 
4700 
3800 
1600 
none 
HFC-152a 
1.8 
530 
150 
49 
none +++ 
CCI4 
47 
1800 
1.300 
480 
negative 
CH3CCI3 
6.1 
360 
100 
34 
negative 
CFjBr 
77 
5600 
4900 
2300 
negative 
CHCI3 
0.7 
92 
25 
9 
negative 
CH2CI2 
0.6 
54 
15 
5 
negative 
CO 
months 
-
-
-
positive 
NMHC 
days to months 
-
-
-
positive 
NO, 
days , 
-
-
-
uncertain 
The persistence of carbon dioxide has been estimated by explicitly integrating the box-diffusion model of 
Siegenthaler (1983); an approximate lifetime is 120 years. 
CO2 is not involved in chemical reactions affecting the concentrations of the radiatively active species. However, it 
could affect the relevant chemical reactions through its influences on the atmospheric thermal structure. 
No currently known or negligible indirect effect. 

A2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
57 
the total column ozone amounts, the longwave effects are 
determined both by the amount and its vertical location 
(Manabe and Strickler, 1964; Ramanathan and Dickinson, 
1979; WMO, 1986; Lacis et al, 1990). The loss of ozone 
in the lower stratosphere induces three distinct radiative 
effects (Ramanathan et al., 1985; Ramaswamy et al., 
1992): 
(a) 
a reduction in the absotption by stratospheric ozone 
of incoming solar radiadon, leading to an increase in 
the amount reaching the surface-troposphere system; 
(b) 
in the absence of stratospheric temperature changes, 
a decrease in the emission of longwave radiation 
from the stratosphere into the surface-troposphere 
system which is opposite to the solar effect; and 
(c) 
a reduction of the in-.situ solar heating and a change 
in the convergence of the longwave radiation within 
the lower stratosphere. Because the thermal balance 
of the lower stratosphere is sensitive to radiative 
perturbations (Pels et al., 1980; Shine, 1987; Kiehl et 
al., 1988) this third effect results, in the absence of 
any compensatory dynamical heating, in a decrease 
of temperatures at these altitudes. This, in turn, leads 
to a further reduction of the longwave emission into 
the troposphere, the magnitude of the reduction 
being sensitive to the decrease in stratospheric 
temperatures. 
Two sets of radiative transfer modelling studies (WMO, 
1992; Ramaswamy et al., 1992), employing slightly 
different assumptions about the vertical profile of the 
lower stratospheric ozone loss over the past decade, have 
been performed and lead to similar conclusions. They 
suggest an enhancement of the ozone-induced longwave 
effects (effects b and c) over the solar (effect a) in the 
middle to high latitudes, corresponding to the larger ozone 
losses there. Because of the spatial variability in the ozone 
depletions and the presence of the solar component, the 
calculated ozone forcing depends on the season and the 
geographical region. Another factor that has a significant 
influence on the ozone radiative forcing is the 
meteorological state of the troposphere, particularly the 
distribution of clouds (WMO, 1992). 
Figure A2.1 (from Ramaswamy et al., 1992) illustrates, 
for the four seasons and for both hemispheres, the changes 
in radiative forcing due to ozone, due to CFCs alone, and 
0.6 
0.3 h 
0.0 
-0.3F 
-0.6 
^ (a) JANUARY 
~~ _ 
\ • 
Ozone forcing 
Non-ozone forcing 
CFC forcing 
— — 
Ozone forcing 
— •-— Non-ozone forcing 
GFDL model 
Reading model 
1 
, 
, 
1 
, 
, 
-90 
0.6 r 
0.3 
-60 
-30 
30 
60 
90 
e 0.0 
-0.6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
_ (c) JULY 
^ ^ - - - ^ ^ 
— 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
1 
, 
, 
1 
, 
. 
V 
^ 
-
1 
. 
, 
1 
. 
. 
-90 
-60 
-30 
0 
Latitude 
30 
60 
0.6 
0.3 h 
0.0 
-0.3 
-0.6 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
> 
I 
. (b) APRIL 
— ^ _ 
/ 
/ 
1 
' 
' 
1 
' 
' 
^ 
\ 
^^^^^^^^^ 
Ozone forcing 
Non-ozone forcing 
GF • L model 
, 
, 
1 
1 
, 
1 
1 
1 
-90 
0.6 r 
0.3 
-60 
-30 
30 
60 
90 
0.0 
H 
-0.3 
90 
-0.6 
_(d) OCTOBER 
^ / - - - . ^ 
/ 
r- 
! n- 
1 
1 
1 
1
1 
. 
1 
-90 
-60 
-30 
0 
Latitude 
30 
60 
90 
Figure A2.1: Latitudinal and seasonal dependence of the radiative forcing due to (i) the 1979-1990 increases in CFCs, (ii) the 1979-
1990 increases in all the non-ozone gases (CO2. CH4, N2O and the CFCs), and (iii) the 1979-1990 observed lower stratospheric losses 
of ozone (.Stolarski et al, 1991: McCormick et al, 1992). Results from two different models are shown: (a) and (c) show University of 
Reading results (Northern Hemisphere January and July perturbations only), and (a) to (d) show GFDL results. All the results were 
obtained assuming stratosphenc temperature equilibrium in the presence of a fixed dynamical heating (from Ramaswamy et al, 1992). 

58 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
due to the sum of the non-ozone gases (CO2, CH4, N2O 
and the CFCs). The illustration indicates that, for the 
decade of the 1980s, the net ozone radiative forcing in 
middle to high latitudes is negative, being opposite in sign 
to the effects due to the non-ozone gases. Poleward of 30 
degrees (N and S), the magnitude of the (negative) decadal 
ozone forcing becomes increasingly comparable to and can 
even exceed the (positive) CFC forcing over the same time 
period (WMO, 1992). In higher latitudes, the ozone 
forcing can counteract a significant fraction of the 
(positive) total non-ozone gas forcing over the same time 
period (WMO, 1992). When globally- and annually-
averaged (Ramaswamy et al., 1992) and assuming that 
there is no change in the dynamical heating of the 
stratosphere, the ozone forcing (-0.08 to -0.09Wm-2), is 
comparable in magnitude (-80%) but opposite in sign to 
the decadal CFC greenhouse forcing (0.10 to O.llWm-2). 
The globally-averaged ozone forcing is opposite in sign 
and is about 18% of the sum of the non-ozone decadal 
trace gas forcing (0.45 to 0.47Wm-2). 
It is emphasized that the ozone forcing is extremely 
sensitive to the altitude of the losses (Ramanathan et al., 
1985; Lacis et al., 1990). There still is some uncertainty 
regarding the exact profile and the magnitude of the loss in 
the immediate vicinity of the tropopause. The S A G E 
profiles are available globally only from ~17km and 
above, and suggest an increasing percentage of loss with 
decreasing altitude in the lower stratosphere. As an 
illustration of this sensitivity, let us suppose that the losses 
observed by TOMS are uniformly distributed through the 
entire stratospheric column (see WMO, 1986). For this to 
be the case, the principal ozone depletions would have to 
occur at altitudes higher than observed over the past 
decade, in which case a much smaller global ozone forcing 
(-0.01 to -0.04Wm-2) would result. Thus, inferences about 
ozone forcing depend crucially on both the total column 
change as well as the change in the vertical profile. 
The radiative forcing due to ozone is unique in two 
respects when compared to that due to the non-ozone 
gases. First, although there is an approximate global mean 
offset of the direct C F C forcing by the ozone losses 
occurring during the 1979-1990 period, this arises because 
of a significant negative forcing by ozone occurring only 
in the middle to high latitudes, in particular the radiative 
forcing due to increasing CFCs and decreasing ozone 
ranges from a net positive one at low latitudes to a net 
negative one at higher latitudes for the period considered 
(WMO, 1992). Because of the spatial dependence of the 
ozone losses and consequently the ozone forcing, the 
globally averaged results represent a considerable 
simplification and must be treated with caution. 
Second, for ozone, unlike the other radiatively active 
species, both solar and the longwave interactions become 
significant. The negative surface-troposphere forcing at the 
mid-to-high latitudes consists of a solar-induced warming 
tendency at the surface, combined with a longwave-
induced cooling tendency of the troposphere (Ramanathan 
and Dickinson, 1979; WMO, 1992). 
A2.4.2 The Greenhouse Effect of Ozone Losses 
The weight of evidence suggests that the observed 
stratospheric ozone losses are due to heterogeneous 
chemical reactions involving chlorine- and bromine-
containing chemicals (halocarbons), particularly the 
anthropogenic emissions of CFCs (WMO, 1992). The 
computed ozone radiative forcings indicate that the 
indirect chemical effects due to the halocarbons have 
substantially reduced the radiative contributions of the 
CFCs to the greenhouse forcing over the past decade 
(WMO, 1992). Thus, the net greenhouse impact attributed 
to the CFCs taken together, including the indirect as well 
as direct contributions, may be significantly reduced 
because of the halocarbon-induced destruction of ozone. 
Three-dimensional General Circulation Model (GCM) 
simulations of the impacts on the Earth's climate due to 
the ozone losses have not been performed as yet, so 
estimates of the effects on the surface temperature are not 
available. In an investigation of the climatic effects due to 
the Northern Hemisphere mid-latitude ozone changes 
around the tropopause during the decade of the 1970s, 
Lacis et al. (1990) estimated a cooling of the surface at 
those latitudes. One-dimensional globally- and annually-
averaged radiative-convective models indicate that, while a 
loss of ozone in the lower stratosphere leads to a surface 
cooling, ozone losses in the middle and upper stratosphere, 
as predicted from homogeneous gas-phase chemistry 
models, yield a warming of the surface (Ramanathan et al., 
1985). 
A2.4.3 Ozone Depletion and Stratospheric Temperatur
Changes 
The indirect effect of CFCs on the climate system due to 
depletion of ozone in the lower stratosphere is critically 
sensitive to the actual temperature change and its 
distribution in the lower stratosphere. Because atmospheric 
circulation can change in response to radiative 
perturbations, the dynamical contribution to the heating 
could also change, thereby contributing to the actual 
temperature change in the stratosphere (Dickinson, 1974). 
The observed global ozone depletion has not yet been 
simulated in a G C M , but simulations for the following 
scenarios of ozone changes have been performed: (a) a 
uniform decrease of O3 throughout the stratospheric 
column (Eels et al, 1980; Kiehl and Boville, 1988), (b) a 
homogeneous gas-phase chemical model prediction of 
ozone depletion (Kiehl and Boville, 1988), which is 
different from the observed losses, and (c) observed 
springtime depletion in the Antarctic region (Kiehl et al. 

A2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
59 
1988). The resuhing stratospheric temperature changes in 
these studies indicate that, unless the column depletions 
are large (>50%), the G C M response is similar to the 
response indicated by the fixed dynamical heating model 
but there are some latitude-dependent differences. The 
G C M studies of Rind et al. (1990, 1991) suggest that 
dynamically forced temperature changes can result from 
subtie interactions between changes in the atmospheric 
structure, upper tropospheric latent heat release, and the 
forcing and transmission of planetary waves and gravity 
waves. 
Turning to the observed temperature trend (see Section 
C3.3), the long-term temperature trends in the lower 
stratosphere suggest a cooling. While this would be in 
accord with the ozone-induced radiative cooling tendency 
of the lower stratosphere (Lacis et al, 1990; WMO, 1992; 
Miller et al, 1992) considerable difficulties remain in 
attributing a part or all of the observed stratospheric 
temperature trends to the ozone losses. Other physical 
factors, such as possible changes in the physical state of 
the troposphere, volcanic aerosols, change in stratospheric 
circulation, etc., which are not accounted for in the 
determination of the radiative forcing, could also be 
contributing to the trends. Thus, significant questions 
remain with regard to the influence of ozone losses on 
stratospheric temperatures. 
A2.5 Radiative Forcing due to Gases in the 
Troposphere 
A2.5.1 Introduction 
Indirect greenhouse gas effects, induced by changes in the 
chemistry of the troposphere, are likely to be significant. 
Gases which are key compounds for the indirect effects 
(and for the oxidation processes in the troposphere) are O3 
and OH. 
Ozone is a greenhouse gas by itself. It is formed in situ 
in the atmosphere by photochemical processes. Tropo-
spheric O3 concentrations are influenced by the 
distribution of CH4, CO, NO^ and NMHCs, leading to 
indirect greenhouse contributions for these gases. OH is of 
importance for the greenhouse effect because it controls 
the loss of a large number of greenhouse gases in the 
troposphere (CH4, HFCs, H C F C s , etc.), thereby 
determining their chemical lifetimes. Furthermore, O3 and 
OH will be affected by the release of these gases, leading 
to important feedback effects on their lifetimes. Additional 
indirect greenhouse effects arise from CH4, CO and 
NMHCs since CO2 is the end product of their chemical 
oxidation in the troposphere. 
Since the tropospheric chemical processes determining 
the indirect greenhouse effects are highly complex and not 
fully understood, the uncertainties connected with 
estimates of the indirect effects are larger than the 
uncertainties of those connected to estimates of the direct 
effects. Added to these uncertainties are the limitations of 
the current models in formulating the distribution and 
spatial variability of NO^ in the troposphere, or the impact 
of clouds on gas phase chemistry (see Chapter 5, WMO, 
1992). 
This sub-section examines the key processes for O3 and 
OH formation, the role of gaseous emissions of CH4, NO^, 
CO and N M H C in changing the O3 and OH distributions 
(and thereby leading to indirect effects), and uncertainties 
in estimating these impacts. The impact of increased U V 
fluxes in the troposphere due to reduced ozone columns, 
and enhanced water vapour content resulting from 
enhanced temperatures are not included. Both effects are 
likely to enhance the OH levels in the troposphere. 
A2.5.2 Chemical processes and changes in O3 and OH 
Although tropospheric O3 only makes up about 10% of all 
ozone in the atmosphere, its presence is central to the 
problem of the oxidizing efficiency of the troposphere. O3 
photolysis is the primary source of OH radicals as well as 
being an oxidizing species itself. Through the formation of 
O H it determines the cleansing efficiency of the 
troposphere. Ultimately, therefore, ozone is one of the 
most important constituents in determining the chemical 
composition of the troposphere. 
The production of ozone depends on the concentrations 
of NOx (WMO, 1992, Chapter 5). As the latter compounds 
are short-lived, and their concentrations vary strongly in 
the troposphere, ozone production is believed to vary 
significantiy throughout the troposphere. There is also an 
in situ chemical loss of ozone in the troposphere in areas 
where NO^ concentrations are particularly low (less than 
approximately 20 pptv). This occurs in the middle 
troposphere and in remote oceanic areas where there are no 
NO^ sources (Liu et al, 1987). Ozonesonde measurements 
reported in WMO (1992) indicate that ozone has increased 
by 1-1.5% per year in the free troposphere over Europe 
during the last 20 to 25 years (Staehelin and Schmid, 
1991). A similar trend in tropospheric ozone has 
previously been reported for stations influenced by 
regional air pollution (Logan, 1985; Bojkov, 1987; 
Penkett, 1988). 
Methane is oxidized primarily in the troposphere 
(>90%) through reaction with the hydroxyl radical. Since 
tills reaction also provides a substantial fraction of the OH 
loss in the troposphere, there is a strong interaction 
between OH and CH4. This causes OH to decrease when 
CH4 increases, leading to a further increase in CH4 - a 
positive feedback (Chameides et al, 1977; Sze, 1977; 
Isaksen, 1988). 
Because of the central role O3 and O H play in 
tropospheric chemistry, the chemistry of CO, CH4, NMHC 
and NO^ is strongly intertwined, making the interpretation 

60 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
of emission changes rather complex. In general, increases 
in the emissions of hydrocarbons and of CO may lead to 
increases in the global average O3, but to reductions in OH 
levels (Isaksen and Hov, 1987). The result will be a slower 
atmospheric loss of methane and other species controlled 
by OH (e.g., HFCs, HCFCs). The impact of NO^ changes 
is different. Increased emissions of NO^ lead to increases 
in both globally averaged O3 and OH (Isaksen and Hov, 
1987). The increased OH levels reduce the lifetime of 
methane. The important consequence of this is that NO^ 
emissions have opposing effects on the two greenhouse 
gases O3 and CH4. 
Significant changes in the global distribution of OH may 
have occurred over the last two centuries as the trace gas 
composition of the troposphere has changed dramatically. 
Key compounds like CH4 and CO have increased in 
concentrations. This is expected to have led to reduced OH 
levels. On the other hand, increases in the concentrations 
of NO^ that are believed to have occurred (although it has 
not been possible to measure any changes) will have 
tended to reduce OH levels. The net effect is difficult to 
estimate, and there are no direct measurements of OH 
which can give reliable information on the global 
distribution or changes over time. Several indirect methods 
have, however, been used to derive a global distribution of 
OH (WMO, 1992). A recent estimate of the OH trend is 
the analysis of Prinn et al. (1992). They deduce a trend in 
global O H from the A L E / G A G E C H 3 C C I 3 record of 
+ 1.0±0.8% per year over the past decade. Their result was 
based on a simple tropospheric box model. 
A2.5.3 Sensitivity of Radiative Forcing to Changes in 
Tropospheric Ozone 
The radiative forcing due to increases in tropospheric 
ozone has been invesUgated in earlier reports (WMO, 
1986). Even though tropospheric ozone amounts are less 
than in the stratosphere, their effective longwave optical 
pathlength is comparable to that in the stratosphere 
(Ramanathan and Dickinson, 1979), thus rendering them 
radiatively important. In particular, the upper tropospheric 
concentrations are most significant (Lacis et al., 1990). A 
10% uniform increase with height in the concentrations of 
tropospheric ozone from current levels at 40°N (January 
conditions) yields a positive radiative forcing of about 
O.lWm-2 (WMO, 1992). Although the radiative effect of 
increases in tropospheric ozone could be extremely 
important in the greenhouse forcing of climate, there is, at 
present, insufficient evidence that such increases are 
actually taking place globally, especially in the radiatively 
significant upper tropospheric regions. In the absence of 
data from which meaningful global trends can be derived, 
it is not possible at this stage to quantify the current 
contribution of tropospheric ozone to the global 
greenhouse radiative forcing. 
16 
01 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
18 
20 
Ozone change (molecules (x10^°)/cm^^) 
Figure A2.2: Calculated global average ozone increases due to a 
doubling (compared to current levels) of surface emissions of 
methane (2-D model calculations with the Harwell and the Oslo 
models refered to in WMO, 1992) and a doubling of the surface 
concentrations of methane (1 -D model calculations with the 
NASA/GSFC model). In the latter case, ozone production is most 
likely underestimated compared to the other two cases because it 
implies smaller emission increases (see discussion in the text). 
A2.5.4 Indirect Effects due to CH^ Emissions 
A2.5.4.1 Changes in Lifetimes due to Changes in OH 
Enhanced surface emissions of CH4 cause increased ozone 
levels which show moderate variations with latitude and 
season (WMO, 1992). The increase is most pronounced in 
the lower troposphere and decreases with height. Figure 
A2.2 shows calculated global and seasonal average ozone 
increases (in molecules per cm^) with height for three 
different tropospheric models resulting from a doubling of 
surface CH4 (fluxes and concentrations). 
The positive feedback on methane through the impact 
on the O H distribution is found to be substantial. 
Furthermore, the feedback is non-linear: it increases with 
increasing CH4 emission in the sense that the relative 
increase in steady-state concentration for a given increase 
in emissions increases faster than the relative increase in 
emissions. For example, a 10% increase in emission leads 
to a 13 to 14% increase in steady-state concentration, 
while a doubling of emissions leads to a 150% increase in 
concentration. In a similar way the feedback will affect the 
concentrations when emissions are reduced, but it will 
become less significant at lower concentrations. 
A2.5.4.2 Radiative Forcing Changes from CH^-Induced 
Changes in Ozone 
Methane has an indirect effect on the radiation balance 
through its influence on ozone. Ozone changes in the 
troposphere due to increased CH4 surface fluxes (Figure 

A2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
61 
A2.2) have been used to calculate the change in radiative 
forcing at different latitudes and seasons using a radiative-
convective model (W.-C. Wang, personal communication). 
The relative effect of ozone on the long wavelength 
radiation (compared to the effect of C H 4 alone) varies 
between 10 and 22%. The globally-averaged effect is 
around 14%. 
The CH4 effect in these calculations includes the direct 
effect and the indirect effect resulting from reduced OH 
levels (the positive feedback effect). Approximately 0.7 of 
the methane effect is a direct effect, and 0.3 is due to the 
OH feedback. The calculated indirect global effect through 
ozone increases is therefore approximately 20% of the 
direct methane effect. 
A2.5.4.3 Effects of CH4 on Stratospheric Water Vapour 
Methane has an indirect effect through its oxidation in the 
stratosphere to water vapour. In IPCC (1990) it was 
assumed that this would enhance the methane forcing by 
30% over its direct value in the absence of N2O 
absorption-band overlap (see Table 2.2 in IPCC, 1990). 
More recent modelling studies have shown that this 
enhancement is highly uncertain. In W M O (1992) the 
range is 22 to 38%, while Lelieveld and Crutzen (1992) 
give a value of 5%. These differences may partiy reflect 
the different types of numerical experiment performed to 
calculate the effect. They may also reflect the fact that 
changes depend critically on the vertical profile of the 
water vapour change (A.A. Lacis, personal commu-
nication). 
A2.5.4.4 Oxidation to CO2 
Oxidation of CH4 leads to formation of C O T and thus 
contributes indirectly to greenhouse warming. The 
contribution will depend on the time horizon used. It 
should be noted that only oxidation of fossil fuel-related 
CH4 leads to a CO2 increase; most CH4 emitted into the 
atmosphere is short-term recycled biogenic CO2. 
A2.5.4.5 Indirect GWP for CH4. 
While the results given here demonstrate the importance of 
a number of processes in amplifying the direct radiative 
forcing effect of increasing methane concentrations, they 
cannot be applied to directiy scale up the direct GWP for 
methane. The experiments performed give only the steady-
state changes due to a sustained emission change, whereas 
the GWP definition used here considers the integrated 
time-dependent response to a pulse emission. 
A2.5.5 NO ^Emissions 
The calculated global ozone changes from increases in 
NO^ surface emissions show large seasonal, latitudinal and 
height variations (WMO, 1992). The impact on ozone 
drops off rapidly with height in the troposphere. This is 
significant as the impact on surface temperatures from 
ozone changes is likely to be height dependent in the 
troposphere with the largest effect resulting from changes 
in the upper troposphere (Wang and Sze, 1980; Lacis et 
al., 1990). Furthermore, the calculations show that the 
results are highly model sensitive, leading to large 
differences (more than a factor of 2) in ozone impact 
between the 2-D models used. 
Calculation of the impact on ozone from NO^ emissions 
from aircraft indicate that this source of NO,, may be more 
than an order of magnitude more efficient in enhancing O3 
levels than surface emissions of NOj^. The enhancement 
occurs also at higher altitudes (middle and upper 
troposphere) where O3 changes have larger effects on 
surface temperatures (Wang and Sze, 1980; Lacis et al., 
1990). 
Increased NO^ levels are expected to increase global 
amounts of OH, and thus to lead to a reduction in CH4. 
NO^ increases therefore have an opposite effect on the 
abundance of the two greenhouse gases, O3 and CH4. 
Calculations also indicate that the radiative forcings caused 
by NO^-induced changes in O3 and CH4 could be of the 
same magnitude. Taking all this into account, estimates of 
the radiative forcing of NO^ changes are extremely 
uncertain and cannot be reliably made at present. 
There is a consistent picture emerging from the 
calculations of OH sensitivity to enhanced fluxes of source 
gases showing that increased NO^ emissions lead to 
increased OH and thereby to increased oxidation in the 
troposphere, while increases in the emissions of the other 
source gases lead to reduced OH values. 
A2.5.6 CO and NMHC Emissions 
Ground-based emissions of CO and N M H C lead to O3 
production, but these are found to be less efficient ozone 
producers on a global scale than CH4. O H is also 
increased. The increases show pronounced global and 
seasonal variations making estimates of indirect GWP 
highly uncertain. 
A2.5.7 Summary 
A summary of the indirect contributions to radiative 
forcing from CH4, NO^, CO and NMHC is given in Table 
A2.2. The Table gives the sign of the contribution from the 
individual processes and the net effect, but no absolute 
values for the indirect effects are presented. 
For CH4, all the indirect contributions are believed to be 
positive and therefore they add to the direct GWP. The 
sum of their contributions is likely to be significant, 
possibly similar in magnitude to the direct effect. Indirect 
effects for methane will thus add substantially to the direct 
values given in Table A2.1. CO and NMHC will also make 
positive indirect contributions, although they are believed 
to be less significant than the contribution from CH4 and 

62 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
Table A2.2: Summary of the impact of emissions ofCH4, NO^, CO and NMHC on OH, on 
O5 and those other greenhouse gases affected by changes in OH 
Effect on concentrations of 
Increased emission of: 
OH 
O3 
CH4, HCFCs, HCFs 
CH4 
- 
+ 
+ 
NO, 
+ 
+ 
CO 
_ 
+ 
+ 
NMHC 
- 
+ 
+ 
more difficult to assess due to temporal and spatial 
variations in concentrations. For NO^^, uncertainties are 
large and it is not possible to give even the sign of the 
indirect effect. It should be noted, however, that NO^ 
emitted from aircraft in the upper troposphere could have a 
large impact on the chemistry and, thereby, on the 
radiative forcing on the surface-troposphere-system. 
Although indirect GWP values were given in IPCC 
(1990), we are now aware of additional complications 
affecting such calculations and are less sure of the results. 
As a consequence, no indirect GWP values are given in 
this report. For methane, however, the indirect 
contributions to the GWP are likely to be significant, 
possibly as large as the direct effect. 
A2.6 Radiative Forcing due to Aerosol Particles 
A2.6.1 Tropospheric Particles 
A2.6.1.1 Background 
Aerosol particles influence the Earth's radiative balance 
directly by scattering and absorption of shortwave (solar) 
radiation. A n increase in concentrations of aerosol 
particles will enhance this effect. Aerosol particles also 
absorb and emit longwave (infrared) radiation, but this 
effect is usually small because (a) the opacity of aerosols 
decreases at longer wavelengths and (b) the aerosols are 
most concentrated in the lower troposphere where the 
atmospheric temperature, which governs emission, is 
practically the same as the surface temperature (Coakley et 
al., 1983; Grassl, 1988). 
Aerosol particles also serve as sites on which cloud 
droplets form (cloud condensation nuclei, CCN). Increased 
concentrations of aerosol particles have the potential, 
therefore, to alter the microphysical, optical and radiative 
properties of clouds, changing their reflective properties 
and possibly their persistence. 
By providing additional surfaces for condensation and 
heterogeneous chemistry, aerosol particles may also 
influence the chemical balance of gaseous species in the 
atmosphere. This may be especially important for the 
balance of O3 in the lower stratosphere. 
In the unperturbed atmosphere, the principal aerosol 
constituents contributing to light scattering are sulphate 
from biogenic gaseous sulphur compounds and organic 
carbon from partial atmospheric oxidation of gaseous 
biogenic organic compounds. Seasalt and windblown soil 
dust contribute substantially at some locations but their 
effect on the global climate is generally unimportant 
because the particles are large and usually short-lived and 
thus transported only short distances. Other aerosol 
substances may also be locally and regionally important, 
especially those that are sporadic such as from volcanoes, 
wildfires, and windblown dust from deserts. 
Submicrometre (diameter <lO'^m) 
anthropogenic 
aerosols are produced in the atmosphere by chemical 
reactions of primarily sulphur-, but also nitrogen- and 
carbon-containing gases, predominantly sulphur dioxide. 
These particles are efficient light scatterers, so changes in 
them may alter the energy balance of the atmosphere. The 
overall effect also depends on changes in the amount of 
energy absorbed. Light absorption is dominated by 
particles containing elemental carbon produced by 
incomplete combustion of carbonaceous fuel. The light 
scattering effect is dominant at most latitudes, but 
absorption might dominate at high latitude, especially over 
highly reflective snow- or ice-covered surfaces (Blanchet, 
1989). Over surfaces with low albedo (<0.1) characteristic 
of most of the surface of the Earth, anthropogenic aerosols 
cool rather than warm the Earth (Coakley et al., 1983); 
thus in global terms the scattering by sulphate should 
dominate over absorption by elemental carbon. 
A2.6.7.2 New findings 
The most important new information that has become 
available since IPCC (1990) refers to the backscattering by 
sulphate aerosols. Based on simulations of the global 
distribution of sulphate aerosols (Langner and Rodhe, 
1991), Charlson et al. (1990, 1991 and 1992) used 
previously acquired information on scattering and 
backscattering coefficients per unit mass of sulphate to 
estimate the impact of anthropogenic sulphur emissions on 
the shortwave radiation balance in cloud-free regions. The 

A2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
90° SH 
\ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
: 
1 
1 
1 
180°W 
120° 
60° 
0° 
60° 
120° 
180°E 
Figure A2.3: Calculated increase of reflected flux to space due to tropospheric sulphate aerosols derived from anthropogenic sources. 
Unit: Wm-2 (from Charlson et al, 1991). 
geographical distribution of the calculated increase of 
reflected solar flux to space is shown in Figure A2.3. The 
authors concluded that the effect for current emission 
levels, averaged over the Northern Hemisphere, 
corresponds to a negative forcing at the Earth's surface of 
about lWm-2, with about a factor of two uncertainty. This 
is comparable (but of opposite sign) to the forcing due to 
anthropogenic CO2 (+1.5Wm-2) 
(Q (jjg direct forcing of 
the other greenhouse gases (-i-lWm-2). In addition to the 
direct effect on climate of sulphate aerosols, there is an 
indirect effect - via changes in C C N and cloud albedo -
which tends to act in the same direction (i.e., towards a 
cooling) with a magnitude that has not yet been reliably 
quantified (Charlson et a/., 1990 and 1992; Kaufman et al, 
1991). 
A very important implication of this estimate is that the 
net anthropogenic radiative forcing over parts of the 
Northern Hemisphere during the past century is likely to 
have been substantially smaller than was previously 
believed. A quantitative comparison between the positive 
forcing of the greenhouse gases and the negative forcing 
due to sulphate is complicated by the fact that the latter is 
much less uniformly distributed geographically than the 
former, cf Figure A2.3. 
A2.6.1.3 Discussion 
Future changes in the forcing due to sulphate aerosols and 
greenhouse gases will depend on how the corresponding 
emissions vary. Because of the short atmospheric lifetimes 
of sulphate and its precursors, atmospheric concentrations 
will adjust within weeks to changes in emissions. This is a 
very different situation from that for most greenhouse gases 
which have effective lifetimes of decades to centuries. For 
example, the concentration of CO2 will continue to rise for 
more than a century even if emissions are kept constant at 
today's level. This difference is illustrated in Figure A2.4 
(from Charlson et al., 1991), which shows schematically 
how the climate forcings due to CO2 and aerosol sulphate 
could change if the global fossil fuel consumption levelled 
off and eventually were reduced. More detailed 
calculations have been given by Wigley (1991). Because 
of the rapid growth in emissions during the past decades 
both the enhanced greenhouse forcing due to CO2 and the 
opposite forcing due to aerosol sulphate have grown 
Growth phase 
1 
Levelling-off 
1 Reduction phase 
I 
phase 
I 
Time 
Figure A2.4: Schematic illustration of the effects of a scenario 
of future global fossil fuel combustion (a) on the atmospheric 
loadings of CO2 and sulphate (b). The differences in response 
arise from their different atmospheric residence times. CO2 
produces a positive radiative forcing (heating) and sulphate a 
negative forcing (cooling) (from Charlson et al., 1991). 

64 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
accordingly. During a levelling off phase, the greenhouse 
forcing due to CO2 will continue to grow whereas the 
aerosol forcing will remain constant. During a decay 
phase, the greenhouse forcing will start to level off and the 
aerosol forcing decline. This simple example illustrates 
that the relative importance of these two major 
anthropogenic forcing agents in the future will depend 
critically on the character of changes in fossil fuel use 
(large-scale desulphurization measures would also have to 
be considered). 
Because of the very different character of the forcing 
due to aerosol sulphate as compared to that of the 
greenhouse gases, no attempt is made here to define a 
negative 
Global Warming Potential (GWP) for 
anthropogenic sulphur emissions. In addition to the well-
known negative deleterious environmental effects of 
sulphates - including acidification - there are several 
reasons why increases in sulphur emissions cannot simply 
be considered as trade-offs against reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions. Among these are: the very 
different horizontal and vertical distributions of radiative 
forcing due to sulphates compared with greenhouse gases, 
the great uncertainty about their effects on clouds and the 
subsequent effects on the climate system, and the fact that 
the distribution of sulphates globally is largely inferred 
from models rather than being directly measured. 
Although in a global sense the negative forcing due to 
aerosols may offset a substantial part of the positive 
greenhouse forcing, the differences in spatial distribution 
of greenhouse radiative forcing and aerosol effects mean 
that increases in sulphates can never be expected to 
compensate for the climatic effects of greenhouse gas 
increases. 
It is clear that a better quantitative description of the 
climate influence of anthropogenic aerosols is necessary in 
models of past, present and future climate. Modelling 
studies need to take into account sulphate aerosol 
concentrations and their radiative influence as a function 
of location and time as governed by emissions of sulphur 
gases. To do this, models should accurately represent the 
direct light scattering effect and also the influences of 
these aerosols on cloud optical, radiative, and persistence 
properties. At present, the influences on clouds in 
particular cannot be estimated with confidence. Further, 
there is only a meagre data base of observations with 
which to validate the models of atmospheric chemistry, 
transport and removal processes that are required to relate 
aerosol concentrations to precursor emissions. There is, 
similarly, little observational information on the 
relationships between aerosol microphysical properties and 
cloud microphysical properties, between aerosol and cloud 
microphysical properties and their radiative properties, and 
between cloud microphysical properties and cloud 
persistence. 
A2.6.2 Stratospheric Sulphate Particles 
Observations over the past decade (lidar, satellite, balloon, 
sunphotometer) indicate that the stratospheric aerosol 
concentration throughout most of the 1980s remained 
higher than that measured in 1979 (a relatively quiescent 
period). This is probably largely attributable to the major 
El Chichon volcanic eruption in 1982 together with the 
effects of a few other minor eruptions (McCormick and 
Trepte, 1987). Anthropogenic sources may have provided 
an additional contribution (Hofmann, 1990). With the 
recent major eruption of the Mt. Pinatubo volcano, there is 
now 
a fresh accumulation of particulates in the 
stratosphere (optical depth estimated to be between 0.1 and 
0.3 one month after the eruption; M . P. McCormick, 
personal communication). For more details, the reader is 
referred to the special issue of Geophysical 
Research 
Letters (Vol. 19, 149-218, 1992). 
The radiative effects due to these particles may be 
already manifest in an observed warming of the lower 
stratosphere (see Section C4.2.4.2; also Labitzke and 
McCormick, 1992). Radiative forcing calculations indicate 
that these aerosols can also be expected to exert a 
significant negative but transient radiative forcing 
(~0.5Wm'2 or more in magnitude) on the surface-
troposphere system over the next few years (Hansen et al., 
1992). This is opposite in sign to the greenhouse gas-
induced forcing. General Circulation Model simulations 
(Hansen et al., 1992) suggest that such an aerosol-induced 
forcing could yield a temporary cooling tendency at the 
surface and dominate the global surface temperature record 
in the next year or more (see Section C4.2.4.2). 
A2.7 Forcing Due to Solar Irradiance Changes 
For a recent review of changes in solar irradiance, see 
Lean (1991). A 1% change in total irradiance is equivalent 
to a radiative forcing of 2.4Wm"- at the top of the 
troposphere, comparable to the total enhanced greenhouse 
forcing to date. Considerably smaller changes than this 
could, if sustained for a number of years, noticeably affect 
global climate and either enhance or offset the effects of 
increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. It is necessary, 
therefore, to monitor future and, if possible, reconstruct 
past irradiance changes with an accuracy of substantially 
better than ±1%. 
To obtain better accuracy, it is necessary to place 
instruments high in or above the atmosphere. Continuous 
observations require satellite instrumentation and the 
available record spans only the period from 1978 to the 
present. These data show a strong link between solar 
magnetic activity (sunspots, faculae and the background 
"active" network radiation) and total irradiance on time-
scales of days to years. During the sunspot minimum of 
1986, total irradiance was about 0.1% less than during the 

M Radiative Forcing of Climate 
65 
previous (1980) maximum, with the reduction in output 
from bright features outweighing the decreased blocking 
effect of sunspots (Foukal and Lean, 1988, 1990; Lean, 
1989). Changes since 1986 have continued to parallel the 
I i-year sunspot cycle (Willson and Hudson, 1991). 
The small amplitude of the observed solar-cycle-related 
irradiance changes does not preclude the existence of 
additional lower-frequency effects operating on the 10 to 
100 year time-scale (Foukal and Lean, 1990; Lean, 1991). 
To investigate this possibility further, there have been 
attempts to extend the observational record back before 
1980 by using rocket- and balloon-based measurements 
(Frohlich, 1987). These show an apparent change in 
irradiance between the late 1960s and the late 1970s of 
around 0.4%. There is considerable doubt, however, about 
the representativeness of these values (measured over 
time-scales of a day) and about the absolute accuracy of 
the instruments used to obtain them (Lean, 1991). 
Although Reid (1991) argues against these problems, it is 
clearly difficult to identify a long-term trend using 
extremely noisy daily data from instruments of uncertain 
accuracy. 
Apart from these data, there are no useful direct 
iiTadiance measurements prior to 1978, so various authors 
have tried to deduce irradiance forcing indirectly. For 
example, Reid (1991) has suggested that low-frequency 
irradiance changes run parallel to the envelope of sunspot 
activity, which shows quasi-cyclic behaviour with a 
roughly 80-year period, and Friis-Christensen and Lassen 
(1991) have hypothesized that low-frequency irradiance 
changes are related to changes in the length of the solar 
cycle. In both cases, there is a strong visual corres-
pondence between the solar irradiance proxy and global-
mean temperature changes over the past 100 years - see 
Section C4.2.1. These results are intriguing, but they have 
yet to be fully evaluated in terms of the implied changes in 
solar forcing compared to greenhouse forcing (Kelly and 
Wigley, 1990). 
An entirely different approach has been used in a study 
by Baliunas and Jastrow (1990) - see also Radick et al. 
(1990). They have examined the magnetic activity of solar-
type stars to try to throw some light on possible changes in 
irradiance associated with events like the Maunder 
Minimum of sunspot activity (1645-1715). The precisely-
dated record of atmospheric radiocarbon measurements 
shows that similar periods of prolonged sunspot minima 
have occurred on many occasions during the past 8000 
years (randomly spaced, but every 500 years on average). 
It has been suggested that they correspond to periods of 
lowered irradiance and global cooling (Eddy, 1976; 
Wigley and Kelly, 1990). Baliunas and Jastrow (1990) find 
that solar-type stars exhibit two modes of activity, a cyclic 
mode similar to the Sun's present condition, and a less 
variable mode (with lower magnetic activity) akin to 
conditions thought to prevail during the Maunder 
Minimum. They conclude that the Sun's irradiance during 
the Maunder Minimum (and other similar periods) was 
"several tenths of a per cenf' less than cuiTcnt levels. 
A more sophisticated interpretation of these stellar data 
has been carried out by Lean et al. (1992) using knowledge 
of the mechanisms of irradiance variations gleaned from 
extant solar data. They consider two possible effects: 
changes in irradiance associated directly with changes in 
magnetic activity, and changes associated with a reduced 
basal emission during prolonged periods of reduced 
activity. The estimated irradiance reduction during a 
Maunder Minimum period is 0.25+0.1%. 
It should be noted that these astronomical results do not 
yet prove that the Sun's irradiance was reduced during 
periods like the Maunder Minimum. Since no star has been 
observed to change mode, it is not yet known whether the 
observed stellar differences reflect different types of star or 
different modes of variation for individual stars. 
Nevertheless, the magnitude of the potential changes 
estimated by Lean et al. (1992) and Baliunas and Jastrow 
(1990) compares favourably with the empirical estimate 
(based on palaeoclimatic data) for a Maunder Minimum 
irradiance reduction of 0.22-0.55% given by Wigley and 
Kelly (1990). All three estimates are substantially below 
that of Reid's (1991) estimate of around 1%. Wigley and 
Kelly (1990) note that, were a similar event to begin now 
or in the near future, then it would partially offset the 
anticipater! increase in forcing due to increasing 
greenhouse gas concentrations but only by a small amount. 
References 
Baliunas, S. and R. Jastrow, 1990: Evidence for long-term 
brightness changes of solar-type stars. Nature. 348, 520-523. 
Blanchet, J.-P. 1989: Toward estimation of climate effects due to 
Arctic aerosols. ,4rm(«', Env., 23, 2609-2625. 
Bojkov, R,D,, 1987: Ozone changes at the surface and in the free 
troposphere. In: Tropospheric Ozone. Proceedings of the 
NATO Workshop, I.S.A, Isaksen (Ed,). D, Reidel, Boston, 
pp83-96, 
Chameides, W,L„ S,C, Liu and R,J, Cicerone, 1977: Possible 
variations in atmospheric methane, J. Geophys. Res., 82, 1795-
1798, 
Charlson, R,J,, J, Langner and H, Rodhe, 1990: Sulfate aerosols 
and climate. Nature, 348, 22-26, 
Charlson, R,J , J, Langner, H, Rodhe, C,B, Leovy and S,G, 
Warren, 1991: Perturbation of the Northern Hemisphere 
radiative balance by backscattering from anthropogenic sulfate 
aerosols, Tellus, 43A-B (4), 152-163, 
Charlson, R,J, S,E, Schwartz, J,M, Hales, R,D, Cess. J,A, 
CoakleyJr,, J,E, Hansen and D,J, Hofmann, 1992: Climate 
forcing by anthropogenic aerosols. Science, 255, 423-430, 

66 
Radiative Forcing of Climate A2 
Coakley, J.A. Jr., R.D. Cess and F.B. Yurevich, 1983: The effect 
of tropospheric aerosols on the Earth's radiation budget: a 
parametrization for climate models. J. Atmos. Sci., 40, 116-138. 
Dickinson, R. E., 1974: Climate effects of stratospheric 
chemistry. Can. J. Chem., 52, 1616-1624. 
Eddy, J.A., 1976: The Maunder Minimum. Science, 192,1189-1202. 
Pels, S.B., J.D. Mahlman, M.D. Schwartzkopf and R.W. Sinclair, 
1980: Stratospheric sensitivity to perturbations in ozone and 
carbon dioxide: Radiative and dynamical response. J. Atmos. 
Sci., 37, 2266-2297. 
Fisher, D.A., C.H. Hales, W.-C. Wang, M.K.W. Ko and N.D. Sze, 
1990: Model calculations of the relative effects of CFCs and 
their replacements on global warming. Nature, 344, 513-516. 
Foukal. P. and J. Lean, 1988: Magnetic modulation of solar 
luminosity by photospheric activity. Astrophysical Journal, 
328, 347-357. 
Foukal, P. and J. Lean, 1990: An empirical model of total solar 
irradiance variadon between 1874 and 1988. Science, 247, 
556-558. 
Friis-Christensen, E. and K. Lassen, 1991: Length of the solar 
cycle: an indicator of solar activity closely associated with 
climate. Science, 254, 698-700. 
Frohlich, C , 1987; Variability of the solar "constant" on time 
scales of minutes to years. J. Geophys. Res., 92, 796-800. 
Grassl, H., 1988: What are the radiative and climatic conse-
quences of the changing concentration of atmospheric aerosol 
particles? In: The Changing Atmosphere. F.S. Rowland and 
l.S.A. Isaksen (Eds.), Wiley and Sons, Chichester, ppl87-199. 
Hansen, J., A. Lacis, R. Ruedy and M. Sato, 1992; Potential 
climate impact of Mount Pinatubo eruption. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 19,215-218. 
Hofmann, D.J., 1990; Increase in the stratospheric background 
sulfuric acid aerosol mass in the past 10 years. Science, 248, 
996-1000. 
IPCC, 1990; Climate Change: The Scientific Assessment. J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J, Ephraums (Eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp365. 
Isaksen, l.S.A. and 0.Hov, 1987: Calculation of trends in the 
tropospheric concentration of O3, OH, CO, CH4 and NO^. 
Tellus, Ser. B.,39, 271-285. 
Isaksen, I.S.A., 1988: Is the oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere 
changing? In: The Changing Atmosphere. F.S. Rowland and 
l.S.A. Isaksen (Eds.), Wiley-Interscience, ppl41-157. 
Johnson, C , J. Henshaw and G. Mclnnes, 1992: Impact of 
aircraft and surface emissions of nitrogen oxides on 
tropospheric ozone and global warming. Nature, 355, 69-71. 
Kaufman, Y.J., R.S, Fraser and R.L. Mahoney, 1991; Fossil fuel 
and biomass burning effect on climate - heating or cooling? J. 
Clim., 4, 578-588. 
Kelly, P.M. and T.M.L. Wigley, 1990. The influence of solar 
forcing trends on global mean temperature since 1861. Nature, 
347, 460-462. 
Kiehl, J.T., B.A. Boville and B.P. Briegleb, 1988; Response of a 
general circulation model to a prescribed Antarctic ozone hole. 
Nature, 332, 501-504. 
Kiehl, J.T. and B.A. Boville, 1988: The radiative-dynamical 
response of a stratospheric-tropospheric general circulation 
model to changes in ozone. J.Atmos.ScL, 45,1798-1817. 
Labitzke, K. and M.P. McCormick, 1992; Stratospheric 
temperature increases due to Pinatubo aerosols. Geophys. Res. 
Lett.,19, 207-210. 
Lacis, A.A., D.J. Wuebbles and J.A. Logan, 1990: Radiative 
Forcing of Climate by Changes in the Vertical Distribution of 
Ozone. J Geophys. Res., 95, D7, 9971-9981. 
Langner, J. and H. Rodhe, 1991: A global three-dimensional 
model of the tropospheric sulfur cycle. J. Atmos. Chem. 13, 
225-263. 
Lean, J., 1989: Contribution of ultraviolet irradiance variations to 
changes in the Sun's total irradiance. Science, 244, 197-200. 
Lean, J., 1991: Variations in the Sun's radiative output. Rev. 
Geophys., 29, 505-535. 
Lean, J., W. Livingston, A. Skumanich and O. White, 1992; 
Estimating the Sun's radiative output during the Maunder 
Minimum. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Cintzen, 1992: Indirect effects of methane 
in climate warming. Nature, 355, 339-342. 
Liu, S.C., M . Trainer, F.C. Fehsenfeld, D.D. Parrish, E.J. 
Williams, D.W. Fahey, G. Hubler and P.C. Murphy, 1987: 
Ozone production in the rural troposphere and the implications 
for regional and global ozone distribution. J. Geophys. Res., 92 
(4), 191-207. 
Logan, 
J.A., 1985: Tropospheric 
ozone; 
seasonal 
behavior,trends, and anthropogenic influence. /. Geophys. 
Res.,9Q, 10463-10482. 
McCormick, M.P. and C.R. Trepte, 1987; Polar stratospheric 
optical depth observed between 1978 and 1985. J. Geophys. 
Res., 92, 4297-4307. 
McCormick, M.P., R.E. Veiga and W.P. Chu, 1992: Strato-
spheric ozone profile and total ozone trends derived from the 
SAGE I and SAGE II data. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 269-272. 
Manabe, S. and R.E. Strickler, 1964: Thermal equilibrium of an 
atmosphere with a convective adjustment. J. Atmos. Sci., 21, 
361-385. 
Miller, A.J., R.M. Nagatani, G.C. Tiao, X.F. Niu, G.C, Reinsel, 
D,J. Wuebbles and K, Grant, 1992: Comparisons of observed 
ozone and temperature trends in the lower stratosphere. 
Geophys. Res. Lett. (Submitted). 
Penkett, S.A., 1988; Indications and causes of ozone increases in 
the troposphere. In: The Changing Atmosphere. F.S. Rowland 
and l.S.A. Isaksen (Eds.), Wiley-Interscience, New York, 
pp91-l03. 
Prinn, R., D. Cunnold, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea, R. Boldi, A. 
Crawford, P. Fraser, D. Gutzler, D. Hartley, R. Rosen and R. 
Rasmussen, 1992: Global average concentration and trend for 
hydroxyl radicals deduced from ALE/GAGE trichloroethane 
(methyl chloroform) data; 1978-1990. J. Geophys. Res. (In 
press). 
Radick, R.R., G.W. Lockwood and S.L. Baliunas, 1990; Stellar 
activity and brightness variations: A glimpse at the Sun's 
history. Science, 247, 39-44. 
Ramanathan, V. and R.E. Dickinson, 1979: The role of 
stratospheric ozone in the zonal and seasonal radiative energy 
balance of the earth-troposphere system. J. Atmos. Sci., 36, 
1084-1104. 
Ramanathan, V., R.J. Cicerone, H.B. Singh and J.T. Kiehl, 
1985: Trace gase trends and their potential role in climate 
change. J Geophys. Res., 90, 5547-5566. 

A2 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
67 
Ramaswamy, V., M.D. Schwarzkopf and K.P. Shine, 1992: 
Radiative forcing of climate from halocarbon-induced global 
stratospheric ozone loss. Nature, 355, 810-812. 
Reid, G.C., 1991: Total solar inadiance variations and the global 
sea surface temperature record. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 2835-
2844. 
Rind, D., N.K. Balachandran and R. Suozzo, 1991: Climate 
change and the middle atmosphere. Part II: The impact of 
volcanic aerosols. /. Clim. (In press). 
Rind, D., R. Suozzo, N.K. Balachandran and M.J. Prather, 1990: 
Climate change and the middle atmosphere. Part I: The 
doubled CO2 climate. /. Atmos. Sci., 47, 475-494. 
Shine, K.P., 1987: The middle atmosphere in the absence of 
dynamical heat fluxes. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc, 113, 603-
633. 
Siegenthaler, U., 1983: Uptake of excess CO2 by an outcrop-
diffusion model of the ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 88, 3599-3608. 
Siegenthaler, U. and H. Oeschger, 1987: Biospheric CO2 
emissions during the past 200 years reconstructed by 
deconvolution of ice core data. Tellus, 39B, 140-154. 
Staehelin, J. and W. Schmid, 1991: Trend analysis of 
tropospheric ozone concentrations utilizing the 20-year data set 
of ozone balloon soundings over Payerne (Switzerland). 
Atmos. Envir, 25a, 1739-1749. 
Stolarski, R.S., P. Bloomfield, R.D. McPeters and J.R. Herman, 
1991: Total ozone trends deduced from NIMBUS 7 TOMS 
data. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 1015-1018. 
Sze, N.D., 1977: Anthropogenic CO emissions: implications for 
the atmospheric CO-OH-CH4 cycle. Science, 195, bTi-blS. 
Wang, W.-C. and N.D. Sze, 1980: Coupled effects of 
atmospheric N2O and O3 on Earth's climate. Nature, 286, 
589-590. 
Wang, W.-C, M.P. Dudek, X.-Z. Liang and J.T. Kiehl, 1991: 
Inadequacy of effective CO2 as a proxy in simulating the 
greenhouse effect of other radiatively active gases. Nature, 
350, 573-577. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1991: Could reducing fossil-fuel emissions 
cause global warming? Nature, 349, 503-506. 
Wigley, T.M.L., M. Hulme and T. Holt, 1990: An alternative 
approach to calculating global warming potentials. Presented 
to a Workshop on the Scientific Basis of Global Wanning 
Potential Indices, Boulder, CO, USA, Nov. 1990. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and P.M. Kelly, 1990: Holocene chmatic change, 
'''C wiggles and variations in solar irradiance. Phil. Trans. 
Roy. Soc, A330, 547-560. 
Willson, R.C. and H.S. Hudson, 1991: The Sun's luminosity over 
a complete solai' cycle. Nature, 351, 42-44. 
WMO, 1986: Atmospheric Ozone 1985. WMO Global Ozone 
Research and Monitoring Project, Report No. 16, Geneva. 
WMO, 1992: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion. 
WMOAJNEP, WMO Global Ozone Research and Monitoring 
Project, Report No. 25, Geneva. 

 

A3 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: 
an Update 
J. LEGGETT, W.J. PEPPER, R.J. SWART 
Contributors: 
J.A. Edmonds; L.G. Meira Filho; I. Mintzer; M.-X. Wang; J. Wasson 

 

CONTENTS 
Executive Summary 
73 
A3.1 Introduction and Background 
75 
A3.2 New Aspects of this Update 
75 
A3.3 The Analytical Tool: The "Atmospheric 
Stabilization Framework" 
76 
A3.4 General Assumptions 
76 
A3.5 Comparisons with Other Studies 
80 
A3.6 Energy 
83 
A3.7 Halocarbons 
85 
A3.8 Agriculture, Forests and Land Conversion 
87 
A3.8.1 Agriculture 
87 
A3.8.2 Forests and Land Conversion 
87 
A3.8.3 Resolution of Land Assumptions 
90 
A3.9 Other Sectors and Gases 
90 
A3.10 Conclusions 
93 
References 
94 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Scenarios of net greenhouse gas and aerosol precursor emissions 
for the next 100 years or more are necessary to support study of 
potential anthropogenic impacts on the climate system. The 
scenarios both provide inputs to climate models and also assist in 
assessing the relative importance of relevant trace gases and 
aerosol precursors in changing atmospheric composition and 
hence climate. Scenarios can also help to improve the 
understanding of key relationships among factors that drive 
future emissions. 
Scenarios are not predictions of the future and should not be 
used as such. This becomes increasingly true as the time horizon 
increases, because the basis for the underlying assumptions 
becomes increasingly speculative. Considerable uncertainties 
surround the evolution of the types and levels of human activities 
(including economic growth and structure), technological 
advances, and human responses to possible environmental, 
economic and institutional constraints. 
Since completion of the 1990 Scenario A (SA90), events and 
new information have emerged which relate to that scenario's 
underlying assumptions. These developments include: the 
London Amendments to the Montreal Protocol; revision of 
population forecasts by the World Bank and the United Nations; 
publicadon of the IPCC Energy and Industry Sub-group scenario 
of greenhouse gas emissions to AD 2025; political events and 
economic changes in the former USSR, Eastern Europe and the 
Middle East; re-estimation of sources and sinks of greenhouse 
gases (reviewed in this Assessment); revision of preliminary 
FAO data on tropical deforestation; and new scientific studies on 
forest biomass. 
These factors have led to an update of SA90, the current 
exercise providing an interim view and laying a basis for a more 
complete study of future emissions. Six alternative IPCC 
scenarios (IS92a-0 now embody a wide array of assumptions 
affecting how future greenhouse gas emissions might evolve in 
the absence of climate policies beyond those already adopted. 
The different worlds which the new scenarios imply, in terms of 
economic, social and environmental conditions, vary widely and 
the resulting range of possible greenhouse gas futures spans 
almost an order of magnitude. Overall, the scenarios indicate that 
greenhouse gas emissions could rise substantially over the 
coming century in the absence of new and explicit control 
measures. IS92a is closer to SA90 due to modest and largely 
offsetting changes in the underlying assumptions. The highest 
greenhouse gas levels result from IS92e which combines, among 
other assumptions, moderate population growth, high economic 
growth, high fossil fuel availability and eventual hypothetical 
phase-out of nuclear power. At the other extreme, IS92c has a 
CO2 emission path which eventually falls below its 1990 starting 
level. It assumes that population grows, then declines by the 
middle of the next century, that economic growth is low, and that 
there are severe constraints on fossil fuel supplies. IS92b, a 
modification of IS92a, suggests that current commitments by 
many OECD Member countries to stabilize or reduce C O 2 might 
have a small impact on greenhouse gas emissions over the next 
few decades, but would not offset the substantial growth in the 
rest of the world. lS92b does not take into account the possibility 
that such commitments could accelerate development and 
diffusion of low greenhouse gas technologies, nor possible 
resulting shifts in industrial mix. 
Population and economic growth, structural changes in 
economies, energy prices, technological advance, fossil fuel 
supplies, nuclear and renewable energy availability are among the 
factors which could exert a major influence on future levels of 
CO2 emissions. Developments such as those in the republics of 
the former Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe, now incorporated 
into all the scenarios, have important implications for future 
fossil fuel carbon emissions, by affecting the levels of economic 
activities and the efficiency of energy production and use. Biotic 
carbon emissions in the early decades of the scenarios are higher 
than SA90, reflecting higher preliminary FAO estimates of 
current rates of tropical deforestation in many - though not all -
parts of the world, and higher estimates of forest biomass. 
The revised scenarios for CFCs and other substances which 
deplete stratospheric ozone are much lower than in SA90. This is 
consistent with wide participation in controls under the 1990 
London Amendments to the Montreal Protocol. However, the 
future production and composition of CFC substitutes (HCFCs 
and HFCs) could significantly affect the levels of radiative 
forcing from these compounds. 
The distribution of C H 4 and N2O emissions from their 
respective sources has changed from the SA90 case. C H 4 
emissions from rice paddies are lower, and emissions from 
animal waste and biomass burning have also been revised 
downwards. Adipic and nitric acid production have been included 
as additional sources of N2O. Preliminary analysis of the 
emissions of volatile organic compounds and sulphur dioxide 
suggests that the global eiuissions of these substances are likely 
to grow substantially in the coming century. 

 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
75 
A3.1 Introduction and Baclcground 
In January 1989, the Response Strategies Working Group 
(RSWG) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) requested a United States/Netherlands 
expert group to prepare a set of scenarios of global 
emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), 
nitrous oxide (N2O), halocarbons and the tropospheric 
ozone precursors nitrogen oxide (NO^) and carbon 
monoxide (CO) (IPCC, 1991a). These scenarios were 
completed in December 1989 for use by the IPCC Science 
Working Group (WGI) in its assessment of future climate 
change (IPCC, 1990a and b). New information has become 
available since the development of the original scenarios. 
Consequendy, in March 1991, the IPCC requested an 
update of the existing scenarios in light of recent 
developments and newly adopted policies. The new IPCC 
mandate explicitly excluded development of new climate 
pohcy scenarios (Swart et al., 1991). 
This Section first briefly compares the major 
assumptions on population and economic growth with 
historical data or other published forecasts. It then 
summarizes how the original no-climate-policy Scenario A 
(SA90) has been updated with information which has 
become available in 1990 and 1991. This produces the new 
IPCC Scenarios "IS92a" and 'TS92b". Because of 
substantial uncertainty in how the future will evolve, this 
Section also includes a preliminary assessment of a range 
of additional no-climate-policy scenarios, as well as 
comparisons with other published greenhouse gas 
scenarios. The updated scenarios are set against two 
studies of the probability distributions of possible CO2 
scenarios, and then are compared to other published 
"central tendency" scenarios that extend past the year 2000 
and up to the year 2100. Finally, we present sector-by-
sector discussions of the particular methods and 
assumptions in the update, along with additional sectoral 
scenarios. Detailed documentation of the scenarios is 
available in a supporting document which also provides 
tabulations of key variables including population, GNP, 
primary energy consumption, and emissions (Pepper et ai, 
1992). 
A3.2 New Aspects of this Update 
The following changes have occurred since the original 
IPCC scenarios were developed: 
• 
revised World Bank and United Nations (UN) 
population forecasts; 
• 
a new greenhouse gas scenario from the IPCC 
Energy and Industry Sub-Group (EIS); 
• 
important political reforms in the USSR, Eastern 
Europe and other countries, and a war in the Persian 
Gulf; 
• 
more optimistic assessments of the economical 
availability of renewable energy resources; 
• 
revised estimates of current sources and sinks of 
greenhouse gases, reported in Section A l of this 
report; 
• 
revised Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
data on rates of tropical deforestation and several 
new studies on forest biomass content; and 
• 
the London Amendments to the Montreal Protocol as 
well as developments in participation and 
compliance with the Protocol entered into force. 
For completeness, several small sources of greenhouse 
gases are added to this assessment which were not 
included in the 1990 IPCC Assessment Report. These 
include N2O from the production of nitric acid and adipic 
acid, and CH4 from animal wastes and domestic sewage 
(see Sections A1.3 and A1.4). In addition, scientific 
evidence described in Section A2 underscores the need to 
consider the full range of gases which influence climate, 
directly or indirectly. Cognizant of the importance of a 
comprehensive approach, this Section also provides 
preliminary estimates of present and future emissions of 
volatile organic compounds (VOC) and sulphur oxides 
(SO^). Their indirect inlluences on radiative forcing are 
more uncertain than those of the direct greenhouse gases 
and it is not yet possible to quantify on an equivalent basis 
all the direct and indirect forcing. Improved information 
with which both to estimate the emissions of these gases 
and to summarize their effects is needed for future 
assessments. 
The reader should be cautioned, however, that none of 
the scenarios depicted in this section predicts the future. 
Long-term scenarios provide inputs to climate models and 
assist in the examination of the relative importance of 
relevant trace gases, aerosols, and precursors in changing 
atmospheric composition and climate. Scenarios can also 
help improve understanding of key relationships among 
factors that drive future emissions. Scenarios illustrate the 
emissions which could be associated with an array of 
possible assumptions regarding demographics, economics, 
and technological advance. They can help policymakers to 
consider the directions in which future emissions may 
evolve in the absence of new greenhouse gas reduction 
efforts, and the types of change in important parameters 
which could or would have to occur in order to 
significantly change future emission paths. 
The results of scenarios can vary considerably from 
actual outcomes even over short time horizons. Confidence 
in scenario outputs decreases as the time horizon increases, 
because the basis for the underlying assumptions becomes 
increasingly speculative. Uncertainties are of two types: 
(i) 
large uncertainty associated with the evolution of 
future patterns of human activity, such as economic 

76 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
growth and structure, technological advances, or 
responses to environmental, economic, or insti-
tutional constraints; and 
(ii) 
inadequacy of scientific knowledge concerning 
physical parameters, such as emission factors, and 
their relationships. 
We have addressed some of these uncertainties in the 
updated IS92a and b in four ways. The first is through the 
creation of new scenarios (c through f explained in Table 
A3.1) using modified key parameters; the second 
compares some of the new IPCC scenarios with two 
studies which have mapped probability distributions of 
future C O T emissions; the third compares the range of new 
IPCC scenarios with other published studies of "central 
tendencies"; and the fourth analyses sensitivity of results 
in different sectors to key parameters. The current exercise 
lays a basis for more complete analysis of the credible 
range and probabilities of alternative scenarios. 
A possibly important limitation of this analysis is that it 
does not assess the effects that climate change may have 
on agricultural production, energy demand, and terrestrial 
ecosystems. Nor does it make assumptions about growth of 
vegetation if CO2 increases fertilization, or about losses of 
the forest uptake of CO2 if deforestation continues. There 
could also be positive feedbacks on CO2 and methane 
emissions through increased respiration of vegetation and 
degradation of organic soils. Also, as discussed in Section 
A2 of this report, we do not yet have an adequate method 
for summarizing on an equivalent basis the effects on 
climate of all the greenhouse gases. 
A3.3 The Analytical Tool: The "Atmospheric 
Stabilization Framework" 
The Atmospheric Stabilization Framework (ASF), 
developed by the US Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA, 1990), was used as the primary tool for integrating 
the assumptions and estimating future emissions of 
greenhouse gases. The A S F is a framework which 
combines emission modules for various sectors including 
modules for energy, industry, agriculture, forests and land 
conversion, as well as a number of small sources. Each 
module combines assumptions concerning population, 
economic growth, structural change, resource availability, 
and emission coefficients to estimate emissions in future 
time periods. The ASF estimates emissions for CO2, CH4, 
NiO, chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and substitutes, CO, 
NO^, VOCs, and SO,^. The energy module uses energy 
prices to equilibriate supply from the different energy 
supply sources with demand in four energy end-use 
sectors. Increased energy prices encourage additional 
energy supply and increases in energy efficiency but have 
only a small feedback on economic growth. The 
agriculture module combines assumptions on population 
growth, economic growth, improved yields, and other 
factors to estimate future production and consumption of 
agricultural products, land use, and fertilizer use along 
with emissions of greenhouse gases from these activities. 
The CFC module estimates future emissions of CFCs, 
HCFCs, carbon tetrachloride (CCI4), methyl chloroform, 
and HFCs under different policy objectives and 
compliance scenarios, derived with assumptions on the 
estimated growth in demand for CFCs. The tropical forest 
section combines assumptions including population, 
demand for agricultural land, method of forest clearing, 
and the amount of biomass stored in the vegetation and 
soils to estimate the clearing of tropical forests and the fate 
of the cleared land (e.g., forests may be cleared and then 
allowed to lie fallow in which case they can start to re-
accumulate carbon). 
A3.4 General Assumptions 
The assumptions for the scenarios in this report come 
mostly from the published forecasts of major international 
organizations or from published expert analyses. Most of 
these have been subject to extensive review. The premises 
for the 1992 IPCC Scenarios a and b ("IS92a" and 
"IS92b") most closely update the SA90 scenario from 
IPCC (1990) There exist a wide variety of other plausible 
assumptions, some of which are used in the range of new 
scenarios presented here. Table A3.1 summarizes the 
different assumptions used in the six scenarios. These 
assumptions are documented in detail in a supporting 
report (Pepper et a/., 1992). 
New information since the SA90 has raised the assumed 
population and economic growth rates compared to those 
in the earlier assessment. The forecast of future population 
growth in the SA90 came from the World Bank (Zachariah 
and Vu, 1988), which the World Bank has since revised 
(Bulatao et al, 1989). The U N has also published new 
population estimates (UN, 1990; U N Population Division, 
1992). The U N medium case is very close to the World 
Bank's update; the U N medium-low and medium-high 
cases are used in the alternative scenarios presented here. 
Most of the variance between the medium-high and 
medium-low cases is in the developing countries. The 
updated World Bank population assumptions are close to 
10% higher than the assumptions in the SA90: global 
population increases from 4.84 billion in 1985, to 8.42 
billion in 2025, and to 11.33 billion in 2100, with about 
94% of the growth occurring in the developing countries. 
The U N medium forecast of future population estimates 
that global population may reach 8.51 billion in 2025, 1% 
higher than the World Bank estimate. Their recent medium 
extension of this suggests world population of 11.18 
billion in 2100 (UN Population Division, 1992), or about 
1% lower than the World Bank's. The U N medium-low 

u 
u 
I 
OS 
6 
C 
3 
8 
3 
O 
« 
i3 
J3 
Cb 
c o 
•s -a 
u 
t ) 
3 
SI 
T 3 
3 
O 
T3 u 
o .S X 
.2 — 
o O 
-a « 
| o 
00 
-a 
2 Z 
U 
I O 
• i d 
i >-
c 
E 
1 o 
S T3 
P c 
c .H 
<0 
CO 
J3 o 
O 
''^ 
O 
M 
e 
O 
O 
" 
S S 
c 
C/5 
c 
p-1 
on 
o 
•3 
c cS 
o O .S 
c '3 "o 
o '3 
> 3 
c 
o 
U 
CO 
O 
3S 
o 
o 
o 
o 
O 
<U CO 
3 g 
- 
^ 
• 
o q • 
= o 
<u S • 
SI 
(N 
O 
c o 
IT) 
o 
c 
8 s § 
26£ 
P 
o 
- 
00 
« o 
- 
O 
22 
c 
u 
o i l 
•S 
2 o 
g 
i 
o 
w 
ON cn 
ol cj 
m o 
<N o 
o 
^ 
6 6 
ON ON 
ON ON 
in o 
S2 
<N <N 
O 
O 
ON 
ON 
0 \ 
ON 
i n 
O 
S2 
O 
O 
0 \ 
ON 
0 \ 
ON 
ON C^, 
c4 CM 
o — 
ON 
ON 
c o 
3 
2 § 
•a PQ 
13 
T3 pa 
o 
l i 
2 pa 
D NO 
E 2 
"S ^ 
S PQ 
ID NO 
a 
o 
IN 
a >> 
m 
•a m Is 
U 
6; 
c 
8 
00 
(N 
ON 
ON 
CO 
ON 
£2 
0 \ 
CO 

78 
Table A3.2: Population assumptions (in millions). 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
World Bank (1991) 
UNMed-Low 
UNMed-High 
IS92a, b & e 
IS92C & d 
IS92f 
Region 
1990 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 t 
2025 
2100 t 
OECD 
838 
939 
903 
865 
503 
1,039 
1,359 
USSR & E.-Europe 
428 
496 
513 
475 
337 
540 
856 
China & CP Asia ++ 
1,218 
1,721 
1,924 
1.526 
935 
1,881 
2,385 
Middle East 
128 
327 
603 
272 
223 
349 
693 
Africa 
648 
1,587 
2,962 
1,375 
1,668 
1,807 
4,651 
Latin America 
440 
708 
869 
682 
770 
832 
1,662 
South & East Asia 
1,553 
2,636 
3,538 
2,395 
1,979 
2,999 
5,987 
Total 
5,252 
8,414 
11,312 
7,591 
6,415 
9,445 
17,592 
' 
Regional breakout of data for 2100 reported here was derived from UN Population Division (1992) which used 
different regions from this IPCC analysis and did not provide country-specific estimates, 
tt 
CP = Centrally planned economies. 
Table A3.3: GNP growth assumptions (average annual rate) 
World Bankt 
Lowtt 
Hightt 
IS92c 
IS92a 
IS92e 
1965 
1990 
1990 
1990 
1990 
1990 
1990 
1990 
1990 
1989 
2000 
2000 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 
2025 
2100 
OECD 
3.2% 
2.4% 
3.1% 
1.8% 
0.6% 
2.5% 
1.7% 
3.0% 
2.2% 
USSR/E.Europe+tt 
1.3% 
3.2% 
3.6% 
1.5% 
0.5% 
2.4% 
1.6% 
3.2% 
2.4% 
China & CP'* Asia 
7.6% 
5.6% 
6.7% 
4.2% 
2.5% 
5.3% 
3.9% 
6.1% 
4.7% 
Other 
4.7% 
3.8% 
4.5% 
3.0% 
2.1% 
4.1% 
3.3% 
4.8% 
4.1% 
Global 
-
-
-
2.0% 
1.2% 
2.9% 
2.3% 
3.5% 
3.0% 
Source: World Bank (1991). 
Estimated using projections of regional growth in GDP/capita and country estimates of GDP, population and 
population growth from 1990 to 2000. 
World Bank data only include several countries in Eastern Europe. 
CP = Centrally planned economies. 
and medium-high ca,ses reach 6.4 billion and 17.6 bOlion, 
respectively, in 2100. Table A3.2 summarizes the 
population assumptions by region. 
Future economic growth assumptions are summarized in 
Table A3.3. Growth rates assumed in this update are based 
in part on the reference scenario to 2025 of the Energy and 
Industry Sub-Group (EIS) of the RSWG (IPCC, 1991b). 
However, we have adjusted them downward in the near 
and medium terms in Eastern Europe, the (former) USSR, 
and the Persian Gulf due to the likely impacts of recent 
political events. Overall, the economic growth assumptions 
in IS92a and IS92b are higher than those used in the SA90, 
especially in Africa, China and Southeast Asia. However, 
the IS92a and b assumptions for 1990 to 2000 are 
generally below or at the low end of the ranges forecast by 
the World Bank (1991), with the exceptions of the US, 
O E C D (Organization of Economic Cooperation and 
Development) Pacific and the Middle East. Table A3.3 
compares the ranges of GNP assumptions in the new IPCC 
Scenarios with historical data and the near term projections 
from the World Bank (World Bank, 1991). The GNP 
growth rate assumptions for the initial 35 years of IS92a 
and b, from 1990 to 2025, are substantially below those 
experienced by most world regions in the past 34 years, 
from 1955 to 1989. The exceptions are Africa; and Eastern 
Europe and the USSR, where we assume substantial 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
79 
Table A3.4: GDP per capita growth f from 1955 to 1989 
(average annual rate) 
OECD Members 
2.9% 
Eastern Europe 
2.5% 
Europe, Middle East, & North Africa 
2.6% 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
1.0% 
Latin America 
1.6% 
Asia 
4.6% 
Source: World Bank (1991), rates of growth re-estimated. 
Table A3.5: GNP per capita growth assumptions from 
1990 to 2025 (average annual rate) 
IS92c 
IS92a 
IS92e 
OECD 
1.7% 
2.2% 
2.7% 
USSR/E.-Europe 
1.2% 
2.0% 
2.7% 
China & CP Asia 
3.5% 
4.3% 
5.1% 
Mid-East 
0.5% 
1.2% 
2.0% 
Africa 
0.9% 
1.7% 
2.5% 
Latin America 
1.2% 
1.9% 
2.7% 
Rest of Asia 
2.3% 
3.0% 
3.8% 
structural adjustment would boost growth in the medium 
term. Over the long-term, GNP tends to slow due to an 
expected slowing of population growth. 
Income per capita is assumed to rise most rapidly in the 
developing world throughout the next century, but in 2100 
it remains well below levels in the developed economies. 
Table A3.4 provides historical data from the World Bank 
on growth of GDP/capita in the past 34 years, for 
comparison with Table A3.5 showing the range of IS92 
assumptions for 1990 to 2025. 
It is important to note that the emission results provided 
in this paper are highly sensitive to both the population and 
economic growth assumptions. These parameters would 
most likely be negatively correlated, however. The 
economic growth assumptions in IS92a and b fall below 
historical rates. It is uncertain whether ambitious growth 
can be realized and maintained in all regions, especially 
considering possible capital and resource constraints and 
the presently volatile circumstances in a number of 
nations. On the other hand, the relatively low GNP per 
capita in developing countries even at the end of the period 
suggest that the IS92a and b assumptions fall well below 
the aspirations of many countries. 
All the scenarios presented here include the changes in 
government policies aimed at mitigating climate change 
which have been adopted (as of December 1991). The 
expert group used a rule for IS92a to incorporate only 
those emission controls internationally agreed upon and 
national policies enacted into law, such as the London 
Amendments to the Montreal Protocol, the amended US 
Clean Air Act, and the SO^, NO^, and VOC Protocols of 
the Convention on Long Range Transboundary A i r 
Pollution (LRTAP).^^'' It does not include the C O j 
emissions targets that have been proposed but not enacted 
by many OECD countries nor broad policy proposals to 
cut back on deforestation. 
Another scenario, IS92b, shows some of the uncertainty 
surrounding these policies. IS92b enlarges the inter-
pretation of current policies to include stated policies 
beyond those legally adopted. All CO2 commitments of 
OECD countries, for example, are included, along with an 
assumption of worldwide ratification and compliance with 
the amended Montreal Protocol. Since we assume that the 
CO2 stabilization commitments would be achieved through 
improvements in energy efficiency and switching from 
fossil fuels to nuclear or renewable energy, this reduces 
simultaneously some of the other greenhouse gases emitted 
by fossil fuels. We assume that after the target years, 
emissions would be kept level. 
Four additional scenarios have been constructed to 
examine the sensitivity of future greenhouse gas emissions 
to a wider range of alternative input assumptions for key 
variables. Full documentation is available in Pepper et al. 
(1992). The scenarios suggest very different pictures of the 
future. 
IS92c, the lowest scenario, assumes the U N medium-
low population forecast, in which population declines in 
the twenty-first century. It also assumes lower growth in 
GNP per capita than IS92a and b, as well as low oil and 
gas resource availability, resulting in higher prices and 
promoting expansion of nuclear and renewable energy. 
Deforestation would be slower with lower population 
growth. IS92d represents another low but more optimistic 
scenario. It extrapolates some possible trends towards 
increasing environmental protection, but includes only 
actions that could be taken due to concern about local or 
regional air pollution, waste disposal, etc. Population 
growth assumes the U N medium-low forecast and would 
be associated with lower natality, falling below the 
replacement rate late in the twenty-first century, due for 
example to improvement in per capita income or increased 
/- [n addition, since there is a trend toward increasing control of 
local air pollution in many countries, all scenarios assumed a 
slow penetration oflow-co.st technologies which reduce SO^ and 
NOy. emissions from very large installations and, in the case of 
NO.^ and CO, from motor vehicles. 

5i 
Si" 
0 \ 
C3 
c 
o 
c 
o 
a , 
o 
. 00 
' 
Ml 
H 
u 
r-1 U 
u B 
1) 
> 
a 
o 
E ^ - i 
y 
U Z 
W S 
o 
P -
o 
u 
3 
<U = 
" 
C 
O 
U 
Z 
W 
c u 
Q O 
a, 
c 
Z 
;§ 
c 
o 
C>0 
— ON 
O — r--, 
l o oc 
M 
t> 
-~ OO a 
r^, 
r-l — 
oo IN 
ON oc 
O 
c4 i/S 
O N 
o >r-, — 
sC ON 
^ 
(N r-, 
oo 1^ 
55 
^ oc 
o 
d 
00 o 
d — 
(N o 
o — 
CNI ri 
6 O 
ON. ON 
O N 
O N 
O N 
5 3 
oo o 
ON 
'O —' 
NC ON 
^ 
CM 
d 
d 
ON 
O 
d — 
ri o 
o — 
6 6 
ON, ON 
ON ON 
O N 
— O 
— r) 
1/-. 00 
N* 
<N 
I/O ("n 
oo \0 
if', op 
S5 
oo r j 
N O 
d 
d 
NC 
d 
d 
o -
ON. 
O N 
S3 
— (N 
NC O 
3; C5 
oo 
NO 
to lO 
o; d 
8 
2 
ON 
d 
oc 00 
c 
d 
o — 
NO 
I T ; 
~ 
C I 
SI 
» 0 
IT-, 
£5 
c 
c 
1^. lO 
d 
c 
6^ ^ 
o — 
uo 
C 
gs 
5? 
O N 
O N 
ON. 
in 
— rJ 
— 
M 
ir^; oc 
oo 
o 
r-1 o 
NC ON 
NC 
— 
•<t NC 
^ 
NC 
— 
S5 
IT-. NO 
ri 'X 
r- NO 
d 
d 
oc c 
d — 
?1 rl 
1 
rJ 
ON 
31 
•a 
?3 
• o 
^ 
g 
I 11 
a> 
— -c 
E o 
a- = 
~ 2 
J u a 
± (J .a 
CL 
" a 
• 3 U • 
fcpr -
M l 
~ 
II C CO 
uj -£ < ul •£ 
< o c 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
81 
family planning. Like lS92c, low fossil resource availabil-
ity gives rise to greater market penetration of renewable 
energy and safe nuclear power. The costs of more stringent 
local pollution controls are incorporated into IS92d 
through a 30% environmental surcharge on fossil energy 
use. Greater well-being is assumed to lead to voluntary 
actions to halt deforestation, to adopt CFC substitutes with 
no radiative or other adverse effects, and to recover and 
efficiently use the C H 4 from coal mines and landfills. 
lS92e, the case with the highest estimated 
C O 2 
emissions, assumes the World Bank (moderate) population 
forecast but a more rapid improvement in GNP per capita. 
Fossil resources are plentiful, but, due to assumed 
improvement in living standards, environmental sur-
charges are imposed on their use. Nuclear energy is phased 
out by 2075. CFC substitute assumptions are like those in 
IS92d, but plentiful fossil resources discourage the 
additional use of coal mine methane for energy supply as 
assumed in lS92d. Deforestation proceeds at the same pace 
as in IS92a. lS92f falls below lS92e, using the high U N 
population growth forecasts but the lower assumptions of 
improvement in G N P per capita than IS92a. Other 
assumptions are high fossil resource availability, 
increasing costs of nuclear power, and less iinprovement in 
renewable energy technologies and costs. Table A3.6 
suinmarizes key results of the scenarios for all gases and 
Figure A3.1 illustrates the scenarios for CO2 emissions 
only. Table A3.7 summarizes net emissions of CO2, and 
anthropogenic emissions of CH4, and N2O by region for 
IS92a. 
A3.5 Comparisons with Other Studies 
No systematic analysis has been conducted in this exercise 
of the likelihood of any of the outcomes illustrated in the 
six new IPCC Scenarios described above. However, the 
probabilities of these emission paths has been considered 
in part by comparison with other studies of probabilities 
Table A3.7: Net emissions of CO 2 and anthropogenic emissions ofCH4 and N2O under IS92a. 
CO2 
Anthropogenic N2O 
Anthropogenic CH4 
1990 
(GtC) 
2025 
2100 
1990 
(TgN) 
2025 
2100 
1900 
(Tg) 
2025 
2100 
OECD 
2.8 
3.5 
4.3 
1.4 
2.0 
1.7 
74 
90 
143 
USSR & Eastern Europe 
1.7 
2.4 
2.5 
0.8 
1.0 
0.9 
70 
62 
113 
China and CP Asia*''' 
0.6 
1.6 
4.2 
0.5 
0.8 
0.9 
37 
53 
73 
Other 
0.9 
3.2 
8.8 
1.9 
3.7 
5.1 
146 
260 
380 
Total 
6.0 
10.7 
19.8 
4.6 
7.5 
8.7 
326 
465 
709 
' 
E.xcludes CH4 from domestic sewage which was not estimated on a regional basis, 
t t 
CP = Centrally planned economies. 

82 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
(1) 
2000 
2025 
2050 
2075 
2100 
Year 
Figure A3.2: Uncertainty analyses for carbon emissions from fossil fuel. The following studies are represented; Edmonds - (1) 95th 
percentile, (3) 75th percentile, (7) 25th percentile, and (8) 5th percentile; Nordhaus and Yohe - (2) 95th percentile, (4) 50th percentile, 
and (6) 5th percentile; also (5) IS92a. The shaded area indicates the range of the IS92 scenarios. 
1990 
1995 
2000 
2005 
2010 
2015 
2020 
2025 
Year 
Figure A3.3: Comparison of COj emissions from fossil fuels out to AD 2025 according to: (1) lEA; (2) CEC; (3) IS92a; (4) OECD; 
(5) IS92b; (6) SA90; (7) the World Energy Conference (WEC) "moderate" and (8) "low" scenarios. The shaded area indicates the 
range of the IS92 scenarios. 
and "best guess" scenarios. Two studies, Edmonds et al. 
(1986) and Nordhaus and Yohe (1983) explicitly examined 
the issue of uncertainty by estimating the probabilities 
associated with the various critical input assumptions and 
the correlation among them, in order to calculate 
probability distributions of future CO2 trends. Figure A3.2 
shows their results, against a shaded area representing the 
range of the new IPCC Scenarios. Both the Edmonds et al. 
and the Nordhaus and Yohe teams found a very wide 
variation in potential future emissions in the absence of 
policies to limit this growth. The IS92a falls slightiy below 
the 50th percentile values from Nordhaus and Yohe in the 
2050 to 2100 time period until they coincide near 2100. 
IS92b is slightly lower. The IS92a and b lie between the 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
83 
0 U 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 
Year 
Figure A3.4: Comparison of CO2 emissions from fossil fuels according to longer-range scenarios: (I) CETA; (2) CRTM-RD; (3) 
Manne & Richels; (4) EPA (RCW); (5) Edmonds/Reilly; (6) SA90; (7) IS92a, and (8) EPA (SCW). The shaded area indicates the range 
of the IS92 scenarios. 
50th and 75th percentiles in the Edmonds analysis. The 
highest, new IPCC Scenario is very close to Edmonds 75th 
percentile, while the lowest is higher than Edmonds 25th 
percentile. These results from Edmonds et al. and 
Nordhaus and Yohe reinforce the conclusion that emission 
trajectories are extremely sensitive to a number of key 
parameters including population growth, economic growth, 
improvements in energy efficiency and structural change 
in the economy, as well as the future costs of fossil energy 
and alternative energy supplies. 
Figure A3.3 compares CO2 emissions from the range of 
IS92 scenarios in the period 1990 to 2025 to emissions 
adapted from scenarios of future energy use developed by 
the International Energy Agency ( l E A , 1991), the 
Commission of the European Communities (CEC, 1989), 
the World Energy Conference (WEC, 1989), Burniaux et 
al. (1991), and SA90. Emissions in the l E A and C E C 
Scenarios are from 5% to 12% higher than the emissions in 
the IS92a through to 2010, the end point of their scenarios. 
Burniaux et al. (1991), using the OECD-GREEN model, 
suggest CO2 emissions that are 4% lower than the IS92a in 
the early years but increase to the same levels by 2020. 
Emissions in the WEC moderate scenario are 24% lower 
than IS92a in 2020. Figure A3.4 examines longer-term 
scenarios, comparing the new IPCC Scenarios with 7 
others, including the SA90 Scenario, two scenarios 
(Slowly Changing World, SCW, and Rapidly Changing 
World, RCW) developed by the US EPA (1990), scenarios 
from Manne and Richels (1990), and several studies 
underway within the Stanford University Energy Modeling 
Forum. The modellers include Edmonds and Barnes, Peck 
and Teisberg (using C E T A ) , and Rutherford (using 
CRTM) (Weyant, 1991: studies to be published in mid-
1992). The range of the new IPCC Scenarios is broader 
than the "central tendency" studies presented in Figures 
A3.3 and A3.4. This is especially true by 2100, due to the 
range of population and economic growth assumptions 
used in the scenarios. Edmonds et al. (1992) provides a 
more detailed comparison of these scenarios. 
A3.6 Energy 
Future levels of greenhouse gas emissions from the energy 
sector are a function primarily of population, incomes, the 
structure and efficiency of economies, and the relative 
costs and availability of different sources of energy. The 
population and economic assumptions in this update of the 
IPCC scenarios have already been discussed. To 2025, the 
estimates of energy demand by region and sector are based 
primarily on the EIS reference scenario. After 2025, 
energy demand is a function of the economic assumptions 
and the factors discussed in this Section, and modelled by 
the ASF (EPA, 1990). Associated emissions of greenhouse 
gases are estimated using coefficients from the OECD 
(1991). 
The exogenous assumptions of improvements in the 
intensity of energy end-use are critical parameters 
counterweighing the upward push on CO2 emissions from 
population and economic growth. The assumptions used 
within IS92a and b result in a global decrease in energy 
intensity of 0.8% annually in the period to 2025, and 1.0% 
annually from 2025 to 2100. The decrease in energy per 
unit of GNP is assumed to be particularly strong in China 
through to 2100 and in Eastern Europe and the former 
republics of the Soviet Union in the period 2000 to 2025 as 
IS92a and b assume substantial structural change. This 
reflects a complex mix of factors, including market-
oriented reforms, a tendency to increase energy demand 
per capita with increased standards of living (though GNP 
growth is substantially reduced in Eastern Europe and the 

84 
republics of the former Soviet Union in the early part of 
this period), and a tendency toward consumption of less 
energy intensive goods and services as economies develop. 
Long-term rates of decrease of exogenous end-use 
intensity are plausible in the range of 0.8% to 1.0% per 
year. Edmonds and Reilly (1985) explored the historical 
rate of change of the energy to GNP ratio in a wide range 
of OECD countries over extended periods of up to 100 
years. The United Kingdom averaged a rate of decline in 
the energy to GNP ratio of 0.8% annually from 1880 to 
1975, while the United States averaged 1.0% from 1920 to 
1975. Rates of change over a 50 year period (1925 through 
1975) for 13 other OECD nations ranged from 0.45% per 
year (Germany) to 1.33% per year (Italy). For three 
centrally planned economies (the former 
USSR, 
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia) the rate of change was 
1.1% per year over the same 50 year period. The range of 
experience is significantiy broader over shorter periods of 
time. Globally, according to World Bank data, the ratio of 
primary energy to GDP declined at an average rate of 0.4% 
in the 24 year period from 1965 to 1989 (World Bank, 
1991). 
The shares of different primary energy supplies change 
dramatically in all of the scenarios due to assumed 
limitations in fossil resources, expected advances in energy 
technologies, as well as calculated increases in energy 
prices. In IS92a and b, assumptions regarding available 
conventional oil, natural gas liquids (NGL), and gas 
resources are based on Masters et al. (1991). At oil and gas 
prices of $23 per barrel ($/bbl) and $2 per gigajoule 
($/GJ), respectively, the available resource equals the 
Masters et al. mean resource estimates. Additional 
conventional resources, up to the Masters et al. 90% 
bounding values, are available at prices rising to $35/bbl 
for oil and $8/GJ for gas. As a result, in these scenarios, 
conventional oil and gas production is gradually replaced 
by unconventional fossil sources, by synthetic fuels from 
coal, and non-fossil energy supplies. World oil prices 
increase to $55/bbl by 2025 and up to $70/bbl by 2100. Up 
to 760 billion barrels of unconventional liquids including 
heavy oils, bitumen, and enhanced oil recovery are 
assumed to become available at oil prices of $35 to 
$70/bbl. As conventional oil and gas are replaced with coal 
and unconventional supplies, the production and 
conversion losses tend to result in significant increases in 
the rate of C O T emissions in IS92a. Large resources of 
shale oil are assumed to be available at prices over 
$70/bbl. For the high fossil resource assumptions in IS92e 
and f, we incorporated estimates of oil resources from 
Grossling and Nielson (1985). 
Simultaneously, the costs of non-fossil energy supplies 
are assumed to fall significantly over the next hundred 
years. For example, solar electricity prices are assumed to 
fall to US$ 0.075 kilowatt per hour ($/kWh) in the IS92a, 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
and to US$ 0.065/kWh in the more optimistic IS92d. They 
are assumed to fall only to $0.083/kWh in IS92f. Overall, 
while renewables are not significantiy competitive with 
fossil energy in 1990, their market penetration speeds as 
unit costs fall and fossil fuel prices increase rapidly around 
2025. By 2100, nuclear, solar, hydropower and biofuels 
represent 43% of total global primary energy supply in 
IS92a and b. Overall, the six new IPCC Scenarios 
represent a global energy system which continues to be 
dependent on fossil fuels, notably coal, and which shows 
only moderate gains in energy efficiency and technological 
development of non-fossil energy sources. 
Global energy use rises steadily until 2100 in IS92a, 
reflecting increases in population and income. Commercial 
primary energy use which is 344 exajoules (EJ) in 1990, 
grows to 708 EJ by 2025 and to 1453 EJ by 2100^^'' 
Primary fossil energy use represents over 85% of primary 
energy use until 2025. After 2025, the fossil share of 
primary energy declines to 57% by 2100 despite a nearly 
three-fold increase in fossil energy production and use. 
Energy sources such as nuclear, hydropower, solar, and 
commercial biofuels play a much more important role after 
2025 than before in all scenarios, although the mix varies 
among scenarios. 
CO2 emissions from energy use increase with primary 
energy use but at a slightly slower rate due to increased use 
of non-carbon energy sources. CO2 emissions in the IS92a 
increase from 6.0 billion tons of carbon (GtC) in 1990 to 
10.7 GtC in 2025 and 19.8 GtC in 2100f2J Compared to 
the original SA90, this represents faster growth before 
2025 but slower growth afterwards. The higher path until 
2025 reflects the assumptions in IS92a and b of more rapid 
population and economic growth, combined with less 
optimistic assumptions concerning improvements in 
energy efficiency, based on the EIS reference scenario 
assumptions. After 2025, IS92a relies more heavily on 
non-fossil energy sources than SA90 thereby reducing the 
rate of growth in CO2 emissions. 
While global CO2 emissions from energy use in IS92a 
and b grow fairiy constantiy at a rate of 1.1% and 1.0% 
annually, respectively, from 1990 to 2100 (see Figure 
A3.4), the pattern of growth differs considerably among 
regions. CO2 emissions from the developed economies 
grow at an average annual rate of 0.8% until 2025. After 
2025 in the developed economies, lower economic growth 
combined with stabilized population levels and increasing 
/ - Primary energy use in SA90 was 473 to 657 EJ in 2025 and 
728 to 1682 EJ in 2100, the range reflecting alternative 
economic growth projections. 
2 - Average CO2 emissions from energy in SA90 were 9.9 GtC i
2025 and 21.7 GtC in 2100. 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
85 
use of non-fossil energy sources yield reductions in this 
growth to an annual average of 0.2%. Emissions from 
developing economies continue to rise due to increases in 
population and economic growth. In the period, 1990 to 
2100, CO2 emissions per capita from energy use grow at 
an average annual rate of only 0.2% to 0.3% in the OECD, 
Eastern Europe, and the republics of the former Soviet 
Union, while averaging 1.0% for the rest of the world. CO2 
emissions per capita in developing countries remain on 
average one quarter to one half those of developed 
countries by 2100. Conversely, CO2 emissions per dollar 
GNP (per $GNP) in the OECD are two thirds the global 
average, one half those of Eastern Europe and the former 
Soviet Union, and one fifth those of China. Global average 
CO2 emissions per $GNP decline at an average annual rate 
of 1.2% from 1990 to 2100. Regionally, the highest rate of 
decline is in China where CO2 emissions per $GNP are 
over four times higher than the global average in 1990. 
IS92b incorporates the stabilization goal for fossil 
carbon dioxide emissions for the year 2000, proposed by 
many OECD Member countries. If countries achieve these 
commitments and sustain them through 2100 (which is 
likely to require programmes beyond those already 
planned) and the rest of the world does not adopt similar 
measures, global emissions in 2025 of fossil carbon would 
be 0.4 GtC lower than in the IS92a. This reduction 
represents a reduction of 11% in emissions of CO2 from 
the OECD from IS92a but only a 4% reduction of global 
emissions. These results reflect the long-term contribution 
of the economies of developing countries, the republics of 
the former Soviet Union, and Eastern Europe to CO2 
emissions. 
A3.7 Halocarbons 
Halocarbons, including chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), their 
substitutes, and other compounds which deplete 
stratospheric ozone, may have important implications for 
climate change. Many of these compounds exert a much 
more powerful direct radiative forcing than CO2 per 
molecule. Recently, it has been discovered that the loss of 
lower-stratospheric ozone can reduce the radiative forcing 
of the troposphere/surface system, particularly at high 
latitudes. Hence, ozone depleting molecules can have both 
positive (direct) and negative (indirect) contributions to 
radiative forcing. However, the net effect of such 
halocarbons on globally averaged temperatures or, more 
broadly, on climate is uncertain at present. As a result, the 
comparisons of scenarios for these gases are summarized 
using the kilotons (kt) of the compounds, not the index of 
direct "Global Warming Potential" (GWP), as calculated 
in Section A2 of this report. 
An important event since the development of the 
scenarios for the first IPCC assessment is the agreement to 
adjust and amend the Montreal Protocol in London in 1990 
(the "London Amendments"). Most key nations have 
either now signed the agreement or have pronounced the 
intention to do so. In IS92a, 70% of the developing world 
is assumed to ratify and comply with the London 
Amendments. This percentage is based on the GNP of 
countries that have signed and/or ratified as of December 
1, 1991 (e.g., China has signed while India has not). We 
further assume in IS92a that if most of the world develops 
and uses CFC substitutes, then the need to trade in global 
markets and "technology transfer" will lead to a gradual 
phase-out of all CFC use (we assume gradually from 2025 
to 2075) even without worldwide ratification. We have 
also included the voluntary reductions ahead of schedule 
achieved by many countries. IS92b assumes global 
compliance with the Montreal Protocol. 
The London Amendments contain a recommendation 
only to use halocarbon substitutes for a transition period. 
There are no international agreements for eventually 
phasing down the production of all substitute compounds. 
Some substitutes may not deplete stratospheric ozone but 
may still contribute to climate change. Therefore, in the 
scenarios, we assume that the production of substitutes 
would mimic the growth rate of the underlying controlled 
compounds which they replace under the phase-out, 
adjusted for market reductions due to non-chemical 
substitution and increased use of recycling and other 
emission control programmes. Accordingly, all of the cases 
assume that the demand for CFCs grows by 2.5% annually 
until 2050 then remains flat. HCFCs and HFCs are 
assumed to replace approximately 21 to 42% (depending 
on the scenario) of phased-out CFCs. Substitution is 
weighted much more towards HCFCs than HFCs over the 
long-term unless additional policy steps are taken. 
This analysis includes seven cases of future emissions of 
CFCs and their substitutes. Three of these cases are 
incorporated into the IS92 Scenarios. The first two cases, 
"Partial Compliance and High H C F C " and "Partial 
Compliance and Reduced HCFC" portray a future where 
only 70% of the developing world ratifies and complies 
with the London Amendments. In these scenarios, CFC 
production in the remaining 30% continue to grow until 
2100. Also, the H C F C reductions in the US are not 
incorporated. The third scenario, "Partial Compliance and 
Technology Transfer", is incorporated into IPCC Scenarios 
IS92a, c, and L It assumes partial compliance with the 
London Amendments but assumes that "technology 
transfer" results in a full phase-out of production of CFCs 
by 2075. It includes the phase-out of HCFCs in the US 
required by the Clean Air Act. The fourth case, "Global 
Compliance", is incorporated in IS92b and contains full 
global ratification and compliance with the London 
Amendments. The fifth case, "97 Phase-Out for Developed 
Countries", accelerates the phase-out schedule for CFCs. 

86 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
Year 
Figure A3.5: Emission of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) under a range of scenarios. Includes CFC-11, CFC-12, CFC-113, CFC-114 and 
CFC-115. 
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 
Year 
KEY: ^ 
CFC-11 & 12 
Q Other CFCs ^ 
CCU 
^ 
MCF 
d 
Halon 1211 & 1301 ^ 
HCFCs 
H j HFCs 
Figure A3.6: Emission of halocarbons under IS92a, c and f. These assume only partial compliance with the London Amendments to 
the Montreal Protocol but, through technical transfer to non-complying countries, a complete end to CFC production by AD 2075. 
The sixth case, "97 Phase-Out and HCFC Phase-Out" is 
incorporated in IS92c and d and expands on the fifth case 
by incorporating a global phase-out of HCFCs. The 
seventh case, "Faster Phase-Out - Global", accelerates the 
phase-out of CFCs and HCFCs in developing countries. 
For the calculations, US EPA's Integrated Assessment 
Model for CFCs vi-as used. Detailed results can be found in 
the supporting document. Pepper et al. (1992). In the 
IS92a, emissions of CFCs, carbon tetrachloride, and 
methyl chloroform decline rapidly through 2010 (see 
Figures A3.5 and A3.6, "Partial Compliance and 
Technology Transfer Case"). After 2010, these emissions 
stabilize and ultimately decline to zero after 2075 as all the 
world adopts the prominent technologies. Emissions of 
HCFCs and HFCs grow rapidly throughout the whole dme 
horizon in all cases, reflecting their roles as substitutes for 
the CFCs and the postulation of no controls on their 
emissions (except on HCFCs in the US). Its results 
indicate that the composition of subsUtutes could have an 
important impact on levels of radiative forcing. 
If "technology transfer" to non-signatories of the 
agreement were not to lead to a phase-out of CFCs, the 
implications by 2100 could be substantial, leading to 
emissions almost back up to the level estimated for 2000. 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
87 
The resuUs for the emissions of CFCs are depicted, as an 
example, in the "Partial Compliance and High HCFC" case 
in Figure A3.5. In this case, after 2010, emissions of CFCs, 
carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform stabilize and 
then start to increase. This reflects growth from non-
signatories of the London Amendments. 
IS92b assumes full ratification of and compliance with 
the London Amendments. Emissions are nearly eliminated 
much earlier ("London Amendments-Global Compliance") 
than in IS92a. Moreover, recent data showing more 
severe ozone depletion (WMO, 1992) could lead to a 
more rapid phase-out of CFCs and halons, carbon 
tetrachloride, and methyl chloroform ("97 Phase-Out for 
Developed Countries"). Controls on the use of HCFCs are 
also possible. 
A3.8 Agriculture, Forests and Land Conversion 
A3.8.1 Agriculture 
Details of the estimation of greenhouse gases from 
agricultural sources are available in Pepper et al. (1992). 
The distribution of the global emissions of non-COT 
greenhouse gases among different sources in the base year 
has been taken from the assessment of the global budgets 
reported in Section A l of this document. This distribution 
is still poorly understood for most gases. In particular, 
emissions of CH4 from rice cultivation are highly 
uncertain but lower than believed in IPCC (1990). Average 
emission coefficients of 38 grams per square metre per 
year for land under rice cultivation have been selected for 
all scenarios based on the CH4 emission budget of 60 
teragrams (Tg). In IS92a and b, the emissions rise 
gradually from 60Tg in 1990 to 88Tg by 2050, then 
decline to 84Tg by 2100. The scenarios assume continuing 
advances in crop yields which average 0.5% annually over 
the period. Consequently, the growth in emissions is 
slower than growth in rice production, which more than 
doubles. 
In IS92a and b, CH4 emissions from enteric fer-
mentation in domestic animals rise from 84Tg in 1990 to 
close to 200Tg by 2100. This increase reflects a rapid 
increase in consumption of meat and dairy products and 
assumes constant emissions per unit of production. 
Emissions of CH4 from animal wastes have been added, 
changing with the levels of meat and dairy production. If 
meat production per animal were to increase, emissions 
would be lower. Emissions from animal wastes increase 
from 26Tg CH4 in 1990 to 62Tg CH4 by 2100. It is 
uncertain whether this growth in the production of meat 
and dairy products can actually be maintained, taking into 
account possible land and feed constraints which are not 
explicitly dealt with in these scenarios. Autonomous 
developments that affect the emissions from enteric 
fermentation or animal waste per unit of production, such 
as those resulting from changed feeding patterns, are not 
hypothesized either. Both types of factors could change the 
emission trends of these scenarios. 
Emissions of N2O from fertilized soils in 1990 of 2.2 
TgN have been selected as the starring budget, falling 
within the range of uncertainty of 0.3 to 3.0 TgN reported 
in Section A l . They increase in proportion to fertilizer use, 
which more than doubles in IS92a and b. The impact of 
changing fertilization practices and the dependency of N2O 
emissions on local soil types, moisture, agricultural 
practices, etc., has not been estimated. 
A3.8.2 Forests and Land Conversion 
Since SA90 was finalized, new data have become available 
regarding both tropical deforestation rates and the average 
content of carbon per hectare of above-ground vegetation. 
Both are higher than the assumptions used in SA90. The 
estimates of carbon in soils and fluxes of greenhouse gases 
with changes in land uses remain as in SA90. Neither of 
the possible effects on CO2 fluxes due to increased 
fertilization or respiration, which may be associated with 
higher CO2 atmospheric concentrations or temperature 
Table A3.8: Assumptions used in deforestation cases. 
Scenario Used In 
Biomass Content 
Rate of Deforestation 
IS92a, b, & e 
Moderate 
Moderate (tied to moderate population growth) 
IS92c 
Moderate 
Moderate (tied to low population growth) 
IS92d 
Moderate 
Halt Tropical Deforestation 
IS92f 
Moderate 
Moderate (tied to high population growth) 
None 
High 
Moderate (tied to moderate population growth) 
None 
Moderate 
High 
None 
High 
High 
None 
Moderate 
Halt Tropical Deforestation/Increase Establishment of Plantations 

88 
increases, have been incorporated in this analysis. 
To incorporate the new data and the uncertainties still 
surrounding these parameters, eight cases of tropical forest 
clearing and emissions of greenhouse gases were 
developed. These eight cases include four cases which 
were incorporated within the new IPCC Scenarios which 
assume moderate assumptions of rates of tropical 
deforestation (except IS92d which has a halt to defor-
estation) and biomass content of vegetation in these 
forests. The eight cases also include four sensitivities 
around the case incorporated in IS92a. The sensitivity 
cases vary rates of deforestation, rates of establishment of 
plantations, and assumptions concerning the biomass 
content of the forests. Table A3.8 summarizes these cases 
and their assumptions. 
As lands convert from one use to another, greenhouse 
gases can be released or taken up by vegetation and soils, 
for example by the burning or regrowth of forests or the 
tilling or amendment of soils. This analysis simulates and 
tracks the changes of land parcels from one use to another 
from 1975 to 2100, due to agricultural demand, burning, 
plantations, etc., and calculates the associated greenhouse 
gas emissions and uptake over time. As land is cleared, 
sometimes more than once in the period of analysis, only 
part of the carbon stored in vegetation and soils is released 
over an extended period of time. As regrowth occurs on 
cleared land, carbon is sequestered. We calculate the net 
balance of carbon from vegetation and soils of all lands 
estimated to be tropical forests at any time from 1975 
through 2100. Assumptions about rates of carbon loss or 
absorption and other parameters used in this analysis, as 
well as the case results, are detailed in Pepper et al. (1992). 
The IS92 Scenarios use the new F A O 1990 Tropical 
Forest Assessment (FAO, 1991) and the 1988 update of 
the 1980 Tropical Forest Assessment (FAO, 1988) for its 
deforestation rates. The new assessment estimates tiiat, on 
average, 17 million hectares of tropical closed and open 
forest were cleared annually from 1981 to 1990. The 1988 
FAO Tropical Forest Assessment provided estimates of 
clearing rates for the period 1976 to 1980. While questions 
have been raised concerning the reliability of these data, 
they are the best and most recent currently available for the 
world. 
We estimated a constant rate of change in clearing rates 
over this period such that the average quantities of clearing 
for 1976 to 1980 and for 1981 to 1990 match those 
reported in the FAO 1988 and 1991 reports, respectively. 
Moreover, this estimate is constrained so that forest areas 
in 1980 equal the quantities given in the more complete 
and detailed 1980 assessment. This results in calculated 
clearing rates increasing from 13.2 million hectares in 
1980 to 19.3 million hectares in 1990. After 1990, 
deforestation rates increase in proportion to population, but 
lagged twenty years and constrained by available forest 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
area in each country. In the "high deforestation" sensitivity 
cases, these rates are increased by an additional 1% point 
per year. In the "halt deforestation" sensitivity case and in 
IS92d, we assume that rates of deforestation decline, 
starting in 1990. The IPCC Greenhouse Gas Task Force 
advised that it should be assumed that all forests not 
legally protected, including areas which have been 
classified as non-productive, can be subject to defor-
estation (IPCC, 1991c). 
Forest clearing in IS92a, b, c, e, and f increases to 20 to 
23.6 million hectares per year by 2025, depending on 
population growth, and then declines. In IS92d, clearing 
declines steadily after 1990 to 0.7 million hectares per year 
by 2025. In the high deforestation sensitivity cases, 
tropical forest clearing increases to 28.6 million hectares in 
2025 before declining. In all sets of assumptions, available 
forest resources within each country provide upper bounds 
on future clearing. In the IS92a, 73% of all tropical forests 
(1.4 billion hectares), are cleared by 2100. In the high 
deforestation sensitivity case, this fraction increases to 
91%. In IS92a, countries representing 43% of forest 
clearing in 1980 have (or have nearly) exhausted their 
forest resources by 2025. By 2050, this fraction increases 
to 52%. 
Other factors which vary in the sensitivity cases include 
the fate of forest fallow, future rates of plantation 
establishment, and the carbon stored in the aboveground 
biomass. The high deforestation sensitivity cases include 
another possible net source of carbon: permanent clearing 
of forest fallow. These are areas of logged or abandoned 
agricultural lands which are regenerating to forest. The 
high deforestation sensitivity cases assume that up to 10 
million hectares of forest fallow are currently being 
converted to permanent agriculture annually (Houghton, 
1991) and that this clearing continues into the future until 
almost all forest fallow is converted. In IS92a, the 
establishment of plantations, which FAO (1988) estimates 
as 1.3 million hectares annually between 1980 and 1985, is 
assumed to continue with 118 million hectares added 
between 1990 and 2100. The high deforestation sensitivity 
cases assume that no new plantations are added after 1990. 
Moderate estimates of carbon stored in the biomass are 
from OECD (1991) which have been adapted from Brown 
and Lugo (1984), Brown et al. (1989), and Brown (1991), 
and have been estimated using wood volumes. The 
moderate biomass estimates are used for the IS92 
Scenarios. The high biomass estimates, used in the 
sensitivity analyses, increase the moderate estimates by the 
percentage corrections cited in Houghton (1991) to reflect 
uncertainties in measurement techniques and results from 
other studies utilizing alternative (i.e., destructive 
sampling) approaches. Table A3.9 summarizes current 
estimates of biomass contents and those used in all IS92 
scenarios. 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
Table A3.9: Carbon stored in tropical forests (tons CI hectare). 
89 
Carbon Stocks from Houghton (1991) 
IS92 a,b ttt 
Earlier Estimate + 
Recent Estimate tt 
Closed 
Closed 
Open 
Moist 
Seasonal 
Closed 
Open 
B-leaf 
Conif. 
B-leaf 
Crops 
Forest 
Forest 
Forest 
Forest 
C 
(DA^)t 
(DA')t 
(U/L)tt 
(DA')t 
Vegetation 
Latin America 
76 
78 
27 
5 
176/82 
158/85 
89/73 
27/27 
5 
Asia 
97 
83 
27 
5 
250/135 
150/90 
112/60 
60/40 
5 
Africa 
117 
68 
16 
5 
210/124 
160/62 
136/111 
90/15 
5 
Soils 
100 
100 
69 
-
100 
90 
-
50 
-
' 
For columns labelled (D/V), the first value is based on destructive sampling of bioitiass and the second value is 
calculated from estimates of wood volumes, 
tt 
For columns labelled (U/L), the first value is for undisturbed forests and the second value is for logged forests, 
ttt Source: OECD (1991). 
4 
O 
-2l-j 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
U 
1990 2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100 
Year 
Figure A3.7: Comparison of net CO2 emissions from tropical deforestation according to some longer-range scenarios: (1) High 
deforestation/high biomass; (2) High deforestation/moderate biomass; (3) moderate deforestation/high biomass; (4) IS92f; (5) lS92a, b 
and e - moderate deforestation/moderate biomass; (6) IS92c; (7) lS92d, and (8) No deforestation/high plantation. (Note: does not 
include the effects of fertilization or increased respiration on net CO2 emissions due to higher CO2 atmospheric concentrations.) 
CO2 emissions in the IS92 Scenarios and the sensitivity 
cases range from 1.1 GtC to 2.3 GtC in 1990. These 
include net soil carbon released as well. In the IS92a, 
emissions are relatively flat through to 1995 and then start 
to decline. Net emissions are shghtly negative by 2100 due 
to carbon sequestration by plantations. In the high 
deforestation and high biomass sensitivity case, emissions 
increase to 3.0 GtC by 2025, decline to 1.9 GtC in 2050 
and 0.2 GtC by 2100. Even though in all of the cases 
clearing of open forests in the period 1980 to 1990 
represents over one third of total clearing, net emissions of 
CO2 from open forests represent less than 10% of total 
deforestation emissions. 
All these cases do not span the range of possibilities for 
both current and future emissions. There is a strong need 
for improvement of the base data. Moreover, current trends 
in deforested area, combined with changes in policies, 
could very well lead to emissions lower than in the 
moderate case. 
In conclusion, the sensitivity analysis explores a wide 
range of possible futures and identifies the importance of 
several key assumptions. Figure A3.7 illustrates the CO2 
emissions from the IS92 Scenarios along with the 
sensitivities around IS92a. One sensitivity case, "High 
Deforestation/Moderate Biomass" illustrates the impact of 
the higher clearing rates and forest fallow clearing 
assumptions on CO2 emissions. The sensitivity case, 
"Moderate Deforestation/High Biomass", illustrates the 
importance of assumptions concerning carbon stored 
within the biomass. The sensitivity case, "High Defor-

90 
estation/High Biomass" siiows the combined impact of 
these alternative assumptions. The "Halt Deforestation/ 
High Plantations" sensitivity case illustrates the potential 
for reducing emissions by quickly stopping forest clearing 
and actively establishing plantations. In this case, forest 
clearing is reduced starting in 1991 and eliminated by 
2025. Up to 293 million hectares of plantations are 
established by 2100. 
A3.8.3 Resolution of Land Assumptions 
While these cases and sensitivities provide a plausible 
range of emissions they do not address all of the 
uncertainty. A key concern with these cases is consistency 
of the assumptions about land uses among the different 
sectors. Because the models and methodologies used for 
the different sectors are not fully integrated with respect to 
land use, this consistency is not automatically guaranteed. 
With population doubling by 2100, improved nutrition in 
the developing economies, and the agricultural land base 
possibly degraded, the demand for additional land 
conversion to produce crops especially in the developing 
countries would be significant, even if sustained 
productivity increases were achieved. Above, we already 
noted the anticipated demand for land for livestock and 
feed production, while the IS92a assumes over 190 EJ of 
energy from commercial biofuels by 2100, of which 70% 
would be in developing countries. 
A review of current land uses, forest clearing, and 
plantation assumptions suggests that the assumptions in the 
new IPCC Scenarios are not inconsistent. F A O (1986) 
reported that in 1984, 1.5 billion hectares were used for 
arable land and permanent crops and 3.1 billion hectares 
were used for permanent pasture leaving 4.1 billion 
hectares of forest and woodlands. The moderate defor-
estation case assumes that on average 1.6 billion hectares 
of tropical forests will be cleared by 2100 while 0.1 billion 
hectares of forest plantations will be established, roughly 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
allowing for a doubling of the arable land base. Table 
A3.10 summarizes these statistics for Latin America, 
Africa, and the Far East along with the IS92a assumptions 
for these regions. Clearing of forest land in these tropical 
regions matches well with the increase in population and 
demand for food. The largest concern would be in Asia 
where population densities are the highest and cleared 
forest lands might not have the same productivity as 
existing cropland, nor may the production be as 
sustainable. Any reduction in deforestation would reduce 
the potential land base and would have to be matched by 
increased productivity on existing agricultural land. Other 
anthropogenic influences on the terrestrial carbon cycle, 
such as pollution, erosion, desertification, logging in 
temperate and boreal zones and carbon sequestration in 
managed forests, have not been taken into account in this 
study because of the absence of quantitative information. 
A3.9 Other Sectors and Gases 
The 1992 Scenarios include emissions of additional gases 
and emissions from additional sectors. Specifically, 
emissions of N2O, CH4, C O , and NOj^ from energy 
combustion and production were developed using 
assumptions about emission controls consistent with the 
US Clean Air Act and the Protocols under the Convention 
on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution. In the base 
year's emission budget, our estimate of emissions of CO 
from fossil fuels, by applying emission coefficients to fuel 
use, falls below the low end of the range given in Section 
A l of this report. Our estimate of emissions reflects the 
latest data on energy consumption and emission 
coefficients, but the CO budget discrepancies need to be 
investigated further. Emissions of N2O from the 
production of nitric and adipic acid have been included and 
reflect scenario assumptions on nitrogen fertilizer 
production and economic growth respectively. Emissions 
Table A3.10: Land-use assumptions (10^ hectares). 
Africa 
Asia t 
Latin America 
FAO 
1984 Arable Land & Permanent Crops 
154 
272 
177 
1984 Permanent Pasture 
630 
35 
551 
Remaining Tropical Forest (1980) 
704 
431 
938 
Forest Cleared (1980-2100) 
653 
329 
635 
Plantation Area Established (1980-2100) 
27 
47 
44 
Maximum Energy Plantation Area+t 
88 
101 
118 
+ 
Far East as defined by FAO 
tt 
Energy plantation area in addition to other plantation area 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
Table A3.11: Global emissions of direct greenhouse gases under IS92a 
91 
1990 
2000 
2025 
2050 
2100 
CO2 (GtC) 
Energy 
6.0 
7.0 
10.7 
13.2 
19.8 
Deforestation 
1.3 
1.3 
1.1 
0.8 
-0.1 
Cement 
0.2 
0.2 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
Total 
7.4 
8.4 
12.2 
14.5 
20.3 
CH4 (Tg) 
Energy Production & Use 
91 
94 
110 
140 
222 
Enteric Fermentation 
84 
99 
138 
173 
198 
Rice 
60 
66 
78 
87 
84 
Animal Wastes 
26 
31 
43 
54 
62 
Landfills 
38 
42 
63 
93 
109 
Biomass Burning 
28 
29 
32 
34 
33 
Domestic Sewage 
25 
29 
40 
47 
53 
Natural 
155 
155 
155 
155 
155 
Total 
506 
545 
659 
785 
917 
N2O (Tg N) 
Energy 
0.4 
0.5 
0.7 
0.8 
0.8 
Fertilized Soils 
2.2 
2.7 
3.8 
4.2 
4.5 
Land Clearing 
0.8 
0.8 
1.0 
1.1 
1.0 
Adipic Acid 
0.5 
0.6 
0.9 
1.1 
1.2 
Nitric Acid 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.5 
Biomass Burning 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.7 
0.7 
Natural 
8.3 
8.3 
8.3 
8.3 
8.3 
Total 
12.9 
13.8 
15.8 
16.6 
17.0 
Halocarbons (kilotons) 
CFC-11 
298 
168 
94 
85 
2 
CFC-12 
363 
200 
98 
110 
1 
CFC-113 
147 
29 
21 
24 
0 
CFC-114 
13 
4 
3 
3 
0 
CFC-115 
7 
5 
1 
1 
0 
CCI4 
119 
34 
19 
21 
0 
Methyl chloroform 
738 
353 
97 
110 
0 
HCFC-22 
138 
275 
530 
523 
614 
HCFC-123 
0 
44 
159 
214 
267 
HCFC-124 
0 
7 
11 
15 
16 
HCFC-14 lb 
0 
24 
82 
110 
138 
HCFC-142b 
0 
7 
11 
0 
0 
HCFC-225 
5 
17 
30 
38 
40 
HFC-134a 
0 
148 
467 
918 
1055 
HFC-125 
0 
0 
14 
175 
199 
HFC-152a 
0 
0 
30 
448 
570 

Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
Table A3.12: Global emissions of indirect greenhouse gases under IS92a. 
1990 
2000 
2025 
2050 
2100 
CO (TgC) 
Energy 
130 
140 
160 
219 
385 
Biomass Burning 
297 
309 
341 
363 
353 
Plants 
43 
43 
43 
43 
43 
Oceans 
17 
17 
17 
17 
17 
Wildfires 
13 
13 
13 
13 
13 
Total 
499 
522 
574 
655 
811 
NOx(TgN) 
Energy 
25 
28 
43 
53 
72 
Biomass Burning 
9 
9 
10 
11 
11 
Natural Lands 
12 
12 
12 
12 
12 
Lightning 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
Total 
55 
58 
74 
85 
104 
VOC Emissions by Gas (Tg) 
Paraffins 
56 
59 
84 
106 
152 
Olefins 
42 
43 
49 
56 
72 
Aromatics (btx) ^ 
15 
16 
21 
25 
36 
Other 
8 
8 
12 
15 
23 
Total 
121 
126 
166 
202 
283 
VOC Emissions by Sector (Tg) 
Energy Production & Use 
27 
30 
48 
64 
102 
Biomass Burning 
53 
53 
54 
54 
52 
Industry 
23 
25 
36 
46 
62 
Other 
18 
19 
27 
38 
67 
Total 
121 
126 
166 
202 
283 
Sulphur (TgS) 
Energy Production & Use 
65 
67 
101 
132 
123 
Biomass Burning 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
Other Industrial 
8 
10 
16 
19 
21 
Natural 
22 
22 
22 
22 
22 
Total 
98 
101 
141 
175 
169 
Benzene, toulene, and xylene 
of CO2 from cement production and CH4 from landfills 
reflect regional population and economic growth 
assumptions as well as expectations of resource limitations 
and saturation. Emissions of N2O, CH4, CO, and NOj^ 
from biomass burning ai-e based on emission coefficients 
from Crutzen and Andreae (1990) and Andreae (1991), 
and future rates of deforestation, clearing of fallow lands 
for shifting agriculture, non-commercial biofuel use, and 
other burning activities. Emissions of volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs) are highly uncertain, especially for 
developing countries. They are based on a detailed, 
country level emissions inventory developed by E P A 
(1991). They are compared with other sources and 
extended into the future based on activities such as 
transportation energy use, deforestation and biomass 
burning, and industrial activity. Emissions of SO^ from 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update 
93 
energy use are based on a study performed by Spiro et al. 
(1991) where emissions reflect average sulphur content of 
the different fossil fuels and are adjusted for emission 
control programmes. Emissions of all trace gases by gas 
and sector are summarized in Tables A3.11 and A3.12. 
All of the new IPCC Scenarios except for IS92d show 
significant increases in emissions of CO, NO^ and SO^ 
even the assumed of adoption of some emission controls 
on large stationary sources and mobile sources in the 
developing countries. Emissions of these gases could be 
significantly higher if we had not assumed significant 
penetration of local pollution controls. For example, in 
IS92a annual emissions of CO grow from 499 TgC in 1990 
to 811 TgC by 2100 and annual emissions of NO^ grow 
from 55 TgN in 1990 to 104 TgN by 2100. Without the 
assumed pollution controls, annual emissions of CO and 
NOx would increase to 1049 T g N and 108 T g N , 
respectively, by 2100. 
A3.10 Conclusions 
This chapter presents a new set of IPCC greenhouse gas 
emission scenarios. The purpose is not to predict which 
evolution of greenhouse gases is most probable among the 
array of plausible alternatives. Rather, comparison of 
alternatives may help policy-makers to consider the 
directions in which future emissions may evolve in the 
absence of new greenhouse gas reduction efforts, and the 
types of change in important parameters which could or 
would have to occur to significantly change future paths. 
Commitments by individual governments or companies to 
reduce emissions of greenhouse gases in response to the 
global warming or other environmental issues could 
significantly affect some of the individual emission 
sources. However, it is difficult to take these commitments 
into account in global emission estimates. 
Two of the Scenarios "IS92a" and "IS92b" update the 
original Scenario A from IPCC (1990) by incorporating 
important information which has become available in 1990 
and 1991. IS92a includes only those policies affecting 
greenhouse gas emissions which are agreed internationally 
or enacted into national laws (as of December 1991). 
IS92b includes proposed greenhouse gas policies as well. 
While some of the revisions to the assumptions used in 
SA90 are significant, the results of IS92a and b are on 
balance very similar to the original SA90. The other 
scenarios provided in this chapter explore a broader range 
of plausible assumptions than in SA90, and indicate that 
the array of possible future trends in greenhouse gas 
emissions spans an order of magnitude. That the different 
futures within this range are not all equally probable has 
not been systematically addressed in this analysis, but this 
topic should be pursued. A more thorough exploration of 
the uncertainties in assumptions and relationships among 
parameters could reveal more about the confidence 
policymakers should have in such emission scenarios and 
in the influence of their decisions on future emission paths. 
Even with a wide range of possible greenhouse gas 
scenarios, a number of conclusions can be drawn from the 
analysis: 
• 
CFC emissions are likely to be substantially lower 
than previously estimated by the IPCC, especially if 
technology transfer and world trade requirements 
lead all countries to comply with the London 
Amendments to the Montreal Protocol. However, the 
future production and composition of C F C 
substitutes could significantly affect the levels of 
radiative forcing from halocarbons. 
• 
The commitments by many O E C D Member 
countries to achieve and maintain stabilization or 
reduction of their CO2 emissions by the year 2000, 
in absolute terms or per capita, could have an 
important impact on their own emissions but a small 
influence on global emissions by the year 2100. The 
CO2 commitments may have the simultaneous effect 
of reducing other greenhouse gases as well. Most of 
the uncertainty over future growth in greenhouse gas 
emissions is likely to depend on how developing 
countries. Eastern European countries, and republics 
of the former Soviet Union choose to meet their 
economic and social needs. 
• 
Population growth, robust economic growth, 
plentiful fossil fuels at relatively low costs, and net 
deforestation tend to push upward the trends in 
greenhouse gas emissions; decreases in energy 
required per unit of GNP, the economical availability 
of renewable energy supplies, plantations of 
biomass, the control of conventional air pollution, 
and improvements in agricultural productivity tend 
to diminish greenhouse gas emissions over the long-
term. Public attitudes and governmental policies may 
have a strong influence on which of these variables 
will dominate over the coming century. 
• 
CO2 emissions from forest and land conversion are 
higher than previous estimates, ranging from 1.1 GtC 
to 2.3 GtC in 1990, because of higher recent 
estimates of both deforestation rates and biomass in 
forests in the tropics, as assessed by the FAO and 
several recent studies, respectively. 
• 
There is no evidence to alter the main conclusions of 
IPCC (1990) regarding CO2 emissions from fossil 
fuels. While several factors could lead to both higher 
or lower emissions, especially in the long-term, most 
expert analyses suggest that these emissions could 

94 
rise substantially over the coming century. IS92a and 
b, which most resemble the SA90 in terms of 
assumptions for key parameters, show a range of 
emissions of 10.3 to 10.7 GtC in 2025, and 18.6 to 
19.8 GtC in 2100. However, a broader range of 
alternative assumptions is plausible. The range of 
emissions estimated for the wider set of alternative 
scenarios is 7 to 14 GtC in 2025 and 5 to 35 GtC in 
2100. 
• 
Comparison with other studies of CO2 scenarios 
indicates that the IS92a and b fall within the range of 
other short-term (to 2025) scenarios, including those 
of the World Energy Council, the International 
Energy Agency, and the Commission of the 
European Communities. By the year 2100, the IS92a 
and b are below but not distant from all the other 
long-term CO2 scenarios reported except one. 
However, the range of alternative, new IS92 
Scenarios encompasses virtually all the other 
scenarios, with a spread of almost an order of 
magnitude. 
• 
There remains an important need to improve the 
estimates of greenhouse gas emissions in all sectors 
(especially in the forest and agriculture sectors) as 
well as of the underlying human-related variables 
(such as rates of land clearing). 
References 
Andreae, M.O., 1991: Biomass burning: its history, use and 
distribution and its impact on environmental quality and global 
climate. In: Global Biomass Burning, Atmospheric, Climatic, 
and Biospheric Implications. J.S. Levine (Ed.). MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Brown, S. and A.E. Lugo, 1984: Biomass of tropical forests: A 
new estimate based on forest volumes. Science, 223, 1290-
1293. 
Brown, S., A.J.R. Gillespie and A.E. Lugo, 1989: Biomass 
estimation methods for tropical forests with applications to 
forest inventory data. Forest Science, 35, 881 -902. 
Brown, S., 1991: Personal Communication. 
Bulatao, R.A., E. Bos and M.T. Vu, 1989: Asia Region 
Population Projections: 1980-80 Edition; Latin America and 
the Caribbean (LAC) Region Population Projections: 1980-80 
Edition; Africa Region Population Projections: 1980-80 
Edition; Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMN) Region 
Population Projections: 1980-80 Edition. Population and 
Human Resources Department, World Bank, Washington, 
D.C. 
Burniaux, J.-M., J.P. Martin, G. Nicoletti and J.O. Martins, 
1991: The Costs of Policies to Reduce Global Emission of CO2: 
Alternate Scenarios with GREEN. Paris, September 1991 
(Revised version II, 1991). 
Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: an Update A3 
CEC (Commission of the European Communities), 1989: Energy 
in Europe: Major Themes in Energy. Brussels. 
Crutzen, P.J. and M.O. Andreae, 1990: Biomass burning in the 
tropics: impact on atmospheric chemistry and biogeo-chemical 
cycles. Science, 250, 1669-1678. 
Edmonds, J. and J. Reilly, 1985: Global Energy: Assessing the 
Future. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Edmonds, J.A., J.M. Reilly, R.H. Gardner and A. Brenkert, 
1986: Uncertainty in Future Global Energy Use and Fossil 
Fuel CO2 Emissions 1975 to 2075. TR036, DOE3/Nbb-0081 
Dist. Category UC-11, National Technical Information 
Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, Virginia. 
Edmonds, J.A, I. Mintzer, W. Pepper, K. Major, V. Schater, M. 
Wise and R. Baron, 1992: A Comparison of Reference Case 
Global Fossil Fuel Carbon Emissions. Washington, D.C. 
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 1990: Policy Options 
for Stabilizing Global Climate: Report to Congress - Technical 
Appendices. United States Environmental Protection Agency, 
Washington, D.C. 
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 1991: Global 
Inventory of Volatile Organic Compound Emissions From 
Anthropogenic Sources. EPA, Air and Energy Engineering 
Research Laboratory, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization), 1986: 1985 FAO 
Production Yearbook, Vol. 39. FAO, Rome. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization), 1988: An Interim 
Report on the State of the Forest Resources in the Developing 
Countries. FAO, Rome. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization), 1991: Forest 
Resources Assessment 1990 Project, Forestry N. 7. FAO, 
Rome. 
Grossling, B.F. and D.T. Nielson, 1985: In Search of Oil, 
Volume 1: The search for oil and its impediments. Financial 
Times Business Information, London. 
Houghton, R.A., 1991: Tropical deforestation and atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. Clim. Change (Submitted). 
lEA (International Energy Agency), 1991: International Energy 
Agency: Energy and Oil Outlook to 2005. lEA, Paris. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990a: 
Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (Eds.). 
WMO/UNEP. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
365pp. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990b: 
Emissions Scenarios prepared by the Response Strategies 
Working Group of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Report of the Expert Group on Emissions Scenarios. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1991a: 
Climate Change: The IPCC Response Strategies. Island Press, 
Washington, D.C. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1991b: 
Energy and Industry Subgroup Report. US Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington, D.C. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) Working 
Group I, 1991c: Summary of WGI task force meeting 
(Shepperton, UK, 8-11, July 1991). 
Manne, A.S. and R.G. Richels, 1990: Global CO2 Emissions 
Reductions - the Impacts of Rising Energy Costs. Electric 
Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA. 

A3 Emissions Scenarios for the IPCC: cm Update 
Masters, CD., D.H. Root and E.D. Attanasi, 1991: Resource 
constraints in petroleum production potential. Science, 253, 
146-152. 
Nordhaus, W.D. and G.W. Yohe, 1983: Future Carbon Dioxide 
Emissions from Fossil Fuels. In: Changing Climate. National 
Academy Press, Washington D.C, pp87-153. 
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development), 1991: Estimation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
and Sinks. Final Report from the OECD Experts Meeting, 
Paris, 18-21 February, 1991, revision of August 1991. 
Pepper. W.J., J.A. LeggeU, R.J. Swart, J. Wasson, J. Edmonds 
and 1. Mintzer, 1992: Emission Scenarios for the IPCC- an 
update:Background 
Documentation 
on Assumptions, 
Methodology, and Results. US EPA, Washington, D.C. 
Spiro, P.A., D.J. Jacob and J.A. Logan, 1991: Global inventory 
of sulphur emissions with \°x\° resolution. J. Geophys. Res. 
(Submitted). 
Swart, R.J., W.J. Pepper, C. Ebert and J. Wasson, 1991: 
Emissions Scenarios for the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change - an Update: Background Paper and 
Workplan. US EPA, Washington, D.C. 
United Nations, 1990: Population Prospects 1990. United 
Nations, New York. 
United Nations, 1992: Long-Range World Population 
Projections, United Nations Population Division, New York. 
WEC (World Energy Conference), 1989: Global Energy 
Perspectives 2000-2020. WEC 14th Congress, Conservation 
and Studies Committee, Montreal. 
Weyant, J., 1991: Stanford Energy Modeling Forum. Personal 
communication. 
WMO, 1992: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion. 
WMO/UNEP, WMO Global Ozone Research and Monitoring 
Project, Report No. 25, Geneva. 
World Bank, 1991: World Development Report 1991. Oxford 
University Press, New York. 
Zachariah, K.C. and M.T. Vu, 1988: World Population 
Projections 1987-88 Edition. Johns Hopkins University Press, 
Baltimore, Maryland. 

 

Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction 
and Model Validation 
W.L. GATES, J.F.B. MITCHELL, G.J. BOER, U. CUBASCH, V.P. MELESHKO 
Contributors: 
D. Anderson; W. Broecker; D. Cariolle; H. Cattle; R.D. Cess; F. Giorgi; M.I. Hojfert; 
B.G. Hunt; A. Kitoh; P. Lemke; H. Le Treut; R.S. Lindzen; S. Manabe; B.J. McAvaney; 
L. Mearns; G.A. Meehl; J.M. Murphy; T.N. Palmer; A.B. Pittock; K. Puri; 
D.A. Randall; D. Rind; PR. Rowntree; M.E. Schlesinger; C.A. Senior; I.H. Simmonds; 
R. Stoujfer; S. Tibaldi; T. Tokioka; G. Visconti; J.E. Walsh; W.-C. Wang; D. Webb 

 

CONTENTS 
Executive Summary 
101 
Bl Introduction 
103 
B2 Advances in Modelling Climate Change due to 
Increased Greenhouse Gases 
103 
B2.1 Introduction 
103 
B2.2 New Transient Results from Coupled 
Atmosphere-Ocean GCMs 
103 
B2.3 New Equilibrium Results from Atmospheric 
GCMs and Mixed-Layer Ocean Models 
108 
B2.4 Regional Climate Simulations 
112 
B3 Advances in Analysis of Climate Feedbacks and 
Sensitivity 
114 
B3.1 Introduction 
114 
B3.2 Water Vapour Feedback 
114 
B3.3 Cloud Feedback 
116 
B3.4 Surface Albedo Feedback 
117 
B3.5 Climate Sensitivity 
118 
B4 Advances in Modelling Atmospheric Variability 
118 
B4.1 Introduction 
119 
B4.2 Diurnal Cycle 
119 
B4.3 Day-to-Day Variability 
119 
B4.4 Extreme Events 
119 
B4.5 Blocking and Storm Activity 
119 
B4.6 Inlra-Seasonal Variability 
120 
B4.7 Interannual Variability 
120 
B4.8 ENSO and Monsoons 
121 
B4.9 Decadal Variability 
122 
B5 Advances in Modelling the Oceans and Sea-Ice 
122 
B5.1 Introduction 
122 
B5.2 Eddy-Resolving Models 
123 
B5.3 Thermohaline Circulation 
124 
B5.4 Sea-Ice Models 
125 
B6 Advances in Model Validation 
126 
B6.1 Introduction 
126 
B6.2 Systematic Errors and Model Intercomparison 
126 
B6.3 Data for Model Validation 
129 
References 
129 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Coupled Model Experiments 
The new transient climate simulations with coupled 
atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (GCMs) 
generally confirm the findings of Section 6 in the 1990 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report (IPCC, 
1990), although the number of coupled model simulations 
is still small. 
• 
There is broad agreement among the four current models 
in the simulated large-scale patterns of change and in their 
temporal evolution. 
• 
The large-scale patierns of temperature change remain 
essentially fixed with time, and they become more evident 
with longer averaging intervals and as the simulations 
progress. 
• 
The large-scale patterns of change are similar to those 
obtained in comparable equilibrium experiments except 
that the warming is retarded in the southern high latitude 
ocean and the northern North Atlantic Ocean where deep 
water is formed. 
All but one of the models show slow initial warming 
(which may be an artefact of the experimental design) 
followed by a nearly linear trend of approximately 0.3°C 
per decade. 
All models simulate a peak-to-trough natural variability of 
about 0.3°C in global surface air temperature on decadal 
time-scales. 
• 
The rate of sea level rise due to thermal expansion 
increases with time to between 2 and 4cm/decade at the 
time of doubling of equivalent CO2. 
Regional Changes 
• 
Although confidence in the regional changes simulated by 
GCMs remains low, progress in the simulation of regional 
climate is being obtained with both statistical and one-way 
nested model techniques. In both cases the quality of the 
large-scale flow provided by the GCM is critical. 
Climate Feedbacks and Sensitivity 
There is no compelling new evidence to warrant changing 
the equilibrium sensitivity to doubled CO2 from the range 
of 1.5 to 4.5°C as given by IPCC 1990. 
• 
There is no compelling evidence that water vapour 
feedback is anything other than the positive feedback it has 
been conventionally thought to be, although there may be 
difficulties with the treatments of upper-level water vapour 
in current models. 
• 
The effects of clouds remain a major area of uncertainty in 
the modelling of climate change. While the treatment of 
clouds in GCMs is becoming more complex, a clear 
understanding of the consequences of different cloud 
parametrizations has not yet emerged. 
Atmospheric Variability 
• 
Model experiments with doubled CO2 give no clear 
indication of a systematic change in the variability of 
temperature on daily to interannual time-scales, while 
changes of variability for other climate features appear to 
be regionally (and possibly model) dependent. 
Ocean Modelling 
• 
Results from eddy-resolving ocean models show a broadly 
realistic portrayal of oceanic variability, although the 
climatic role of eddies remains unclear. 
Ocean-only GCMs show considerable sensitivity of the 
thermohaline circulation on decadal and longer time-scales 
to changes in the surface fresh-water flux, although 
coupled models may be less sensitive. 
• 
Sea-ice dynamics may play an important role in the 
freezing process, and should therefore be included in 
models for the simulation of climate change under 
increased CO2 
Model Validation 
• 
There have been improvements in the accuracy of 
individual atmospheric and oceanic GCMs, although the 
ranges of intermodel error and sensitivity remain large. 
• 
The lack of adequate observational data remains a serious 
impediment to climate model improvement. 

 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
103 
Bl Introduction 
Since the publication of the first IPCC Scientific 
Assessment of Climate Change (IPCC, 1990) there have 
been significant advances in many areas of climate 
research as part of a continuing worldwide acceleration of 
interest in the assessment of possible anthropogenic 
climate changes. In this section we concentrate on 
advances in the modelling of climate change due to 
increased greenhouse gases, improvements in the analysis 
of climate processes and feedbacks, and on advances in 
climate model validation that were not available to the 
IPCC in early 1990. This section is thus intended as an 
update to selected portions of the 1990 assessment rather 
than as a comprehensive revision, and an effort has been 
made to keep the discussion both concise and focussed in 
accordance with the stringent space limitations placed 
upon this supplementary report. 
In Section B2 recent simulations of climate change are 
assessed, with emphasis on results from coupled ocean-
atmosphere models. In Section B3, recent research on 
modelling climate feedbacks is discussed, and the IPCC 
1990 estimates of chmate sensitivity are reviewed. The 
simulation of atmospheric variability and its changes due 
to increased atmospheric CO2 are discussed in Section B4 
while developments in ocean and sea-ice modelling are 
presented in Section B5. Finally, Section B6 discusses 
advances in climate model validation. 
B2 Advances in Modelling Climate Change due to 
Increased Greenhouse Gases 
B2.1 Introduction 
Simulation of the climatic response to increases in 
atmospheric greenhouse gases has continued to dominate 
climate modelling. Preliminary results from new 
integrations of coupled global atmosphere-ocean models 
with progressive increases of CO2 show that the patterns of 
the transient response are similar to those in an equilibrium 
response, except over the high-latitude southern ocean and 
northern North Atlantic ocean; here the delayed warming 
has highlighted the critical role of the oceanic 
thermohaline circulation. Computing limitations have 
continued to restrict the resolution that can be used in 
G C M simulations of the climate changes due to increased 
greenhouse gases, although progress is being made in the 
simulation of regional climate by both statistical 
techniques and by locally nesting a higher-resolution 
model within a global G C M . 
B2.2 New Transient Results from Coupled Atmosphere-
Ocean GCMs 
At the time of the 1990 IPCC report, preliminary results 
were available from only two coupled model integrations 
with transient CO2, namely those made at N C A R 
(Washington and Meehl, 1989) and at GFDL (Stouffer et 
al, 1989). Of these only the GFDL integration had been 
carried to the point of CO2 doubling (which occurred after 
Table Bl: Summary of transient CO2 experiments with coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs 
GFDL 
MPI 
NCAR 
U K M O 
AGCM 
R15L9 
T21 L19 
R15L9 
2.5° X 3.75° LI 1 
OGCM 
4.5° X 3.75° L12 
4°L11 
5°L4 
2.5° X 3.75° LI7 
Features 
no diurnal cycle. 
prognostic CLW, quasi-
prognostic CLW, 
isopycnal ocean 
geostrophic ocean 
isopycnal ocean 
diffusion 
diffusion 
Flux adjustment 
seasonal, heat, fresh 
seasonal, heat, fresh 
none 
seasonal, heat, fresh 
water 
water, wind stress 
water 
Control CO2 (ppm) 
300 
390 t 
330 
323 
CO2 (t) 
l%yr-' 
IPCCa&d(1990 
1% yr' 
l%yr-l 
(compound) 
Scenarios), 2XCO2 
(linear) 
(compound) 
Length (yr) 
100 
100 
60 
75 
CO2 doubling time (yr) 
70 
60 (IPCCa) 
100 
70 
Warming (°C) at COj 
2.3 
1.3 
2.3 
1.7 
doubling 
(projected) 
2xC02 sensitivity (°C) 
4.0 
2.6 
4.5 
2.7 tt 
(with mixed layer ocean) 
L - number of vertical levels; R - number of spectral waves (rhomboidal truncation); T - no spectral waves (triangular truncation), 
t - equivalent CO2 value for trace gases 
++ - estimate from low resolution experiment 

104 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
approximately 70 years as a result of a 1% per year 
compound increase of CO2). Here we present further 
resuhs from the transient CO2 experiments with both the 
GFDL and NCAR coupled models, along with preliminary 
results from new transient CO2 integrations recently 
completed at the Max-Planck-Institute for Meteorology 
(MPI) in Hamburg and at the Hadley Centre of the United 
Kingdom Meteorological Office ( U K M O ) . A fuller 
description and intercomparison of these results is being 
prepared (WCRP, 1992). 
A summary of the new transient results is presented in 
Table B l . Note that there are differences in the CO2 
equivalent doubling times (by a factor of almost two) and 
that the equilibrium sensitivity of the models is different. 
The U K M O model has the finest horizontal resolution 
while the MPI model has the finest vertical resolution in 
the atmosphere and includes explicitly the radiative effects 
of other trace gases. Three of the four coupled models (see 
Table B l ) use a correction or adjustment of the air-sea 
fluxes so that the C02-induced changes should be 
interpreted as perturbations around a climate similar to that 
presently observed. Adjustment of the fluxes also prevents 
distortion of the CO2 induced perturbation by rapid drift of 
the model climate (since the same corrections are applied 
to the control and anomaly simulations). 
1. The new transient climate simulations with coupled 
atmosphere-ocean GCMs generally confirm the findings of 
Section 6 in the 1990 IPCC report, although the number of 
coupled model simulations is still small. 
The globally averaged annual mean increase of surface 
air temperature at the time of effective CO2 doubling (70 
years for the GFDL and UJCMO models, 60 years for the 
MPI model with IPCC Scenario A, and 100 years for the 
NCAR model) is between 1.3°C and 2.3°C. These values 
are approximately 60% of the models' equilibrium 
warming (where known) with doubled CO2 when run with 
simple mixed-layer oceans. These results confirm those 
from the simple models used in IPCC 1990. The lower 
values of warming compared to the equilibrium 
experiments are partly due to the fact that the transient 
experiments take into account the thermal inertia of the 
deep ocean and are therefore not at equilibrium at the time 
of effective CO2 doubling. 
2. All but one of the models show a limited initial warming 
(which may be an artefact of the experimental design) 
followed by a nearly linear trend of approximately 0.3°C 
per decade. All models simulate a peak-to-trough natural 
variability of about 0.3 to 0.4°C in global surface air 
temperature on decadal time-scales. 
The evolution of the change of globally averaged 
surface air temperature (sea surface temperature for the 
N C A R experiment) during the course of the various 
transient experiments with coupled ocean-atmosphere 
4 
0) 
S 1 -
^ 
. 
E 
^ 
0-
-1 
• 
GFDL 
• 
MPI 
— 
— 
UKMO 
NCAR 
—
— 
IPCC A 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Year 
Figure B l : Decadal mean changes in globally averaged surface 
temperature (°C) in various coupled ocean-atmosphere 
experiments, (see Table Bl). Note that the scenarios employed 
differ from model to model, and that the effect of temperature 
drift in the control simulation has been removed. Open boxes = 
GFDL; solid circles = MPI; triangles with dashed line = UKMO; 
triangles with dotted line = NCAR (sea temperatures only); solid 
line = IPCC 1990 Scenario A "best estimate". 
GCMs is shown in Figure B l . In spite of the differences in 
the models' parametrizations and in their experimental 
configurations, all of the models exhibit a number of 
similar overall features in their response. Firstly, three of 
the models show relatively little warming during the first 
few decades of the integration rather than a constant rate of 
warming throughout, despite the near constant rate of 
increase in radiative heating. This so-called "cold start " is 
barely noticeable in the G F D L simulation, but in the 
U K M O and MPI models the warming is negligible during 
the first 2 to 3 decades. This phenomenon is thought to be 
an artefact of the experimental design and can be 
reproduced qualitatively using simplified models 
(Hasselmann et al., 1992; J . M . Murphy, personal 
communication; see also Hansen et al., 1985) which 
indicate that the length of delay grows with increasing 
model sensitivity (the equilibrium warming for doubling 
CO2) and with effective heat capacity in the ocean. Until 
this "cold start" phenomenon is investigated and 
understood, it is not meaningful to match "model time" 
with calendar dates. Secondly, as the increase in CO2 
progresses, each model approximates a constant rate of 
warming, in overall agreement with the O.S'C/decade in 
the IPCC (1990) projections made for the "business-as-
usual" CO2 forcing scenario (A) with a simplified 
upwelling-diffusion ocean model. Thirdly, all models 
exhibit variability on interannual, decadal and even longer 
time-scales, and some models reproduce ENSO-like 
effects (Meehl,1990; Lau et al., 1991; J.F.B. Mitchell, 
personal communicarion). The peak-to-trough range of 
global surface air temperature intra-decadal natural 
variability is 0.3 to 0.4°C (see, for example. Figure B2). 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
105 
Figure B2: Temporal variations of the area-averaged deviation 
of annual mean surface air temperature (°C) from the 
corresponding 100-year average of the control as simulated by 
the GFDL coupled ocean-atmosphere model for; (a) the globe, 
(b) the Northern Hemisphere, and (c) the Southern Hemisphere. 
(From Manabe etal., 1991.) 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Year from start of simulation 
100 
Figure B3: Decadal mean changes in globally averaged sea level 
change (cm) from various coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM 
experiments (see Table Bl). Open squares = GFDL; solid circles 
= MPI (IPCC Scenario "A"); solid diamonds = MPI (IPCC 
Scenario "D"); open triangles = UKMO. Note the differences in 
forcing in Table B1, and that the effect of long-term drift in the 
models has been removed by differencing. 
Analysis of the nature of this variability in the coupled 
integrations and of the implications for detecting global 
warming is currently in progress. 
3. The rate of sea level rise due to thermal expansion 
increases with time to between 2 and 4cm/decade at the 
time of doubling of equivalent COj. 
The "cold start" leads to a substantial delay in the 
associated change in global sea level rise due to thermal 
expansion (Figure B3), and is most pronounced in the 
U K M O and MPI models. The rate of sea level rise 
increases during the simulations to 2, 2.5 and 4cm/decade 
by the time of CO2 doubling in the MPI A (Scenario A), 
U K M O and G F D L experiments, respectively. The 
simulated rate of sea level rise at 2030 (the time of 
doubling of CO2) due to thermal expansion (Scenario " A " 
best estimate) in the previous IPCC assessment was about 
2.5cm/decade. Note that we have not reassessed the 
contribution to sea level rise from changes in the snow and 
ice budgets over land. 
4. The large-scale patterns of change are similar to those 
obtained in comparable equilibrium experiments except 
that the warming is retarded in the southern high latitude 
ocean and the northern North Atlantic Ocean where deep 
water is formed. 
The geographical distribution of the change in surface 
air temperature at the approximate time of CO2 doubling in 
the four transient experiments is shown in Figure B4. (For 
the NCAR model the CO2 increase is only 60%) The same 
overall characteristics are seen in the distribution of the 
simulated change of surface air temperature. These 
characteristics are: (1) the largest warming occurs in the 
high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, (2) relatively 
uniform warming occurs over the tropical oceans, and (3) a 
minimum of warming or in some cases cooling occurs over 
the northern North Atlantic and over the Southern Ocean 
around Antarctica. Features (1) and (2) are familiar from 
the earlier studies of the equilibrium warming in response 
to doubled CO2 with a mixed-layer ocean (see Section 
B2.3); the high latitude ocean warming minima, on the 
other hand, are due to the presence of upwelling and deep 
vertical mixing which increase the effective heat capacity 
and hence the thermal inertia of the ocean locally. 
5. There is broad agreement among the four models in the 
simulated large-scale patterns of change and in their 
temporal 
evolution. 
The large-scale 
patterns 
of 
temperature change remain essentially fixed with time, and 
they become more evident with longer averaging intervals 
and as the simulations progress. 
A larger warming over land areas compared to that over 
the oceans is common to all models in both winter and 
summer. This ocean-land asymmetry contributes to a more 
rapid warming in the Northern Hemisphere compared to 
that in the Southern Hemisphere. There is a maximum 
warming over the Arctic Ocean in winter (Figure B5a) and 
a minimum in summer (Figure B5b), similar to the 
equilibrium results. However, the warming and its seasonal 

.5 
IT) 
U 
O 
1 1 
E 
E 
o 
o 
13 
c o 
^ 
S 1 - ^ 
8 I 
>, 
s 
§ 
I s 
CI CTJ 
O 
^ 
O 
o 
8 « 
am 
I 
o S 
2 Si 
c 
< 
CO 
.5 
Si 
U 
2 ^ 
E 00 
o -a 
So M> 
> 2 
o 
00 
a 
2 S 
o 
c 
o 
3 
m 
s .s 
S3 1 
OS 
o 
< e 
U 
a on 
o 
o 
60 
C 
_ 
C 
D 
a. 
OJ 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
107 
Figure B5: Distribution of the mean surface air temperature (°C) for (a) DJF, and (b) JJA during years 60-80 of a transient COj 
simulation with the GFDL model, relative to the 100 year average of the control. (From Manabe et al., 1992.) 
variation over the circumpolar ocean in the Southern 
Hemisphere is considerably less than in the equilibrium 
models because of deep vertical mixing in the ocean. 
Precipitation increases in the Northern Hemisphere in high 
latitudes throughout the year, in much of mid-latitudes in 
winter, and in the southwest Asian monsoon (Figure B6a, 
b). In the Southern Hemisphere, there are precipitation 
increases along the mid-latitude storm tracks throughout 
the year. In the Northern Hemisphere, winter soil moisture 
increases over the mid-latitude continents, while in the 
summer there are many areas of drying; this is also similar 
to the results obtained by equilibrium models (Figure B7a, 
b). 
In at least one simulation (Cubasch et al., 1991) the 
progressive change in surface temperature is unrelated to 
the pattern of internal variability in the model; the first 
empirical orthogonal function (EOF) of the annual mean 
surface temperature in the control run is uncorrelated with 
the first E O F from the simulation with increasing 
greenhouse gas concentrations. The cliinate change pattern 
becomes more evident as the integration progresses, as 
indicated by the growth in the fraction of variance 
explained by the first EOF of the anomaly experiment 
(Figure B8). This feature is noticeable in other models (for 
example, Meehl et al., 1991a) and in other fields such as 
soil moisture (Figure B9) and (to a lesser extent) in the 
precipitation (Santer et al, 1991; J.F.B. Mitchell, personal 
communication). In IPCC 1990 it was assumed that the 
regional climate changes would scale linearly with the 
global mean temperature changes; while Figure B9 offers 
some support for this assumption, there is considerable 
interdecadal variability at regional scales in the coupled 
model simulations, so this scaling remains questionable. 
There are a number of caveats to be kept in mind in 
assessing the results of the transient CO2 simulations with 
coupled ocean-atmosphere models shown here. Chief 
among these is the use (in the GFDL, MPI and U K M O 
models) of adjustments to the oceanic surface fluxes so 

108 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
Figure B6: Decadally averaged changes in precipitation (mm/day) for (a) DJF, and (b) JJA around the time of doubling of CO2 in an 
experiment in which CO2 was increased by 1 %/year in the UKMO model (J.F.B. Mitchell, personal communication). Contours are 
every 1 mm/day and areas of decrease ai-e stippled. 
that the ocean temperature and saUnity remain close to 
present climatology. If flux corrections are not used (as in 
the NCAR model), imperfections in the component models 
(and in their interaction) may introduce significant 
systematic errors in the coupled simulation. Such flux 
corrections or adjustments represent substantial changes of 
the fluxes that are exchanged between the component 
models and, as shown in Figure BIO, are comparable in 
magnitude to the atmospheric fluxes. In the case shown, 
they tend to be of opposite sign, i.e., the flux correction 
substantially reduces the net effective flux to the ocean. 
The use of such adjustments may distort the models' 
response to small perturbations like those associated with 
increasing CO2. On the other hand, the similarities in the 
responses of the N C A R model without flux corrections 
and in the three models that use flux corrections indicate 
that the simulated changes in the models may not be 
substantially affected by flux adjustment. In addition, 
confidence in the overall validity of the results is raised by 
the consistency of parallel experiments with the GFDL 
model in which the CO2 undergoes a progressive transient 
reduction (Manabe et al., 1991,1992). 
B2.3 New Equilibrium Results from Atmospheric GCMs 
and Mixed-Layer Ocean Models 
Although increasing attention is being paid to transient 
simulations with coupled atmosphere-ocean GCMs (see 
Section B2.2), doubled CO2 experiments with atmospheric 
GCMs and mixed-layer ocean models continue to be of 
interest since they can be carried to statistical equilibrium 
relatively easily and they provide a benchmark for model 
sensitivity. The results of several new such experiments 
completed since the publication of the 1990 IPCC 
Scientific Assessment (IPCC, 1990) are summarized in 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
109 
90N 
180 
150W 
120W 
90W 
60W 
30W 
0 
30E 
60E 
90E 
120E 
150E 
180 
180 
150W 
120W 
90W 
60W 
SOW 
0 
30E 
60E 
90E 
120E 
150E 
180 
Figure B7: Decadally averaged changes in soil moisture in the MPI model for (a) DJF, and (b) JJA around the time of doubling of 
effective COj. Contour intervals are every cm. Areas of decrease are shaded. (Cubasch etal, 1991.) 
Table B2. In general the simulated globally-averaged 
increases in surface air temperature and precipitation are 
similar to those found earlier (see IPCC, 1990, Table 2.3 
(a); the differences relative to earlier models can be related 
in some cases to the differences in cloud radiative 
feedback in the tropics (see Section B3.3)). The largest 
changes are found in the one new model (LMD) that 
includes prognostic cloud liquid water and variable cloud 
optical properties. 
New model results suggest that the difference in the 
vertical distribution of the radiative forcing has 
implications for the simulations of the control climate as 
well as for the greenhouse gas-induced warmer climates. 
As demonstrated by Wang et al. (1991b), inclusion of 
individual trace gases (i.e., not as equivalent CO2) in a 
control simulation produces a warmer atmosphere, 
especially in the tropical upper troposphere. Since this 
model (and most other GCMs without trace gases) show a 
cold bias relative to observations of the current climate 
(Boer et al., 1991a; see Section B5.2), inclusion of the 
trace gases should tend to reduce this systematic error. 
Note, however, that the anticipated cooling effect of 
aerosols (Charlson et al, 1991) is not included in current 
climate models. 
The regional climate responses due to the inclusion of 
additional greenhouse gases have been examined by Wang 
et al. (1992). In one experiment the trace gases (CO2, 
CFCs, methane and nitrous oxide) were represented 
explicitly, while in the second trace gases were represented 
by adding the amount of CO2 which gives an equivalent 
increase in radiative heating at the tropopause, i.e., using 
CO2 as a surrogate for the trace gases. When the trace 
gases and CO2 are given values in 2050 according to the 
IPCC "business-as-usual" scenario (at which time the 
concentrations of CO2, CH4, N2O, CFC-11 and CFC-12 
would have increased by 52, 89, 19, 49 and 121%, 

110 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
90N 
60N h 
30Nh 
40 
60 
Time (years) 
100 
Figure B8: Cumulative spatial variance explained as a function 
of time and number of EOFs (1, 2, 10, 20 and 50) for Scenario 
"A" (see text for explanation). The signal is defined as the 
difference relative to the smoothed initial state (average over 
years 1-10) of the control run of the MPI model. Results are for 
annually averaged 2m temperature. (From Cubasch etai, 1991.) 
( b ) 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
I 
/ 
1 
1 
\ \ 
- \ 1 
\''' 
\M 
V 
•iF 
\ - - s = 
, 
\/ 
\ 
\ 
7 
1 
\ 
/ 
' 
\ 
/ 
> 
\ 
/ 
1 
\ y 
\ 
*—' 
\ 
-
1 
1.. 
1 
1 
1 
1 
90N 
60N h 
150W 
120W 
90W 
60W 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
• 10 
20 
30 
40 
Latitude 
Figure 89: Distribution of the change in JJA soil moisture (cm) 
simulated during successive 20-year periods over North America 
relative to a control by the GFDL coupled model vi'ith a 1 % per 
year (compound) increase of CO2: (a) years 40 to 60; (b) years 60 
to 80, and (c) years 80 to 100. (From Manabe et al, 1992.) 
Figure BIO: The zonal mean of the surface fluxes of (a) heat, 
and (b) precipitation minus evaporation, simulated by the 
atmosphere in the UKMO coupled GCM (solid line) and the flux 
corrections (dashed line) added during the course of the coupled 
model integration. (From Murphy, 1990.) 

S8 i i 
§-8 1 
u o 0,1 
o 
c 
o 
U 
5 5^ 
c 
o 
so 
c 
3 
s 
O 
o 
CO 
8^ 
< 
u 
05 
00 
O 
00 
00 
op 
9, 9> 
2 R 
R 
S 
^ 
CO 
( N 
0 0 
1 0 
O 
ON 
m 
r--
^ 
^ 
ir> 
—^ 
^ a 
8^ 
0
0 
o 
^ 
OD 
C 
00 
0 
u 
« 
u 
2; u 
u 
So 
0 0 
u 
u 
z 
C O 
s 
< 
< 
u 
< 
< 
u 
< 
U 
< 
u 
( N 
ON 
ON 
- I 
J 
J 
J 
i n 
IT) 
i n 
i n 
CM 
X 
a; 5 
5 
i n 
ON 
ON 
3 
8^ 
0. 
a,— 
<-J 5 
II 2 
•s 
X 
O 
$ i z 
6 ^' 
a, O N 
0,00 
1^ 
o •X 
II 
U 
O ^' 
<N<N 
Z It 
CI, c« 
O 
o 
I S 
o 
i." 
X I 11 
— .5 
'Co 
U 
o 
i
l 
• i s 
c 
o 
0 " 
2 ? 
s 2 
1 ^ 
?1 
0 2 
(u is 
o 
o >o 
.11 
"I 
ON 
o 
< 
--^ 
U 
. 
O 
<D 
•r: 
> 
II 
> " 
'•5 
o 
a, a p 
Of) 
c 
S 
•3 
5 
00 
c o 
X 3 
o 
T 3 
o 
r 3 
cd a-
g § 5 
§ 2 o 
o S 2 
X ' - ^ 00 
O 
c 
E 
"S 
E 
& 
O 
u 
o c 
o 
o 
x; 
H 
o 
u 
c 
_u 
> 
'3 
a. c 
s 22S 
£ I 

112 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
(a) 
Figure B l l : Effect on equilibrium surface temperature change (DJF) using actual trace gases (Scenario "A", 1990-2050) instead of 
radiatively equivalent increases in CO2 (Wang et al, 1992): (a) warming using actual trace gases. Contour interval is 1 °C except in 
stippled region (>8°C) where the interval is 4°C; (b) difference due to use of actual trace gases rather than effective COj- Contour 
interval is 0.5°C, negative contours are dashed and areas of statistical significance are stippled. 
respectively, relative to 1990), the equilibrium simulations 
show nearly identical annual and global mean surface 
warming and increased precipitation (see Table B2). 
However, die regional pattern of climate changes between 
the two experiments is different (Figure B l l ) . Although 
the physical mechanisms for these differences have not yet 
been established, such results suggest that atmospheric 
trace gases other than CO2 should be included explicitly in 
future G C M simulations of both the present and future 
climates. 
B2.4 Regional Climate Simulations 
Although confidence in the regional changes simulated by 
GCMs remains low, progress in the simulation of regional 
climate is being made with both statistical and one-way 
nested model techniques. In both cases the quality of the 
large-scale flow provided by the GCM is critical 
The horizontal resolution in current general circulation 
models is too coarse to provide the regional scale 
information required by many users of climate change 
simulations. The development of useful estimates of 
regional scale changes is dependent upon the reliability of 
G C M simulations on the large-scale. Recognizing that 
simple interpolation of coarse-grid G C M data to a finer 
grid is inadequate (Grotch and MacCracken, 1991), 
strategies have been developed that involve the projection 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
113 
1980 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
2080 
Year 
Figure B12: Projected 5-year mean changes in precipitation 
over the Iberian peninsula (mm/month) in a transient CO2 
experiment. Solid line = grid point values from a GCM; dashed 
lines = values from a statistical approach with large-scale patterns 
derived from the GCM. (From Von Storch et al, 1992.) 
of large-scale information from GCMs onto the regional 
scale either by using limited area models with boundary 
conditions obtained directly from the G C M (the one-way 
nested approach) or by using empirically-derived 
relationships between regional climate and the large-scale 
flow (the statistical approach). In both approaches, 
however, accuracy is limited by the accuracy of the large-
scale flow generated in the G C M , and so they do not avoid 
the need for improvement in G C M simulations. 
Since the preparation of the IPCC (1990) report there 
has been considerable research using statistical approaches 
to climate simulation; see, for example, Wigley et al. 
(1990), Karl et al. (1990) and Robock et al. (1991) 
amongst others. The statistical technique of Von Storch et 
al. (1991) has successfully reproduced observed rainfall 
patterns over the Iberian peninsula, and has been applied to 
an IPCC Scenario A model integration (Cubasch et al, 
1991). The resulting changes in the winter rainfall are 
shown in Figure B12 as compared to the original G C M 
Figure B13: The average January surface air temperature (°C) over Europe: (a) as given by high-resolution observations; (b) as 
simulated by a mesoscale model nested within the NCAR CCMl R15; (c) as given by large-scale observations, and (d) as simulated by 
the NCAR CCMl alone. (From Giorgi et al, 1990.) 

114 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
grid-point rainfall amounts; here, however, only about half 
of the year-to-year variability is explained. Similar 
research is underway at other institutions ( U K M O , 
BMRC). A recent review of research in these areas has 
been prepared by Giorgi and Meams (1991). 
The one-way nested modelling approach has been 
applied by Giorgi et al. (1990), whose regional scale 
climate simulations shown in Figure 813 compare well 
with high-resoludon observations, and show a significant 
amount of detailed information that was not portrayed in 
the original G C M . (The limited area model is likely to 
produce significant improvements only in regions where 
topographic effects are substantial.) Similar results have 
been found by McGregor and Walsh (1991) with the 
CSIRO model and by other groups (MPI, UKMO). The 
application of the nesting approach to regional climate 
changes in increased CO2 experiments is not quite so 
advanced, although Giorgi et al. (1991) have recently used 
the N C A R doubled CO2 simulation of Washington and 
Meehl (1991) in this way; their simulated changes of 
January surface air temperature for both the original G C M 
and the G C M plus a one-way nested mesoscale model are 
shown in Figure B14. 
In spite of this progress, the relatively low confidence 
attached to regional projections of any sort should be 
emphasized. Analysis by Karl et a/. (1991) has shown that 
the observed changes of temperature and the winter-to-
summer precipitation ratio over central North America are 
not consistent with the IPCC (1990) projections, though 
this inconsistency could be due to factors other than model 
errors. 
B3 Advances in the Analysis of Climate Feedbaclcs and 
Sensitivity 
B3.1 Introduction 
While climate simulation continues apace, new attention 
has been given to the critical role of feedback processes in 
determining the climate's response to perturbations. In 
general, water vapour is expected to amplify global 
warming, while the effect of clouds remains uncertain. 
Overall, there is no compelling evidence to change earlier 
model estimates of the climate's sensitivity to increased 
greenhouse gases. 
B3.2 Water Vapour Feedback 
There is no compelling 
evidence that water vapour 
feedback is anything other than the positive feedback it has 
generally been considered to be, although there may be 
difficulties with the treatments of upper-level water vapour 
in current models. 
The importance of water vapour feedback in climate 
change has long been recognized (Manabe and Wetherald, 
1967) and the dependence of the current greenhouse effect 
on water vapour has been documented by Raval and 
(a) 
10°W 
0° 
10°E 
20°E 
Figure B14: The distribution of changes in January surface air 
temperature over Europe as a result of doubled CO2: (a) the 
temperature change (°C) given by the NCAR GCM relative to the 
GCM control; (b) the temperature change (°C) given by the 
nested mesoscale model relative to the nested model control. 
(From Giorgi era/., 1991.) 
Ramanathan (1989) using satellite data from regions of 
clear skies. The theoretical maximum concentration of 
water vapour is governed by the Clausius-Clapeyron 
relation, and increases rapidly with temperature (about 
6%/°C); this is the physical basis for the strong positive 
water vapour feedback seen in present climate models 
(whereby increases in temperature produce increases in 
atmospheric water vapour which in turn enhance the 
greenhouse effect leading to a warmer climate). Increases 
in water vapour will be more effective at higher levels 
where temperatures are lower, and the change in emissivity 
(or effectiveness in absorbing thermal radiation) will be 
approximately proportional to the fractional change in 
water vapour. (This simple relationship is complicated by 
absorption by the water vapour continuum in the tropics, 
so that for a given percentage increase in water vapour, the 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
115 
Figure B15: Vertical profiles of the global mean change in (a) specific humidity, and (b) relative humidity, simulated by the GISS 
GCM in a warm climate (+2°C SST change) relative to a cold climate (-2°C SST change). The full line denotes the standard version of 
the model and the dashed line denotes an improved version. (From Del Genio etal, 1991.) 
biggest contribution to increasing the greenhouse effect 
occurs from about 500 hPa in cold regions, but from about 
800 hPa in the tropics (Shine and Sinha, 1991).) 
The main source of water vapour is evaporation over the 
oceans, and humidities in the oceanic boundary layer are 
close to saturation, with the concentration decreasing 
rapidly with height. Both convective and large-scale 
motions and the evaporation of precipitation help to 
maintain the moisture distribution of the middle 
troposphere (Betts, 1990; Pierrehumbert, 1991; Kelly et 
al, 1991). The generally strong vertical gradients of water 
vapour may, however, lead to systematic errors in models 
with parametrized vertical moisture diffusion or coarse 
vertical resolution. Consequently, the large-scale transport 
of moisture must be treated carefully in G C M s lest 
spurious sources and sinks of moisture occur (Rasch and 
Williamson, 1990, 1991; Kiehl and Williamson, 1991). 
Nevertheless, the overall realism of the outgoing clear-sky 
radiative fluxes and of the simulated mean tropospheric 
temperatures suggests that the models' simulated 
tropospheric water vapour concentrations are not greatly in 
error (Cess et al., 1990; Boer et al., 1991a). 
Under global warming, there is general agreement that 
the atmospheric boundary layer would become moister, 
and as a result of both large-scale and convective mixing, 
the humidity in the upper troposphere is also likely to 
increase. A l l current GCMs simulate a strong positive 
water vapour feedback (Cess et al., 1990) with relative 
humidity remaining constant to a first approximation 
(Mitchell and Ingram, 1992). Lindzen (1990) noted, 
however, that at warmer temperatures, tropical convective 
clouds might detrain moisture at higher, colder 
temperatures, and thus provide less water to the 
atmosphere directly. Del Genio et al. (1991) diagnosed 
results from two versions of the GISS G C M , and found 
that in a warmer climate, cumulus-induced subsidence 
indeed tends to increase drying as anticipated by Lindzen, 
but found that this effect is offset by increased moistening 
as a result of upward moisture transport by large-scale 
eddies and by the tropical mean meridional circulation 
(Figure B15). 
Estimates of the strength of the water vapour feedback 
can be made from observations, although they are not 
independent of the effects of atmospheric motions. As 
noted earlier, Raval and Ramanathan (1989) computed the 
dependence of the normalized clear-sky greenhouse effect 
derived from E R B E satellite data against sea surface 
temperature from different locations and seasons. The 
enhancement due to ascent in the intertropical convergence 
zone (at temperatures around 303K) and the reduction due 
to subsidence (at temperatures around 295K) can be seen 
in Figure B16. The overall positive slope suggests that the 
greenhouse effect indeed increases with temperature, 
although work by Arking (1991) indicates that some of the 


B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
117 
maritime clouds. If tiiis correlation holds for global 
warming, then it represents a positive feedback mechanism 
associated with low cloudiness in these regions. (Note, 
however, that other processes can lead to local changes in 
cloud optical depth, and the correlation with temperature 
may be fortuitous.) Feigelson's data, however, suggest 
little change in optical depth with increasing temperature 
for water clouds. 
Ramanathan and Collins (1991) have discussed a 
negative feedback mechanism associated with the 
production of highly reflective cirrus clouds as a 
consequence of an increase in tropical convective activity 
associated with the 1987 El Niiio. The importance of this 
mechanism for the case of greenhouse warming remains to 
be fully investigated, as the circulation changes in the 
tropics accompanying global warming are unlikely to be 
the same as those during an El Niiio (Mitchell, 1991; Boer, 
1991). 
Cloud feedback effects have been investigated in G C M 
studies in order to understand some of the consequences of 
the different ways in which clouds and cloud optical 
properties are represented in models. Clouds are 
represented either diagnostically as a function of relative 
humidity, or prognostically by carrying an equation for 
cloud water. Additionally, the optical properties of the 
clouds may be specified to remain fixed or they inay be 
parametrized to change as the climate changes (see Table 
B l ; also Table 3.2a, in IPCC 1990). As noted in IPCC 
1990, Cess et al. (1990) included examples of each of 
these possibilities in a study of 19 GCMs, and found that 
the simulated cloud feedback varied from slightly negative 
to strongly positive. 
Cloud feedback due to changes in cloud amount and/or 
distribution may be different, depending on whether clouds 
are specified in terms of relative humidity or derived from 
an explicit cloud water prognostic equation. Differences 
may also arise from the differing treatment of clouds in 
explicit cloud water schemes. For example, in the U K M O 
model (Senior and Mitchell, 1992a) increasing the lifetime 
of water cloud relative to ice cloud weakens the cloud 
feedback (tending to reduce climate sensitivity), while in 
the L M D model (Li and Le Treut, 1991) lowering the 
temperature at which ice cloud forms strengthens the cloud 
feedback. In the U K M O model the parametrization of 
cloud properties (as a function of cloud water content) 
appareittly results in a modest positive contribution to the 
total feedback in the tropics due to increased infrared 
longwave emissivities. In the C C C model, on the other 
hand, the parametrization of cloud properties (as a function 
of temperature) gives a negative contribution to the 
feedback in tropical regions due to the increase in cloud 
albedo. The reduced tropical solar input at the surface in 
the perturbed climate thus moderates both the warming 
and the increase in evaporation, so that the hydrological 
cycle does not strengthen as much as in other models 
(Boer, 1991). 
B3.4 Surface Albedo Feedback 
The conventional 
explanation of the amplification of 
global warming by snow feedback is that a warmer climate 
will have less snow cover, resulting in a darker surface 
which in turn absorbs more solar radiation. A recent 
analysis suggests that snow-albedo-temperature feedback 
processes in models are somewhat more complex than this 
view would indicate. 
Using a methodology developed for an earlier study of 
G C M cloud feedbacks (Cess et al., 1990), a perpetual 
April simulation was used with an imposed globally-
uniform SST perturbation of 2°C relative to a prescribed 
climatological SST distribution. To isolate snow feedback, 
two such April climate change simulations were 
performed, one in which the snow cover was held fixed 
and one in which the snow line was allowed to retreat 
following the imposition of the SST anomaly. The results 
of these simulations are shown in Figure B18 in terms of 
the climate feedback or sensitivity parameter X that was 
defined in Section 3.3.1 of the IPCC (1990) report. (An 
increase in \ represents an increased climate change 
caused by a given climate forcing.) There are clear 
differences among current GCMs in their response to 
changes in snow cover as measured by the ratio XIX^ 
(where \ is the sensitivity parameter for fixed snow). Here 
a value of 1,11.^ >1 indicating a positive snow feedback is 
found in most models. Also shown are the corresponding 
feedbacks in the case of an equivalent cloudless 
atmosphere, found by separately averaging the models' 
clear-sky radiative fluxes at the top of the atmosphere 
(TOA) in order to isolate the effects of clouds on snow 
2.2 I 
1 
2.0 - 
• Global 
O 
O Clear 
• 
1.8 -
« 1.6 - 
• O 
^ 1,4 - 
O ^ • 
1.0 
^ 
0.81 
I 
I 
i
_
j 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I 
I
—
I I 
I 
1 
1 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
Model number 
Figure B18: The snow feedback in terms of the ratio of the 
sensitivity parameter ("k) to that with fixed snow (A,j), as 
simulated in 17 atmospheric GCMs. The full circles denote 
global values while the open circles are for cleai-sky conditions. 
(From Cess era/., 1991.) 

775 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
feedback. The clear-sky values of XIX^ range from 
negligible snow feedback to as much as a two-fold 
feedback amplification. 
In general, clouds are thought to reduce positive snow 
feedback by shielding the T O A albedo change. This 
mechanism, however, cannot account for the feedback sign 
reversals or the cloud-induced amplification of positive 
snow feedback exhibited by some models. As discussed by 
Cess et al. (1991), the sign reversal in some cases is caused 
by cloud redistribution, while in others it occurs as a 
consequence of cloud-induced longwave interactions; there 
is also a significant longwave feedback associated with 
snow retreat in some models. These results are 
complementary to those of Cohen and Rind (1991), who 
found that the suppression of surface air temperature 
changes by positive snow anomalies is considerably 
reduced by a negative feedback involving the non-radiative 
components of the surface energy budget. 
Uncertainties in the size of the surface albedo feedback 
associated with sea-ice remain. As Ingram et al. (1989) 
noted, estimates of the strength of feedback depend not 
only on the model used, but also on the method used to 
provide the estimate. Covey et al. (1991) estimated an 
upper limit to sea-ice-albedo feedback by carrying out 
simulations in which the albedo of sea-ice was changed to 
that of the open ocean. They found an enhancement of 
globally and annually averaged absorption of radiation of 2 
to 3Wm"2, comparable to the change on doubling CO2. 
They concluded that for a warming of the magnitude 
expected on doubling C O 2 , sea-ice-albedo feedback is 
likely to be smaller than the feedback from water vapour 
and potentially smaller than that from clouds. This is 
consistent with Ingram et al. (1989) who estimated a 
feedback of 0.2-0.3Wm"2K"l from sea-ice-albedo changes, 
whereas estimates of the strength of water vapour feedback 
are typically about l . S W m - K " ' (see for example, 
Mitchell, 1989). Meehl and Washington (1990) found that 
changing their sea-ice albedo formulation to one which 
was liable to induce ice melt led to both a warmer control 
climate (about IK) and a greater sensitivity (about 0.5K) to 
doubling CO2. Further discussion of sea-ice modelling is 
given in Section B5.4. 
B3.5 Climate Sensitivity 
There is no compelling new evidence to warrant changing 
the equilibrium sensitivity to doubled CO2 from the range 
of 1.5 to 4.5T as given by IPCC 1990. 
The climate sensitivity is defined as the equilibrium 
change in global average surface air temperature due to a 
doubting of CO2 (Section 3.2 of IPCC, 1990), and is a 
measure of the response of a climate model to a change in 
radiative forcing. The climate sensitivity may be thought 
of as partly a direct radiative effect (estimated to be of the 
order of 1.2°C for a doubling of CO2) and partly the effect 
of feedbacks that act to enhance or suppress the radiative 
warming. The IPCC "best guess" for the climate sensitivity 
is 2.5°C, with a range of uncertainty from 1.5 to 4.5°C. 
Values of the climate sensitivity estimated from recent 
equilibrium G C M simulations for doubled C O 2 are 
summarized in Table 82, and generally fall within the 
range given in Table 3.2a of IPCC 1990. These recent 
simulations convey little new information as they all (with 
the exception of the L M D model) employ a relative 
humidity-based cloud scheme and fixed cloud radiative 
properties as in earlier models. The coupled model results 
(at the time of C O T doubling) give lower bounds, as 
discussed in Section B2.2. 
Recent additional estimates of the climate sensitivity 
have been made by fitting the observed temperature record 
to the evolution of temperature produced by simple 
energy-balance climate/upwelling-diffusion ocean models, 
assuming that all the observed warming over the last 
century or so was due solely to increases in greenhouse 
gases (see IPCC (1990), Sections 6 and 8). Schlesinger et 
al. (1991) estimate a climate sensitivity of 2.2+0.8°C 
allowing for the effect of sulphate aerosols, while Raper et 
al. (1991) obtain a value of 2.3°C with a larger range of 
uncertainty due to their allowance for natural variability 
(see Wigley and Raper, 1990) and they estimate a value of 
1.4°C with no aerosol effect. The effect of including 
sulphates (or other factors that could act to oppose the 
greenhouse warming) in such calculations is to increase 
the estimated climate sensitivity, since the observed 
climate warming is then ascribed to a reduced radiative 
forcing (see Sections A2.6 and C4.2.4). 
In summary, there have been a number of further studies 
that have a bearing on estimates of climate sensitivity. 
New equilibrium G C M simulations have widened the 
range slightly to 1.7°C (Wang et al, 1991a) and 5.4°C 
(Senior and Mitchell, 1992a), but no dramatically new 
sensitivity has been found. Energy-balance model 
considerations bring previous estimates of sensitivity 
(IPCC. 1990) more in line with the IPCC "best guess". 
B4 Advances in Modelling Atmospheric Variability 
1. Although studies are incomplete in many respects, the 
ability of models to replicate observed 
atmospheric 
behaviour on a wide range of space and time-scales is 
encouraging. As noted in IPCC 1990, this ability provides 
some evidence that models may be usefully applied to 
problems 
of climatic 
change associated 
with the 
greenhouse effect. 
2. Model experiments with doubled CO2 give no clear 
indication of a systematic change in the variability of 
temperature on daily to interannual time-scales, while the 
changes of variability for other climate features appear to 
be regionally (and possibly model) dependent. 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
119 
B4.1 Introduction 
Since tiie 1990 IPCC report there has been increased 
emphasis of the analysis of the ability of models to 
simulate atmospheric variability on time-scales ranging 
from diurnal to decadal in both control and perturbed 
climate simulations. Such studies are critical to the 
assessment of the effects of climate change, since it is 
increasingly recognized that changes in variability and the 
occurrence of extreme events may have a greater impact 
than changes in the mean climate itself (Katz and Brown, 
1991). Notwithstanding these results, there is at present 
only limited confidence in the ability of climate models to 
infer changes in the occurrence of interannual and regional 
events. 
The following discussion is arranged in order of 
increasing time-scales from diurnal to decadal. Particular 
attention is given to new studies that include simulated 
changes in variability due to doubling atmospheric CO2, 
and to relating new results to the findings of IPCC 1990. 
Other studies are included to document the improvement 
in the capability of models to simulate selected aspects of 
atmospheric variability. 
B4.2 Diurnal Cycle 
Inclusion of the diurnal cycle (now a feature of many 
GCMs) permits the simulation of high-frequency temporal 
variations. For example, a recent simulation by Randall et 
al (1991a) has demonstrated that the diurnal variation of 
the hydrologic cycle in the tropics can be realistically 
simulated, while Cao et al. (1992) have found that the 
simulated diurnal range of surface temperature is generally 
comparable to observations except for a slight 
underestimate in the mid-latitudes. On doubling CO2, Cao 
et al. (1992) found a slight decrease in the globally-
averaged diurnal range of surface temperatures, as noted in 
IPCC 1990, although locally they found that factors such 
as reduced soil moisture, receding snow lines or reduced 
cloud cover could lead to an increase in the diurnal 
temperature range with doubled C 0 2 . Historical 
observations over 25% of the global land area show a 
decreased diurnal temperature range, although the reasons 
for this change, which is largely a result of an increase in 
minimum temperatures, are not yet clear (see Section 
C3.1.5). 
B4.3 Day-to-Day Variability 
In several of the models used in CO2 studies, the day-to-
day variability of surface temperature is greater than that 
observed, particularly in higher northern latitudes (Meehl 
and Washington, 1990; Portman et al, 1990). Cao et al. 
(1992) found that in a U K M O model the daily variability 
of surface air temperature is overestimated in high 
northern latitudes in winter, but is less than observed over 
mid-latitude continents in summer. 
On doubling CO2, Cao et al. (1992) found a general 
reduction in day-to-day temperature variability in winter in 
mid- to high latitudes over North America and over the 
ocean. The reduction was particularly pronounced in 
regions where winter sea-ice had melted. Mearns et al. 
(1990) , however, found no clear pattern of change in daily 
temperature variability whereas P. Whetton (personal 
communication) found general increases in daily 
temperature variability throughout Australia in both winter 
and summer. Mearns et al (1990) found a general increase 
in the day-to-day variability of precipitation due to 
increased C O 2 , whereas Boer et al. (1991b) found an 
overall decline in the daily variance of sea-level pressure 
due to doubling CO2, with the largest decrease occuiring 
in the North Atlantic in winter. 
B4.4 Extreme Events 
The simulation of extreme events is an important aspect of 
a model's performance, and is closely connected with the 
question of natural variability. An important extreme event 
is the occurrence of tropical cyclones (or hurricanes) 
which GCMs cannot simulate in detail, though they do 
simulate tropical disturbances (see IPCC 1990, Section 
5.3.3). Broccoli and Manabe (1990) and Haarsma et al 
(1992) found that the spatial and temporal distributions of 
modelled tropical disturbances are similar to those 
observed. On doubling CO2 Haarsma et al (1992) found 
that the number of simulated tropical disturbances 
increased, with little change in their average structure and 
intensity. However, as noted in IPCC 1990, Broccoli and 
Manabe (1990) found an increase in the number of tropical 
storms if cloud cover was prescribed, but a decrease if 
cloud was generated within the model. 
In the 1990 IPCC report a consistent increase in the 
frequency of convective precipitation at the expense of 
large-scale precipitation was noted, with the implication of 
more intense local rain at the expense of gentler but more 
persistent rainfall events. This tendency has been found in 
recent simulations using the CSIRO model (Gordon et al, 
1991; Pittock et al, 1991) and a high-resolution U K M O 
model (J. Gregory, personal communication). Pittock et al 
(1991) find a systematic increase in the frequency of heavy 
rain events with doubled C O 2 (Figure B19) and a 
consequent decrease in the return period of heavy rainfall 
(Figure B20). These changes are related to a systematic 
increase in the frequency of penetrating convection in the 
tropics and mid-latitudes on doubling C O 2 (see IPCC, 
1990). 
B4.5 Blocking and Storm Activity 
Studies of the simulated variation of storm activity with 
enhanced C O 2 are difficult to generalize as they use 
different measures for storminess and address different 
regions. R. Lambert (personal communication) found a 

120 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
160-| 
140-
>, 
o 
120-
c 
0) 100-
a> 80-
c 
60-
<L> 40-
O) 
C 
20-
to 
,c 
n 
O 
u 
• 
40°N [O 40'"S g 
Australian land points 
0.2-0.4 
0.8-1.6 
3.2-6.4 
12.8-25.6 
0.4-0.8 
1.6-3.2 
6.4-12.8 
>25,6 
Daily rainfall class (mm day"^) 
Figure B19: Changes in the frequency of occurrence of daily 
rainfall classes with doubled CO2 in the CSIRO model. (From 
Pittockef a/., 1991.) 
E 
I 
c 
Q 
V 
V 
V 
2.1 mth 3.9 mth 
7.2 mth 
1.1 yr 
2.5 yr 
Return period 
Figure B20: Daily rainfall amount vs. return period in Australia 
as simulated by the CSIRO model for both control (IXCO2) and 
doubled COj. (From Pittock et al., 1991.) 
significant reduction in the number of cyclonic events in 
the CCC model between 30°N and the North Pole during 
winter, but a significant increase in the number of strong 
cyclones. (Boer et al. (1991b) noted a decrease in the 
variance of 1000 hPa height in the same experiment; see 
Section B4.3.) Senior and Mitchell (1992b) found a 
northwest shift in the filtered variance of geopotential 
height (a surrogate for storm tracks) in the North AUantic 
in winter in the high resolution U K M O model. B. Hoskins 
(personal communication), on the basis of experiments 
using the time-mean data from Senior and Mitchell's 
simulations, attributed the changes in storm tracks to 
changes in the horizontal temperature gradient and 
increases in atmospheric water vapour. MuUan and 
Renwick (1990) conducted a detailed analysis of the 
results of the CSIRO model in die Australian-New Zealand 
region, and found a slight increase in the number of storms 
in this region for all seasons. 
The simuladon of persistent large-scale anomalies such 
as blocking has proved difficult to forecast with extended-
range NWP models (Tibaldi and Molteni, 1990; Miyakoda 
and Sirutis, 1990), although GCMs can simulate some of 
the statistical properties of blocking in the Northern 
Hemisphere as recently shown by Hansen and Sutera 
(1990) for the NCAR C C M and by Kitoh (1989) for the 
MRI G C M . Tibaldi (1992) has examined the space-time 
variability of blocking in the MPI (ECHAM) model, using 
the blocking index of Tibaldi and Molteni (1990) applied 
to 5-day mean December to February 500 hPa fields in the 
Northern Hemisphere. While the variance of both the low-
and high-frequency components is reasonably well 
simulated, 
the 
magnitudes 
are 
systematically 
underestimated. 
B4.6 Intra-Seasonal Variability 
An important intra-seasonal variabihty is that associated 
with the 30-60 day oscillation. This oscillation appears to 
influence onset and break phases of the monsoons, and 
thus has a considerable impact on the prediction of tropical 
rainfall (Lau and Peng, 1990). These oscillations may also 
play a role in the onset of El Nino events. Park et al. 
(1990) and Zeng et al. (1990) have shown that some 
GCMs simulate intra-seasonal variations that are similar in 
structure to those observed, but they are generally of 
smaller amplitude. 
B4.7 Interannual Variability 
As in IPCC 1990, no meaningful change in the interannual 
variability of temperature has been found with increased 
CO2, apart from a general reduction in the vicinity of the 
winter sea-ice margins. 
Some of the models used in climate studies exaggerate 
the interannual variability of surface temperature in high 
latitudes in winter (Meams, 1991, reporting on simulations 
by Oglesby and Saltzman, 1990; Cao et al, 1992). The 
simulated changes in the variability of temperature with 
doubled CO2 vary from model to model; Rind (1991) 
found decreases over much of the northern continents in 
winter in the GISS model, as did Georgi et a/. (1991) using 
a regional model driven by output from the NCAR G C M 
simulations of Washington and Meehl (I99I). On the odier 
hand, Meams (1991) found both increases and decreases in 
temperature variability, while Cao et al (1992) found that 
increases were widespread in the tropics and subtropics, 
and in summer over North America and westem Europe, 
with significant reductions confined to regions where sea-
ice receded in winter. 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
121 
4.5 
3.0 h 
d -1.5h 
-4.5 
_(a) 
-" r 
1 
r —
1
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
i
n
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
\
—
1
— 
GCM 
OBS A\ 
A 
h \ 
/Vi* 
i \ 
/ 
' 
AvA 
/! 
\ 
I 
\ 
h P \ i . ^ 
1 L A 
\ 
ll 
M 
'A A/ 
—
1 
1 
1 
i
_ 
V 
1 
1 
L 
V I ' 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
L 
1 
70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 
Year 
J 
I 
L. 
70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 V 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 
Year 
Figure B21: The 1970-1989 lime-series of (a) the zonal surface wind stress anomahes averaged between 180°-140°W and 4°N-4°S, 
and (b) the Southern Oscillation Index. The observed variation is given by the dashed line, and that simulated by the MRI GCM is 
given by the solid line. (From Kitoh, 1991.) 
B4.8 ENSO and Monsoons 
A dominant mode of atmospheric variability in the tropics 
is that associated with tropical sea surface temperature 
anomalies in the Pacific. These tropical ocean-global 
atmosphere oscillations are called El Niiio-Southern 
Oscillation, or E N S O . As noted in IPCC (1990), 
atmospheric models are capable of giving a realistic 
simulation of the seasonal tropical atmospheric anomalies 
at least for intense El Niiio periods if they are given a 
satisfactory estimate of the anomalous sea surface 
temperature (SST) in the tropical Pacific. This conclusion 
is supported by more recent results (Konig et al, 1990; 
Kitoh, 1991; B. Hunt, personal communication). For 
example, as illustrated in Figure B21, a rather good 
simulation has been made of the observed interannual 
variations of zonal surface wind stress over the central 
equatorial Pacific and of the observed large-scale 
interannual variations of sea-level pressure as represented 
by the Southern Oscillation Index. Using prescribed sea 
surface temperatures from 1987 and 1988, the broad 
characteristics of monsoon interannual variability have 
been reproduced (Palmer et al, 1991; Kitoh, 1992). Using 
the coupled lAP model with observed initial conditions, 
Zeng et al (1990) and L i et al. (1991) report a successful 
simulation of summer precipitation anomalies in the 
monsoon region of southeast Asia. 
Using tropical ocean-atmosphere models, Lau et al. 
(1991), Nagai et al (1991), Philander et al (1991) and 
Latif et al. (1991) have successfully simulated interannual 
variations that resemble some aspects of E N S O 
phenomena, although the amplitude of the simulated SST 
anomalies is generally less than that observed (as noted in 
IPCC, 1990) and model resolution appears to have an 
important influence on the simulated behaviour. Meehl 
(1990) claims some success in simulating ENSO-like 
disturbances in a global low-resolution ocean-atmosphere 
G C M , though it should be recalled that not all tropical SST 
variations are associated with ENSO. As shown in Figure 
B22, the patterns of tropical sea-level pressure changes 
that are characteristic of ENSO in the present climate are 
also present with doubled COj (Meehl et al, 1991b). The 
patterns of the tropical precipitation and soil-moisture 
anomalies are similar in the control and doubled CO2 
cases, with the dry areas becoming generally drier and the 
wet areas becoming generally wetter with increased CO2. 
These results, however, are yet to be confirmed with other 
models. On increasing the concentration of greenhouse 
gases in the MPI global coupled model, Lai et al. (1992) 
found no evidence for a significant change in the mean 
onset date of the Indian Monsoon or for changes in the 
precipitation in the monsoon region. 

722 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
(a) 
0 
90E 
180 
90W 
0 
(b) 
Figure B22: The change in DJF sea-level pressure (hPa) between composite warm ENSO events and the 15-year mean simulated by a 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model for (a) normal CO2, and (b) doubled CO2. (From Meehl et al, 1991b.) 
B4.9 Decadal Variability 
There are now a sufficient number of model integrations 
over 50-100 year (and longer) periods to provide 
preliminary information on the simulation of atmospheric 
decadal variability. (See Section B4.3 for a discussion of 
simulated decadal variability in the ocean.) Whether 
simple models, low-resolution G C M s coupled to an 
oceanic mixed layer (Houghton et al., 1991; B. Hunt, 
personal communication) or full global ocean-atmosphere 
G C M s (Section B2.2) are used, the presence of 
considerable natural variability (i.e., in the absence of 
changes in external forcing) on decadal time-scales is 
characterisdcally found in model control runs. Typical 
magnitudes of such decadal variations are several tenths °C 
in surface air temperature, as illustrated in Figure B2 for 
the control run of the GFDL coupled model that was used 
in the transient CO2 simulation discussed in Section B2.2. 
In this integration the surface flux corrections applied at 
the ocean surface were evidentiy successful in preventing a 
multi-decadal drift of the mean temperature. Such internal 
variability may mask at least part of the changes due to 
increased greenhouse gases. 
B5 Advances in Modelling the Oceans and Sea-Ice 
B5.1 Introduction 
Although there is generally less experience in ocean 
modelling than there is in atmospheric modelling, since the 
preparation of the IPCC (1990) report there have been a 
number of studies with high-resolution and other ocean 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
123 
Figure B23: (a) The instantaneous 160m temperature at TC intervals, and (b) the volume transport streamlines at 10 Sv intervals, as 
simulated in an eddy-resolving global ocean GCM with 1/2° resolution. (From Semtner and Chervin, 1988.) 
models that have potentially important consequences for 
the simulation (and identification) of climate change with 
coupled ocean-atmosphere G C M s (Anderson and 
Willebrand, 1991). 
B5.2 Eddy-Resolving Models 
Recent simulations with the W O C E community ocean 
model (Bryan and Holland, 1989) for the North Atlantic 
with a 1/3° resolution have yielded a distribution of eddy 
energy that agrees reasonably well with the GEOSAT 
altimetric observations, although the simulated amplitudes 
are generally too small. A qualitatively similar agreement 
of simulated and observed variability was found by 
Semtner and Chervin (1988) with a 1/2° model of the 
global ocean, examples of which are shown in Figure B23. 
First results from the F R A M 1/4° model for the Antarctic 
Circumpolar Current (Webb et al, 1991) indicate that the 
distribution of maximum variability associated with 

124 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
mesoscale eddies is reasonably well simulated, although 
the eddy minima appear to be too low. The F R A M model 
also shows a strong meridional (Deacon) cell in the 
Antarctic Ocean, with a transport of over 20Sv. The 
upwelling branch of this cell, which is seen in both high-
and low-resolution models, occurs at those latitudes where 
the coupled ocean-atmosphere models show delayed 
greenhouse gas warming (see Section B2.2). A recent 
experiment by Boning and Budich (1991) has shown that 
the simulated eddy energy increases substantially (along 
with significant variability on time-scales of several years) 
when the horizontal resolution is increased to 1/6°. This 
raises the question (of practical importance for climate 
modelling) whether or not mesoscale ocean eddies must be 
resolved in climate calculations. Mesoscale effects are so 
inhomogeneous and so tenuously connected to the larger-
scale currents that a simple parametrization of their effects 
seems unlikely. However, studies using models that omit 
salinity variations suggest that the total meridional heat 
transport is only slightiy influenced by eddies, since the 
eddy flux tends to be compensated by a modification of the 
mean flow induced by the eddies themselves (Bryan, 
1991). Further research on the climatic (as opposed to the 
synoptic) role of ocean eddies is clearly required. 
B5.3 Thermohaline Circulation 
A great deal of interest has recently focussed on the 
behaviour of the thermohaline circulation of the North 
Atlantic, whereby North Atlantic deep water is formed. 
This sinking is part of a global system of ocean transports 
known as the Conveyor Belt Circulation (Gordon, 1986). 
Many aspects of the thermohaline circulation have been 
simulated in a 1/2° global ocean model (Semtner and 
Chervin, 1991), and its basic dynamical structure and 
sensitivity are being illuminated by both theoretical studies 
and simulations with idealized models. In the present 
climate, high-latitude winter cooling of relatively saline 
surface water in the North Atlantic causes it to sink and 
subsequently to move out of the basin by deep southward 
currents; this flow is compensated by the northward flow 
of warm surface water from the tropics, whose salinity 
may be increased relative to the other high-latitude oceans 
by enhanced evaporation (Stocker and Wright, 1991). 
Coupled ocean-atmosphere models produce sinking in 
high latitudes in the North Atlantic, though it is not clear 
how realistically they do so. It may also be noted that 
Dixon et al (1991) have recently succeeded in simulating 
the observed spreading of CFCs in the Southern Ocean 
with the same GFDL coupled model that was used in the 
transient CO2 experiments; this increases confidence that 
the vertical mixing parametrization in the oceanic part of 
the model is a reasonable approximation. However, it 
should be noted that heat may affect the vertical stability in 
the ocean and hence may not behave in the same way as 
CFCs. Using a model with flux adjustments, Manabe et al. 
(1991) find that the effect of enhanced greenhouse 
warming is to reduce the rate of deep water formation. 
(Washington and Meehl (1989) also note a reduction in 
deep water formation in a model without 
flux 
adjustments.) This in turn decreases the flow of warm 
surface water from the soudi and probably contributes to a 
delay in the greenhouse response in the northern North 
Atlantic noted earlier in Figure B4. 
As shown with ocean-only models, variability on 
decadal and longer time-scales is associated with the 
advection of salinity anomalies through the deep 
convection regions (Marotzke and Willebrand, 1991; 
Weaver and Sarachik, 1991; Weaver et al., 1991; 
Mikolajewicz and Maier-Reimer, 1990). In the G F D L 
coupled model (R. Stouffer, personal communication) 
similar variability on time-scales of order 50 years is 
found. In an integration started from different initial 
conditions, a GFDL model (Manabe and Stouffer, 1988) in 
fact converged to a second equilibrium solution in which 
the North Atiantic was both fresher and colder (as shown 
in Figure B24) with a thermohaline circulation that was 
weakly reversed. The existence of multiple equilibrium 
states for the global ocean circulation raises the question of 
their stability, i.e., how easily the system may change from 
one state to another. Maier-Reimer and Mikolajewicz 
(1989) used the uncoupled MPI ocean G C M to investigate 
the Younger-Dryas event and found that the North Atlantic 
thermohaline circulation was sensitive to relatively small 
variations in the strength and location of the surface fresh 
water input, such that a breakdown of the circulation could 
occur within a few decades. Other recent experiments with 
zonally averaged ocean models have demonstrated that 
transitions between multiple equilibrium states can be 
triggered by relatively modest changes in the large-scale 
precipitation (Marotzke and Willebrand, 1991; Stocker and 
Wright, 1991). 
The possibility of the natural collapse of the North 
Atlantic thermohaline circulation has obvious implications 
for our ability to predict future variations of the climate 
system on decadal and longer time-scales. The North 
Atlantic circulation, however, appears to be more robust to 
change than the ocean-only model results suggest. Atlantic 
and Pacific deep sea sediment cores show that, with the 
exception of a possible short interruption during the 
Younger-Dryas event, no major break in the thermohaline 
circulation has occurred since the end of the last ice age in 
spite of the variability that has occurred in both the 
atmosphere and ocean (see, for example, Keigwin et al, 
1991). Preliminary results from a long integration of a 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model (R. Stouffer, personal 
communication) suggest that the thermohaline circulation 
is more stable in a coupled model than in an ocean-only 
model with restored SSTs. 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
125 
120E 
180 
120W 
60W 
0 
60E 
120E 
Figure B24: The difference in (a) mean surface temperature (°C), and (b) surface salinity (parts per thousand), in the North Atlantic in 
an equilibrium solution of the GFDL coupled ocean-atmosphere model with an active thermohaline circulation, relative to an 
alternative solution without thermohaline circulation. (From Manabe and Stouffer, 1988.) 
B5.4 Sea-Ice Models 
Ocean-only and coupled ocean-atmosphere models 
generally use thermodynamic sea-ice models with (at 
most) only simple advection schemes for the sea-ice. 
Experiments with sea-ice models coupled to mixed-layer 
pycnocline models (Owens and Lemke, 1990) have shown 
that the net freezing rate may depend on the continuum-
mechanical properties used for the sea-ice. Inclusion of 
sea-ice dynamics may therefore be required to properly 
model the surface boundary conditions of the ocean. A 
model that contains most of the characteristics of sea-ice 
believed to be relevant for climate investigations was 
proposed by Hibler (1979) and has recently been 
reformulated in a simplified version by Plato and Hibler 
(1990). 
Experiments with dynamic-thermodynamic sea-ice 
models have shown that such models are generally less 
sensitive to changes in the thermal forcing than are the 
simplified sea-ice models used so far in climate studies 
(Hibler, 1984; Lemke et al., 1990). This reduced 
sensitivity is a result of a negative feedback between the 
sea-ice dynamics and thermodynamics. It is therefore 
possible that the pronounced response of the polar regions 
found in experiments with increased CO2 (see Section 
B2.2 and IPCC (1990), Section 5) will be modified by the 
inclusion of ice dynamics. On the other hand, dynamic sea-
ice models are more sensitive than thermodynamic models 
to changes in the wind forcing, and most atmospheric 
circulation models do not reproduce the observed wind 
field in polar regions very well. Further improvement of 
sea-ice models therefore depends upon advances in the 
parametrization of polar processes, including the effect of 

126 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
fog and low stratus clouds on the polar radiation balance. It 
may also be noted that models typically filter their 
solutions in polar latitudes for purely numerical reasons, 
and this may tend to degrade the simulation of sea-ice. 
B6 Advances in Model Validation 
B6.1 Introduction 
Climate models show an increasing ability to simulate the 
current climate and its variations. This improvement is due 
to a combination of increased model resolution and 
improved physical parametrizations. The correctness of 
simulated results for the present climate at both global and 
regional scales is a desirable but not a sufficient condition 
for increased confidence in their use for simulations of 
future climate change. 
B6.2 Systematic Errors and Model Intercomparison 
Every climate modelling group strives to identify their 
models' systematic errors as a natural part of the 
continuing process of model development. Ideally, each 
physical parametrization in a climate model should be 
individually calibrated against appropriate observational 
data, although in many (if not most) cases this is not 
possible. Instead, with a particular set of parametrizations 
and a particular resolution, a model's performance is 
evaluated against the available seasonal climatological 
distributions of the large-scale variables such as 
temperature and circulation. While atmospheric and 
oceanic models continue to improve, the overall 
characterization of their performance given in Section 4 of 
IPCC (1990) remains valid (Gates et al, 1990). The 
situation is somewhat different, however, for coupled 
atmosphere-ocean GCMs, for which only a provisional 
error assessment is possible due to the limited number of 
integrations that have been performed (see below and 
Section B2.2) and because of the limited ocean data 
currently available. 
Progress in atmospheric model validation since the 
IPCC (1990) report has occurred both in the form of 
documented improvements in specific GCMs and in the 
form of intercomparisons of large numbers of independent 
GCMs. An example of an improvement in a particular 
model is the change in the parametrization of tropical 
evaporation and convection that has removed a major 
systematic error in the ECMWF model (see Figure 825). 
Recent intercomparisons of atmospheric models have 
either focussed on the simulation of the present climate (as 
in Boer et al, 1991a) or have considered the radiative 
forcing induced by a prescribed climate change (as in Cess 
et al, 1991) (see Section B3.3.3). On behalf of the 
Working Group on Numerical Experimentation (WGNE), 
Boer et al. (1991a) have collected the mean DJF and JJA 
distributions of selected atmospheric variables as 
150°W120°W90°W60°W30°W 
0° 
30°E 60°E 90°E l a C E 150°E 
150°W120°W90°W60''W30°W 
O" 
S C E S C E 90°E 120''E 150°E 
(C) 
150''W120°W90''W60''W30°W 0° 
30''E 60°E 90°E 120''E IBCE 
Figure B25: The 200 hPa velocity potendal anomalies (lO^m^s') 
for JJA 1988: (a) as given by ECMWF analyses referenced 
against the mean during 1986-1990; (b) as simulated by the 
ECMWF model over the same interval with observed SST and 
standard surface flux parametrizations for heat and moisture, and 
(c) as simulated with revised parametrizations accounting for 
fluxes at low windspeeds. (From Miller et al, 1991.) 
simulated in the control runs of 14 atmospheric GCMs. 
Despite the fact that the models differed greatly in 
resolution and in the nature and sophistication of their 
parametrizations of physical processes, a number of 
common systematic errors where found. The simulated 
climate was colder than that observed on average, and all 
models showed a cold bias in the middle- and high-latitude 
upper troposphere and in the tropical lower stratosphere 
(see Figure B26). These temperature errors induce 
corresponding errors in the zonal wind distribution in 
accordance with the thermal wind relationship, with the 
result that most GCMs display too westerly a flow in the 
upper troposphere and in high latitudes. Taken as a whole, 
models appear to be more sensitive to changes in physical 
parametrizations than to modest changes in resolution. 
The principal features of the Hadley, Ferrel and polar 
cells that characterize the atmospheric circulation are 
simulated by all models, along with appropriate seasonal 
shifts. There is, however, considerable variation in the 
strengths of the models' simulated meridional circulations. 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
127 
80N 
60N 
40N 
20N 
0 
20S 
Latitude 
40S 
60S 
SOS 
SON 
SON 
40N 
20 N 
0 
20S 
Latitude 
40S 
608 
SOS 
Figure B26: The systematic error (simulated minus observed) in 
mean temperature (°C) for (a) DJF, and (b) JJA for the UKMO 
atmospheric GCM. (From Boer et al, 1991a.) 
At the same time there has been improvement in the 
simulation of mean sea-level pressure in a number of 
models, due partly to increased resolution and partly to the 
introducdon of the parametrization of gravity wave drag. 
This improvement is illustrated in Figure B27a. The largest 
differences among models are found near Antarctica, 
where the extrapolation of pressure to sea level may 
introduce artificial variations. 
There has not been as much improvement in the 
simulation of precipitation by current GCMs. As shown in 
Figure B27b, there is a systematic over-estimation of the 
precipitation over much of the Northern Hemisphere (as 
well as an apparent under-estimation in the mid-latitudes 
of the Southern Hemisphere), and the models' simulated 
precipitation in the tropics varies considerably around that 
observed. There are, however, uncertainties in the 
observed data themselves, especially over the tropical 
oceans and in the Southem Hemisphere. Relatively large 
uncertainties in the simulation of regional precipitation are 
shown in the intercomparison of atmospheric GCMs being 
undertaken by the Monsoon Numerical Experimentation 
Group (MONEG) of the WCRP (1990b). 
In a companion study to the model intercomparisons of 
Cess et al. (1990, 1991) (see Section B3.3), an inter-
comparison of the surface energy fluxes in the GCMs has 
recentiy been made (Randall et al., 1991b). In this study 
(a) JJA 
1050 
1030 
1010 
S 1000 
Q. 
950 
1 
1 
— 1 
1 
I 
-
-
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
90N 
(b) DJF 
80 
30 
0 
30 
Latitude 
60 
908 
90S 
Figure B27: (a) The zonally-averaged JJA sea level pressure 
(mb) simulated by current high resolution GCMs; (b) the zonally-
averaged DJF precipitation (mm/day) simulated by current 
GCMs. Different symbols indicate different models and the solid 
line is the observed climatological average according to Jaeger 
(1976). (From Boeref o/., 1991a.) 
considerable variation is found in the models' simulated 
increases in precipitation, evaporation and total atmo-
spheric water vapour in response to a uniform 4°C SST 
increase. As shown in Figure B28, the models also 
simulate an overall increase in the net infrared clear-sky 
flux at the surface, reflecting the positive temperature/ 
water vapour feedback (Section B3.2) in the models. 

128 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
-25 F I I I I 
I I 
I I 
I 
I I I I I 
I I I I I I I 
I I I I 1 I 
I I 
90N 
60 
30 
0 
-30 
-60 
Latitude 
Figure B28: The change in the zonally-averaged longwave 
clear-sky flux at the surface as simulated by 14 atmospheric 
GCMs in response to a uniform 4°C increase of SST relative to 
July chmatology. (From RandaO et al, 1991b.) 
In the Boer et al. (1991a) intercomparison, as in most 
previous intercomparisons of climate models, results have 
been collected as available from the modelling community 
and no attempt has been made to run the models under 
common conditions and for common periods of time. In an 
effort to achieve a more systematic intercomparison of 
models, these attributes have recently been incorporated 
into the W G N E / P C M D I Atmospheric Model Inter-
comparison Project (AMIP), in which virtually all of the 
world's atmospheric GCMs will simulate the decade 1979-
1988 with common values of the CO2 concentration and 
solar constant and with observationally-prescribed but 
monthly-varying SST and sea-ice distributions (Gates, 
1991). The AMIP involves many of the same modelling 
groups that participated in the earlier 
W C R P 
Intercomparison of Radiation Codes in Climate Models 
(ICRCCM), the results of which have recently been 
published (Ellingson et al, 1991; Fouquart et al, 1991). 
The identification of systematic errors and the 
intercomparison of ocean models are at a less advanced 
stage than for atmospheric models. When forced with 
"observed" surface temperatures, salinities and wind 
stresses, ocean models have been moderately successful in 
reproducing the observed large-scale circulation and water 
mass distribution (see Section B5). The principal 
systematic errors common to most ocean models are an 
underestimate of the meridional heat transport as inferred 
from observations, and the simulation of the main 
thermocline to be too deep and too diffuse. No common 
systematic errors have as yet been identified in the deeper 
ocean in view of the paucity of observational data, 
although there are considerable differences in the 
simulated rate and location of deep water formation and in 
the strength of deep ocean circulation. 
In order to examine ocean model performance in more 
detail, an intercomparison of tropical Pacific ocean models 
has recently been undertaken by T O G A - N E G (WCRP, 
1990a; D. Anderson, personal communication), in which 
several models have been integrated with the same 
representation of surface forcing. In general, the SST error 
in all models shows a similar pattern, with the central 
equatorial Pacific being too cold and the equatorial 
western Pacific too warm throughout the year. Water along 
the western coast of South America is also generally too 
warm, and the equatorial undercurrent tends to be too 
weak. These discrepancies may be at least partly caused by 
inadequate surface forcing. 
An intercomparison of the behaviour of the tropical 
Pacific SST in coupled ocean-atmosphere models (in 
which the ocean and/or the atmosphere is a GCM) has 
recently been made by Neelin et al. (1992). These models 
show a wide range of behaviour in their simulation of 
tropical interannual variability, and some are more 
successful in simulating ENSO-like events than others. 
The runs were not made under the same conditions, 
however, and there is a wide range of model sophistication 
represented. 
The comparison of simulated past climates with palaeo 
data provides a further test of models, though the 
usefulness of such tests is limited by the quality of data 
and by our knowledge of the changes of past climates. A 
Palaeoclimate Model Intercomparison Project (PMIP) has 
been proposed (NATO Advanced Research Workshop on 
Palaeoclimatic Modelling, 27-31 May 1991, Saclay, 
France) to promote the understanding of the response of 
climate models to past changes in forcing. 
Although model intercomparison of the sort described 
here does not address many important questions in climate 
modelling (such as how to determine which parametriz-
ations are "best" or how best to couple the atmosphere and 
ocean), intercomparison has proven useful as a collective 
exploration of model parameter space and as a benchmark 
for the documentation of model improvement. It is 
characteristic of model intercomparisons that no single 
model is found to be superior to all other models in all 
respects. It should also be recognized that the various 
intercomparisons are designed for different purposes: those 
of Cess et al. (1990, 1991) are concerned with the models' 
response to changes in forcing (and are therefore relevant 
to the response to possible future changes of greenhouse 
gases), while those of Boer et al (1991a) and those being 
undertaken in AMIP (Gates, 1991) are concerned with the 
models' ability to simulate the present climate. As model 
development continues (and as increased computer 
resources become available), there will be both an 
opportunity and a need to conduct further climate model 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
129 
intercomparisons, especially of coupled ocean-atmosphere 
models in both their control configuration and in 
experiments with increasing greenhouse gases. 
B6.3 Data for Model Validation 
The availability of appropriate observational data is a 
critical factor in the validation (and improvement) of 
climate models, and some progress has been made in the 
assembly of global data sets for selected climate variables. 
The recent global compilations of average monthly surface 
air temperature and precipitation by Legates and Willmott 
(1990a, b) are believed to be improvements over earlier 
atlases of these variables, and new assemblies of land-
based precipitation (Hulme, 1992) and soil moisture 
(Vinnikov and Yeserkepova, 1991) are available. It should 
also be noted that the diagnostics made from the 
operational analyses of global numerical weather 
prediction models (Hoskins et al., 1989; Trenberth and 
Olson, 1988) are important sources of data for the 
validation of selected aspects of atmospheric models. The 
climatological ocean atlas of Levitus (1982) has been 
supplemented by the compilation of surface variables from 
the COADS data set (Wnght, 1988; Oberhuber, 1988; 
Michaud and Lin, 1991). These data are proving useful in 
the validation of both ocean and coupled ocean-
atmosphere models, as are the observations of transient 
tracers in the ocean (Toggweiler et al, 1989; Dixon et al, 
1991). 
For other variables such as cloudiness, precipitation, 
evaporation, run-off, surface heat flux, surface stress, 
ocean currents and sea-ice, however, the observational data 
base remains inadequate for the purposes of model 
validation. These variables are relatively difficult to 
observe on a global basis, and are not easily inferred from 
compilations of conventional circulation statistics such as 
those of Oort (1983). The best prospect for their systematic 
global estimation is probably the procedure known as re-
analysis, whereby modern data assimilation techniques are 
used to retrospectively initialize a comprehensive 
atmospheric G C M on a daily basis for a number of past 
years. Such projects are being planned by both ECMWF 
and NMC, and the possibility of applying the technique to 
ocean models is under active consideration. 
Finally, it should be noted that the development of a 
more comprehensive global climate data base is a key 
element of the World Climate Research Programme 
(WCRP). The observational plans that have been 
developed in recent years for the Global Precipitation 
Climatology Project (WCRP, 1988a), for the World Ocean 
Circulation Experiment WOCE (WCRP, 1988b), for the 
Tropical Ocean-Global Atmosphere project T O G A 
(WCRP, 1990a), and for the Global Energy and Water 
Cycle Experiment GEWEX (WCRP, 1990c) are focussed 
on the acquisition of data that are necessary for the further 
development and validation of global atmospheric and 
oceanic models, and have culminated in the proposal for a 
Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) (WCRP, 
1991). 
References 
Anderson, D.L.T. and J. Willebrand, 1991: Recent advances in 
modelling the ocean circulation and its effects on climate. Rev. 
Progress Phys. (In press). 
Arking, A., 1991: Temperature variability and water vapor 
feedback. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Betts, A.K. and Harshvardhan, 1987: Thermodynamic constraint 
on the cloud liquid water feedback in climate models. J. 
Geophys. Res., 92, 8483-8485. 
Betts, A.K., 1990: Greenhouse warming and the tropical water 
budget. Bull. Amer Met. Soc, 71, 1464-1465. 
Boer, G., 1991: Chmate change and the regulation of the surface 
moisture and energy budgets. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Boer, G.J., K. Aipe, M. Blackburn, M. Deque, W.L. Gates, T.L. 
Hart, H. Le Trent, E. Roeckner, D.A. Sheinin, I. Simmonds, 
R.N.B. Smith, T. Tokioka, R.T. Wetherald and D. WiUiamson, 
1991a: An intercomparison of the climates simulated by 14 
atmospheric general circulation models. CAS/JSC Working 
Group on Numerical Experimentation Report No. 15, 
WMO/TD - No. 425, World Met. Organiz., Geneva, 37 pp. 
Boer, G.J., N.A. McFarlane and M. Lazare, 1991b: Greenhouse 
gas induced climate change simulated with the Canadian 
Climate Centre second generation general circulation model. J. 
Climate (In press). 
Boning, C.W. and R. Budich, 1991: Eddy dynamics in primitive 
equation models: Sensitivity to horizontal resolution and 
friction. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Broccoli, A.J. and S. Manabe, 1990: Can existing climate models 
be used to study anthropogenic changes in tropical cyclone 
climate? Geophys. Res. Letters, 17, 1917-1920. 
Bryan, F. and W.R. Holland, 1989: A high-resolution simulation 
of the wind- and thermohaline-driven circulation in the North 
Atlantic Ocean: In Parametrization of Small-scale Processes, 
Proceedings of 'Aha Huliko'a Hawaiian Winter Workshop. 
Univ. Hawaii, Manoa, pp. 17-20, 99-115. 
Bryan, K., 1991: Poleward heat transport in the ocean: A review 
of a hierarchy of models of increasing resolution. Tellus, 43 A-
B, 104-115. 
Cao, H-X., J.F.B. Mitchell and J.R. Lavery, 1992: Simulated 
diurnal range and variability of surface temperature in a global 
climate model for present and doubled COo. J. Climate. (In 
press). 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, J.P. Blanchet, G.J. Boer, A.D. Del 
Genio, M. Deque, V. Dymnikov, V. Galin, W.L. Gates, S.J. 
Ghan, J.T. Kiehl, A.A. Lacis, H. Le Trent, Z.-X. Li, X.-Z. 
Liang, B.J. McAvaney, V.P. Meleshko. J.F.B. Mitchell, J.-J. 
Morcrette, D.A. Randall, L. Rikus, E. Roeckner, J.F. Royer, U. 
Schlese, D.A. Sheinin, A. Slingo, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, 
W.M. Washington, R.T. Wetherald, I. Yagai and M.-H. Zhang, 

130 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
1990: Intercomparison and interpretation of climate feedback 
processes in nineteen atmospheric general circulation models. 
J. Geophys. Res., 95, 16,601-16,615. 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, M.-H. Zhang, J.-P. Blanchet, S. Chahta, 
R. Colman, D.A. Dazlich, A.D. Del Genio, V. Dymnikov, V. 
Galin, D. Jerrett, E. Keup, A.A. Lacis, H. Le Treut, X.-Z. 
Liang, J.-F. Mahfouf, B.J. McAvaney, V.P. Meleshko, J.F.B. 
Mitchell, J.-J. Morcrette, P.M. Norris, D.A. Randall, L. Rikus, 
E. Roeckner, J.-F. Royer, U. Schlese, D.A. Sheinin, J.M. 
Slingo, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, W.M. Washington, R.T. 
Wetherald and I. Yagai, 1991: Interpretation of snow-climate 
feedback as produced by 17 general circulation models. 
Science, 253, 888-892. 
Charlson, R.J., J. Langer, H. Rodhe, C.B. Leovy and S.G. 
Warren, 1991: Perturbation of the Northern Hemisphere 
radiadve balance by backscattering from anthropogenic sulfate 
aerosols. Tellus, 43AB, 152-163. 
Cohen, J. and D. Rind, 1991: The effect of snow cover on the 
climate. J. Climate, 4, 689-706. 
Covey, C , K.E. Taylor and R.E. Dickinson, 1991: Upper limit 
for sea-ice albedo feedback contribution to global warming. J. 
Geophys. Res., 96, 9169-9174. 
Cubasch, U., K. Hasselmann, H. Hock, E. Maier-Reimer, U. 
Mikolajewicz, B.D. Santer and R. Sausen, 1991: Time-
dependent greenhouse warming computations with a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. Max Planck Inst. Meteor. Report 67, 
Hamburg. 
Del Genio, A.D., A.A. Lacis and R.A. Ruedy, 1991: Simulations 
of the effect of a warmer climate on atmospheric humidity. 
Nature, 251, 382-385. 
Dix, M., B.J. McAvaney, I.G. Watterson and H.B. Gordon, 1991: 
Personnal communication. Full text in preparation. 
Dixon, K.W., J.L. Bullister, R.H. Gammon, R.J. Stouffer and 
G.P.J. Theile, 1991: Climate model simulation studies using 
chlorofluorocarbons as transient oceanic tracers. (Unpublished 
manuscript). 
Ellingson, R.G., J. ElUs and S. Eels, 1991: The intercomparison 
of radiation codes used in climate models: Longwave results. 
J. Geophys. Res., 96, 8929-8954. 
Feigelson, E.M., 1978: Preliminary radiation model of a cloudy 
atmosphere. Structure of clouds and solar radiation. Contrib. 
Atmos. Phys., 51, 203-229. 
Flato, G.M. and W.D. Hibler. 1990: On a simple sea-ice 
dynamics model for climate studies. Ann. GlacioL, 14, 72-77. 
Fouquart, Y., B. Bonnel and V. Ramaswamy, 1991: Inter-
comparing shortwave radiation codes for climate studies. J. 
Geophys. Res., 96, 8955-8969. 
Gates, W.L., 1991: The WGNE atmospheric model inter-
comparison project. AMIP Newsletter No. 1, PCMDI, 
Lawrence Livermore Nat'l. Lab., Livermore, USA. 8pp. 
Gates, W.L., P.R. Rowntree and Q.-C. Zeng, 1990: Validation of 
climate models. In: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment. J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums 
(Eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. pp93-130. 
Giorgi, F. and L.O. Mearns, 1991: Approaches to the simulation 
of regional climate change: A review. J. Geophys. Res., 29, 
191-216. 
Giorgi, F., M.R. Marinucci and G. Visconti, 1990: Use of a 
limited-area model nested in a general circulation model for 
regional climate simulation over Europe. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 
18,413-18,431. 
Giorgi, F., M.R. Marinucci and G. Visconti, 1991: A 2xC02. 
climate change scenario over Europe generated using a 
limited-area model nested in a general circulation model. Part 
II. Climate change scenario. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Gordon, A.L., 1986: Inter-ocean exchange of thermocline water. 
J. Geophys. Res., 91, 5037-5046. 
Gordon, H.B., P. Whetton, A.B. Pittock, A. Fowler, M. Haylock 
and K. Hennessy, 1991: Simulated changes in daily rainfall 
intensity due to the enhanced greenhouse effect: ImpUcations 
for extreme rainfall events. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Grotch, S.L. and M.C. MacCracken, 1991: The use of general 
circulation models to predict regional climate change. J. 
Climate, 4, 286-303. 
Haarsma, R.J., J.F.B. Mitchell and C.A. Senior, 1992: Tropical 
disturbances in a GCM. Climate Dyn. (In press). 
Hansen, A.R. and A. Sutera, 1990: Weather regimes in a general 
circulation model. J. Atmos. Sci., 47, 380-392. 
Hansen, J.E., G. Russell, A. Lacis, I. Fung and D. Rind., 1985: 
Climate response times: Dependence on climate sensitivity and 
ocean mixing. Science, 229, 857-859. 
Hasselmann K., R. Sausen and E. Maier-Reimer, 1992: On the 
cold-start problem in transient simulations with coupled 
ocean-atmosphere models. Max Planck Inst. Meteor. Report, 
Hamburg. (In press). 
Hibler, W.D., 1979: A dynamic-thermodynamic sea-ice model. 
J. Phys. Oceanogr, 9, 815-846. 
Hibler, W.D., 1984: Sensitivity of sea-ice models to ice and 
ocean dynamics. WCP-77, WMO, Geneva. 
Hoskins, B.J., H.H. Hsu, I.N. James, M . Masutani, P.D. 
Sardeshmukh and G.H. White, 1989: Diagnostics of the global 
atmospheric circulation based on ECMWF analyses 1979-
1989. WCRP-27, WMO/TD - No. 326, World Met. Organiz., 
Geneva, 217 pp. 
Houghton, D.D., R.G. Gallimore and L . M . Keller, 1991: 
Stability and variability in a coupled ocean-atmosphere climate 
model; Results of 100-year simulations. J. Climate, 4, 557-
577. 
Hulme, M . , 1992; A 1951-80 global land precipitation 
climatology for the evaluation of general circulation models. 
Climate Dyn., 7, 57-72. 
Ingram, W.J., C.A. Wilson and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1989: Modelling 
climate change: an assessment of sea-ice and surface albedo 
feedbacks. /. Geophys. Res., 94, 8609-8622. 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change, The IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (Eds.). 
Cambridge University Press. UK. 365pp. 
Jaeger, L., 1976; Monatskarten des Niederschlags fur die ganze 
Erde. Ber. Deut. Wetterdienstes, Nr. 139, Offenbach. 38pp. 
Karl, T.R., W.-C. Wang, M.E. Schlesinger, R.W. Knight and D. 
Portman, 1990: A method of relating general circulation model 
simulated climate to the observed local climate. Part I: 
Seasonal statistics. /. Climate, 3, 1053-1079. 
Karl, T.R., R.R. Heim and R.G. Quayle, 1991: The greenhouse 
effect in central North America: If not now. when? Science, 
251, 1058-1061. 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
131 
Katz, R.W. and B.G. Brown, 1991: Extreme events in a changing 
climate: Variability is more important than averages. Climatic 
Change. (In press). 
Kelly, K.K., A.F. Tuck and T. Davies, 1991: Wintertime 
asymmetry of upper tropospheric water content between 
Northern and Southern Hemispheres. Nature, 353, 244-247. 
Kiegwin, L.D., G.A. Jones, S.J. Lehman and E.A. Boyle, 1991: 
Deglacial meltwater discharge. North Atlantic deep circulation 
and abrupt climate change. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 16,811-
16,826. 
Kiehl, J.T. and D.L. Williamson, 1991: Dependence of cloud 
amount on horizontal resolution in the National Center for 
Atmospheric Research Community Climate Model. J. 
Geophys. Res., 96, 10955-10980. 
Kitoh, A., 1989: Persistent anomalies in the Northern 
Hemisphere of the MRI GCM-1 compared with the 
observation. Pap. Met. Geophys., 40, 83-101. 
Kitoh, A., 1991: Interannual variations in an atmospheric GCM 
forced by the 1970-1989 SST. Part I: Response of the tropical 
atmosphere. J. Met. Soc. Japan, 69, 251 -269. 
Kitoh, A., 1992: Simulated interannual variations of the Indo-
Australian monsoons. J. Met. Soc. Japan, 70 (special edition 
on Asian Monsoon). (In press). 
Konig, W., E. Kirk and R. Sausen, 1990: Sensitivity of an 
atmospheric general circulation model to interannually varying 
SST. Ann. Geophys. Sci., 8, 829-844. 
Lai, M., U. Cubasch and B.D. Santer, 1992: Potential impacts of 
global warming on monsoon climate as inferred from a 
coupled ocean-atmosphere general circulation model. 
(Unpublished manuscript). 
Latif, M., M. Flugel and J-S. Xu, 1991: An investigation of short 
range climate predictability in the tropical Pacific. Max 
Planck Inst. Meteor., Report No. 52, Hamburg. 
Lau, K.M. and C. Peng, 1990: Origin of low-frequency (intra-
seasonal) oscillations in the tropical atmosphere. Part III, 
Monsoon dynamics. J. Atmos. Sci., 47, 1443-1462. 
Lau, N.-C, S.G.H. Philander and M.J. Nath, 1991: Simulation of 
EI Niiio-Southern Oscillation phenomena with a low-resolution 
coupled general circulation model of the global ocean and 
atmosphere. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Legates, D.R. and C.J. Willmott, 1990a: Mean seasonal and 
spatial variability in global surface air temperature. Theor. 
Appl. Climatology, 41, 11-21. 
Legates, D.R. and C.J. Willmott, 1990b: Mean seasonal and 
spatial variability in gauge-corrected global precipitation. Int. 
J Climatology, 10, 111-127. 
Lemke, P., W.B. Owens and W.D. Hibler, 1990: A coupled sea-
ice mixed-layer pycnocline model for the Weddell Sea. J. 
Geophys. Res., 95, D6, 9513-9525. 
Le Trent, H., Z.X. Li, M. Foaichon and R. Butel, 1992: The 
sensitivity of the LMD GCM to greenhouse forcing: an 
analysis of the atmospheric feedback effects. (Manuscript in 
preparation) 
Levitus, S., 1982: Climatological Atlas of the World Ocean. 
NOAA Professional Paper 13, US Dept. Commerce, 
Washington, DC, USA. 173 pp. 
Li, X., Q.-C. Zeng and G.C. Yuan, 1991: Paper presented at 
Workshop of the Monsoon Numerical Experimentation Group, 
Boulder, USA. October 1991. 
Li, Z-X. and H. Le Trent, 1991: Cloud radiation feedback in a 
GCM and their dependence on cloud modelling assumptions. 
Climate Dyn. (In press). 
Lindzen, R.S., 1990: Some coolness concerning global warming. 
Bull. Amer. Met. Soc, 71, 288-299. 
Maier-Reimer, E. and U. Mikolajewicz, 1989: Experiments with 
an OGCM on the cause of the Younger-Dryas. In: 
Oceanography 1988 A. Ayala-Castanares, W. Wooster and A. 
Yanez-Arancibia (Eds.). UNAM Press, Mexico City, pp87-100. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1988: Two stable equilibria of a 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model. / Climate, 1, 841-866. 
Manabe, S., M.J. Spelman and R.J. Stouffer, 1992: Transient 
responses of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to gradual 
changes of atmospheric CO2. Part II: Seasonal response. 
J Clim., 5, 105-126. 
Manabe, S., R.J. Stouffer, M.J. Spelman and K. Bryan, 1991: 
Transient responses of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to 
gradual changes of atmospheric CO2. Part I: Annual mean 
response. J. Climate, 4, 785-818. 
Manabe S. and R.T, Wetherald, 1967: Thermal equilibrium of 
the atmosphere with a given distribution of relative humidity. 
J. Atmos. Sci, 2^, 241-259. 
Marotzke, J. and J. Willebrand, 1991: Multiple equilibria of the 
global thermohaline circulation. J. Phys. Oceanogr. (In press). 
McAvaney, B.J., R. Colman, J.F. Fraser and R.R. Dahni, 1991: 
The response of the BMRC AGCM to a doubling of C02-
BMRC Technical Memorandum No.3. (In press). 
McGregor, S.L. and K. Walsh, 1991: Summertime climate 
simulations for the Australian region using a nested model. 
Proceedings Fifth Conf. Climate Variations, Amer. Met. Soc, 
Denver, USA. 
Mearns, L.O., 1991: Changes in climate variability with global 
warming and its possible impacts. Proceedings of the First 
Nordic Interdisciplinary Conference on the Greenhouse Effect, 
16-19 September 1991, Copenhagen. (In press). 
Mearns, L.O., S.H. Schneider, S.L. Thompson and L.R. 
McDaniel, 1990: Analysis of climate variability in general 
circulation models: Comparison with observations and changes 
in variability in 2xC02 experiments. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 
20469-20490, 
Meehl, G.A., 1990: Seasonal cycle forcing of El Niiio-Southern 
Oscillation in a global, coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM. J. 
Climate, 3, 72-98. 
Meehl, G.A. and W.M. Washington, 1990: CO2 climate 
sensitivity and snow-sea-ice albedo parametrization in an 
atmospheric GCM coupled to a mixed-layer ocean model. 
Climatic Change, 16, 283-306. 
Meehl, G.A., W.M. Washington and T.R. Karl, 1991a: Low-
frequency variability and CO2 transient climate change. Part I. 
Time-averaged differences. (Unpublished manuscript) 
Meehl, G.A., G.W. Branstator and W.M. Washington, 1991b: El 
Nifio-Southern Oscillation and CO2 climate change. 
(Unpublished manuscript) 
Michaud, R. and C A , Lin, 1991: Monthly summaries of 
merchant ship surface marine observations and implications 
for climate variability studies. Climate Dyn. (In press) 
Mikolajewicz, U. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1990: Internal secular 
variability in an ocean general circulation model. Climate 
Dyn., A, 145-156. 

132 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
Miller, M.J., A.C.M. Beljaars and T.N. Palmer, 1991: The 
sensitivity of the ECMWF model to the parametrization of 
evaporation from the tropical oceans. / Climate. (In press) 
Mitchell, J.F.B., 1989: The "greenhouse effect" and climate 
change. Rev. Geophys., 11, 115-139. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., 1991: No limit to global warming? Nature, 353, 
219-220. 
Mitchell, J.F.B. and W.J. Ingram, 1992: On COj and climate: 
Mechanisms of changes in cloud. J Climate., 5, 5-21. 
Miyakoda, K. and J. Siruds, 1990: Subgrid scale physics in 1-
month forecasts. Part II: Systematic error and blocking 
forecasts. Mow. Wea. Rev., 118, 1065-1081. 
Mullan, A.B. and J.A. Renwick, 1990: Climate change in the 
New Zealand region inferred from general circulation models. 
New Zealand Meteorological Service, 142 pp. 
Murphy, J.M., 1990: Prediction of the transient response of 
climate to a gradual increase in C O 2 using a coupled ocean/ 
atmosphere model with flux correction. In: Research Activities 
in Atmospheric and Oceanic Modelling. CAS/JSC Working 
Group on Numerical Experimentation, Report No 14, 
WMO/TD No 396, 9.7-9.8. 
Nagai, T., T. Tokioka, M. Endoh and Y. Kitamura, 1991: El 
Nino-Southern Oscillation simulated in an MRI atmosphere-
ocean coupled general circulation model. (Unpublished 
manuscript) 
Neelin, J.D., M. Latif, M.A.F. AOaart, M.A. Cane, U. Cubasch, 
W.L. Gates, P.R. Gent, M. Ghil, C. Gordon, N.-C. Lau, C.R. 
Mechoso, G.A. Meehl, J.M. Oberhuber, S.G.H. Philander, P.S. 
Schopf K.R. Sperber, A. Sterl, T. Tokioka, J. Tribbia and S.E. 
Zebiak, 1992: Tropical air-sea interaction in general circulation 
models. Climate Dyn. (In press). 
Oberhuber, J.M., 1988: An atlas based on the COADS data set: 
The budgets of heat, buoyancy and turbulent kinetic energy at 
the surface of the global ocean. Max Planck Inst. Meteor., 
Report No. 15, Hamburg, 238 pp. 
Oglesby, R.J. and B. Saltzman, 1990: Sensitivity of the equi-
librium surface temperature of a GCM to systematic changes 
in atmospheric carbon dioxide. Geophy. Res. Letters, 17, 1089-
1092. 
Oort, A.H., 1983: Global Atmospheric Circulation Statistics 
1958-1973. NOAA Professional Paper 14, U.S. Dept. 
Commerce, Washington, DC, USA. 180 pp. 
Owens, W.B. and P. Lemke, 1990: Sensitivity studies with a sea-
ice mixed-layer pycnocline model in the Weddell Sea. J. 
Geophys. Res., 95, C6, 9527-9538. 
Palmer, T.N., C. Brankovic, P. Viterbo and M.J. Miller, 1991: 
Modelling interannual variations of summer monsoons. J. 
Clim. (In press). 
Park, C.K., D.M. Straus and K.M. Lau, 1990: An evaluation of 
the structure of tropical intra-seasonal oscillations in three 
general circulation models. J. Met Soc. Japan, 68, 403-417. 
Philander, S.G.H., R.C. Pacanowski, N.-C. Lau and M.J. Nath, 
1991: A simulation of the Southern Oscilladon with a global 
atmospheric GCM coupled to a high-resolution tropical Pacific 
ocean GCM. J. Clim. (In press). 
Pierrehumbert, R.T., 1991: The mixing paradigm: Towards a 
Langrangian view of the general circulation. Proceedings of 
First DEMETRA Meedng on Global Change, Chianciano 
Terme, Italy. (In press). 
Pittock, A.B., A.M. Fowler and P.H. Whetton, 1991: Probable 
changes in rainfall regimes due to the enhanced greenhouse 
effect. Proceedings of Intn'l. Hydrology and Water Resources 
Symp., Perth, Australia, October 1991. 
Portman, D.A., W.-C. Wang and T.R. Karl, 1990: A comparison 
of general circulation model and observed regional climates: 
Daily and seasonal variability. Proceedings of 14th Climate 
Diagnostics Workshop, NOAA, Washington, D.C, USA. pp 
282-288. 
Ramanathan, V. and W. Collins, 1991: Thermodynamic reg-
ulation of ocean warming by cirrus clouds deduced from the 
1987 El Nino. Nature, 351, 27-32. 
Randall, D.A., Harshvardhan and D.A. Dazlich, 1991a: Diurnal 
variability of the hydrologic cycle in a general circulation 
model. J. Atmos. Sci., 48, 40-61. 
Randall, D.A., R.D. Cess, LP. Blanchet, G.J. Boer, D.A. 
Dazlich. A.D. Del Genio, M.Deque, V. Dymnikov, V. Galin, 
S.J. Ghan, A.A. Lacis, H. Le Treut, Z.-X. Li, X.-Z. Liang, B.J, 
McAvaney, V,P. Meleshko, J.F.B. Mitchell, J.-J. Morcrette. 
G.L. Potter, L. Rikus, E. Roeckner, I.E. Royer, U. Schlese. 
D.A. Sheinin, J. Slingo, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, W.M. 
Washington, R.T. Wetherald, I. Yagai and M.-H. Zhang, 
1991b: Intercomparison and interpretation of surface energy 
fluxes in atmospheric general circulation models. J. Geophys. 
Res. (In press). 
Raper, S.B.C., T.M.L, Wigley and P.D. Jones, 1991: The effect 
of man-made sulphate aerosols on empirical estimates of the 
climate sensitivity. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Rasch, P.J. and D.L. Williamson, 1990: Computational aspects 
of moisture transport in global models of the atmosphere. 
Quart. J. Roy. Met. Soc, 116, 1071-1090. 
Rasch, P.J. and D.L. Williamson, 1991: The sensitivity of a 
general circulation model climate to the moisture transport 
formulation. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 13123-13137. 
Raval, A. and V. Ramanathan, 1989: Observational deter-
mination of the greenhouse effect. Nature, 342, 758-761. 
Rind, D., 1991: Climate variability and climate change. In: 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic Change: A Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations, Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, pp. 69-78. 
Rind, D., E.-W. Chiou, W, Chu, J, Larsen, S. Oltmans, J. Lerner, 
M.P. McCormick and L. McMaster, 1991: Positive water 
vapor feedback in climate models confirmed by satellite data. 
Nature, 349, 500-503. 
Robock, A., R.P. Turco, M.A. Harwell, T.P. Ackerman, R. 
Andressen, H.-S. Chang and M.V.K., Sivakumar, 1991: Use of 
general circulation model output in the creation of climate 
change scenarios for impact analysis. (Unpublished 
manuscript). 
Santer, B.D., U. Cubasch, K. Hasslemann, W. Bruggemann, H. 
Hoeck, E. Maier-Reimer and U. Mikolajewicz, 1991: 
Selecting components of a greenhouse gas fingerprint. In: 
Proceedings of First Demetra meeting on Climate Variability 
and Global Change, Chianciano Terme, Italy. 28 Oct - 3 Nov. 
Schlesinger, M.E., X. Jiang and R.J. Charlson, 1991: 
Implication of anthropogenic atmospheric sulphate for the 
sensitivity of the climate system. J.C. AUred.and A.S. Nichols 
(Eds.). Proceedings of Conf.Global Climate Change, Los 
Alamos, New Mexico. 21-24 October. 

B Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation 
Semtner, A.J., Jr. and R.M. Chervin, 1988: A simulation of the 
global ocean circulation with resolved eddies. J. Geophys. 
Res.,n, 15502-15522. 
Semtner, A.J., Jr. and R.M. Chervin, 1991: Ocean general 
circulation from global eddy-resolving model. (Unpublished 
manuscript). 
Senior, C A . and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1992a: COj and climate: The 
impact of cloud parametrization. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Senior, C A . and J F B Mitchell, 1992b: The dependence of 
climate sensitivity on the horizontal resolution of a GCM. 
(Unpublished manuscript). 
Shine, K.P. and A. Sinha, 1991: Sensitivity of the Earth's climate 
to height dependent changes in the water vapour mixing ratio. 
Nature, 354, 382-384. 
Somerville, R.C.J, and L.A. Remer, 1984: Cloud optical thick-
ness feedbacks in the CO2 problem. J. Geophys. Res., 89, 
9668-9672. 
Stocker, T.F. and D.G, Wright, 1991: Rapid transitions of the 
ocean's deep circulation induced by changes in surface water 
fluxes. Nature, 351, 729-732. 
Stouffer, R.J., S. Manabe and K. Bryan, 1989: Interhemispheric 
asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Nature, 342, 660-662. 
Tibaldi, S. and F. Molteni, 1990: On the operational 
predictability of blocking. Tellus, 42A, 343-365. 
Tibaldi, S., 1992: Low-frequency variability and blocking as 
diagnostic tools for global climate models. In Proceedings of 
the NATO Workshop on Prediction of Interannual Climate 
Variations. 22-26 July, 1991, Trieste, Italy. J. Shukla (Ed.). 
(Also appears in Proceedings of the Fondazione S. Paolo di 
Torino Workshop on Oceans, Climate and Man. 15-17 April, 
1991, Turin, Italy.) 
Toggweiler, J.R., K. Dixon and K. Bryan, 1989: Simulations of 
radiocarbon in a coarse-resolution world ocean model. I. 
Steady-state prebomb distributions. /. Geophys. Res., 94, 
8217-8242. 
Trenberth, K.E. and J.G. Olson, 1988: ECMWF global analyses 
1979-1986: Circulation statistics and data evaluation. NCAR 
Tech. Note TN -300 +STR, 94pp. 
Tselioudis, G., W. Rossow and D. Rind, 1991: Global patterns of 
cloud optical thickness variation with temperature. 
(Unpublished manuscript). 
Vinnikov, K. Ya. and I.B. Yeserkepova, 1991: Soil moisture: 
Empirical data and model results. J. Climate, 4, 66-79. 
Von Storch, H., E. Zorita and U. Cubasch, 199\: Downscaling of 
global climate estimates to regional scales: An application to 
Iberian rainfall in wintertime. Max Planck Inst. Meteor. 
Report No. 64, Hamburg. 
Wang, H.J., Q.C Zeng and X-H. Zhang, 1991a: Simulation of 
climate change due to doubled atmospheric CO2 using the lAP 
GCM with a mixed layer ocean. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Wang, W.-C, M.P. Dudek, X-Z. Liang and J.T. Kiehl, 1991b: 
Inadequacy of effective CO2 as a proxy in simulating the 
greenhouse effect of other radiatively active gases. Nature, 
350, 573-577. 
Wang, W.-C, M.P. Dudek and X-Z. Liang, 1992: A general 
circulation model study of the climatic effect of atmospheric 
trace gases. (Unpublished manuscript). 
133 
Washington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1989: Climate sensitivity 
due to increased CO2: Experiments with a coupled atmosphere 
and ocean general circulation model. Climate Dyn., 4, 1-38. 
Washington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1991: Characteristics of 
coupled atmosphere-ocean CO2 sensitivity experiments with 
different ocean formulations. In: Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic Change: A Critical Appraisal of Simulations and 
Observations. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 79-110. 
Washington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1992: Greenhouse 
sensitivity experiments with penetrative cumulus convection 
and tropical cirrus effects. (Unpublished manuscript). 
WCRP, 1988a: Validation of Satellite Precipitation Measure-
ments for the Global Precipitation Climatology Project 
(Report of Intnl. Workshop, Washington, DC, Nov. 1986). 
World Climate Research Programme, WCRP-1, WMO/TD -
No. 203, WMO, Geneva, 27pp. 
WCRP, 1988b: World Ocean Circulation Experiment Imple-
mentation Plan. Vol. II, Scientific Background. World Climate 
Research Programme, WCRP-12, WMO/TD - No. 243, WMO, 
Geneva, 132pp. 
WCRP, 1990a: Report of the Fourth Session of the TOGA 
Numerical Experimentation Group (Palisades, NY, USA, June 
1990). World Climate Research Programme, WCRP-50, 
WMO/TD - No. 393, WMO, Geneva, 24pp. 
WCRP, 1990b: Report of the Second Session of the Monsoon 
Numerical Experimentation Group (Kona, HI, July 1990). 
World Climate Research Programme, WCRP-49, WMO/TD -
No. 392, WMO, Geneva, 16pp. 
WCRP, 1990c: Scientific Plan for the Global Energy and Water 
Cycle Experiment. World Climate Research Programme, 
WCRP-40 WMO/TD - No. 376, WMO, Geneva, 83pp. 
WCRP, 1991: The Global Climate Observing System (Report of 
meeting, Winchester, UK, January 1991). World Climate 
Research Programme, WCRP-56, WMO/TD - No. 412, WMO, 
Geneva, 15pp. 
WCRP, 1992: The transient climate response to increasing 
greenhouse gases as simulated by four coupled atmosphere-
ocean GCMs. Report of the Steering Group on Global Climate 
Modelling (SGGCM), World Climate Research Programme, 
Geneva. (Unpublished manuscript). 
Weaver, A.J. and E.S. Sarachik, 1991: The role of mixed 
boundary conditions in numerical models of the ocean's 
climate. J. Phys. Oceanogr (Special Edition on Modelling the 
Large-scale Circulation of the Ocean). (In press). 
Weaver, A.J., E.S. Sarachik and J. Marotzke, 1991: Internal low-
frequency variability of the ocean's thermohaline circulation. 
Nature. (In press). 
Webb, D.J., P.D. Killworth, A.C. Coward and S.R. Thompson, 
1991: The FRAM Atlas of the Southern Ocean. The Natural 
Environment Research Council, Swindon, UK. 
Wigley, T.M.L., P.D. Jones, K.R. Briffa and G. Smith, 1990: 
Obtaining sub-grid-scale information from coarse-resolution 
general circulation model output. /. Geophys. Res., 95, 1943-
1953. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1990: Detection of the 
enhanced greenhouse effect on climate. In: Climate Change: 
Science, Impacts and Policy. Proceedings Second World 
Climate Conference. Eds: J. Jager and H.L. Ferguson. 
Cambridge Univ. Press, UK. pp. 231-242. 

134 
Climate Modelling, Climate Prediction & Model Validation B 
Wright, P.B., 1988: An atlas based on the COADS data set: 
Fields of mean wind, cloudiness and humidity at the surface of 
the global ocean. Max Planck Inst. Meteor. Report No. 14, 
Hamburg. 70 pp. 
Zeng, Q.-C, G.C. Yuan, W.-Q. Wang and X.-H. Zhang. 1990: 
Experiments in numerical extra-seasonal prediction of climate 
anomalies. J. Chinese Acad. Sci., 14, 10-15. 

c 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
C.K. FOLLAND, T.R. KARL, N. NICHOLLS, B.S. NYENZI, D.E. PARKER, 
K.Ya. VINNIKOV 
Contributors: 
J.K. Angell; R.C. Balling; R.G. Barry; M. Chelliah; L. Chen; J.R. Christy; 
G.R. Demaree; H.F. Diaz; Y. Ding; W.R Elliott; H. Flohn; E. Friis-Christensen; 
C. Fu; P.Ya. Groisman; W. Haeberli; J.E. Hansen; RD. Jones; D.J. Karoly; 
K. Labitzke; K. Lassen; P.J. Michaels; A.H. Oort; R.W. Reynolds; A. Robock; 
CF. Ropelewski; M.J. Salinger; R.W. Spencer; A.E. Strong; K.E. Trenberth; 
S. Tudhope; S.-W. Wang; M.N. Ward; T.M.L. Wigley; H. Wilson; FB. Wood 

 

CONTENTS 
Executive Summary 
139 
CI Introduction 
141 
C2 Palaeoclimate Variations and Change - Climates 
Mainly Before the Late Nineteenth Century 
141 
C3 The Modern Instrumental Record 
142 
C3.1 Surface Temperature Variations and Change 
142 
C3.1.1 Hemispheric and Global Land Temperature 
142 
C3.1.2 Hemispheric and Global Sea Surface 
Temperature 
143 
C3.1.2.1 Ship data 
143 
C3.1.2.2 Reliability of the SST data 
145 
C3.1.2.3 Coral reef bleaching as an indicator 
of SST extremes 
145 
C3.1.3 Land and Sea Combined 
146 
C3.1.4 Worldwide Regional Temperature Anomaly 
Patterns 
148 
C3.1.5 Changes in the Diurnal Range of Temperature 151 
C3.2 Precipitation and Evaporation VariaUons and 
Changes 
152 
C3.2.I Precipitation Over Land 
152 
C3.2.2 Precipitation Over the Oceans 
153 
C3.2.3 Evaporation from the Ocean Surface 
153 
C3.3 Tropospheric and Lower Stratospheric Variations 
and Change 
154 
C3.3.I Temperature 
154 
C3.3.1.1 Radiosonde data 
154 
C3.3.1.2 Satellite microwave sounder data 
156 
C3.3.1.3 Comparisons of satellite microwave, 
radiosonde & surface temperature data 
156 
C3.3.2 Atmospheric Moisture 
157 
C3.4 Variations and Changes in the Cryosphere 
158 
C3.4.1 Snow Cover 
158 
C3.4.2 Mountain Glaciers 
158 
C3.4.3 Polar Ice Caps 
160 
C3.4.4 Sea-Ice 
160 
C3.5 Variations and Changes in Atmospheric 
Circulation 
162 
C4 Detection and Attribution of Climatic Change 
162 
C4.I The Greenhouse Effect 
162 
C4.2 Other Factors 
162 
C4.2.1 Solar Influences 
162 
C4.2.2 Bi-decadal Temperature Variations 
163 
C4.2.3 "Abrupt" Climatic Changes 
163 
C4.2.4 Aerosols 
163 
C4.2.4.I Man-made aerosols 
163 
C4.2.4.2 Volcanic aerosols 
164 
C4.2.5 Changes in Land Surface Characteristics 
164 
C4.2.6 Deep Ocean Heat Storage 
164 
C5 Concluding Remarks 
165 
References 
165 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
1. Globally-averaged land and ocean surface temperatures for 
1990 and 1991 have been similar to those of the warmest years of 
the 1980s and continue to be warm relative to the rest of the 
record. Trends show, however, regional and seasonal diversity 
and not every region shows warming. 
2. Continuing research into the nineteenth century ocean temper-
ature record has not significantly altered our calculation of surface 
temperature warming of 0.45+0.15°C since the late nineteenth 
century. 
3. In those land areas for which we have adequate data on 
maximum and minimum temperatures (approximately 25% of the 
global land mass), the observed warming over the past several 
decades is primarily due to an increase of the daily minimum 
(night-time) temperatures with little contribution from the daily 
maximum (daytime) temperatures. The source of the greater 
warming at night relative to that by day is not clear but could be 
related to enhanced cloudiness, increasing concentrations of man-
made sulphur-based aerosols, increasing concentrations of 
greenhouse gases and possibly to residual urbanization effects in 
the record. 
4. A new analysis of radiosonde data confirms that mid-
tropospheric warming has occurred over the past several decades. 
Combining information from the two available analyses, the 
radiosonde data show a mid-tropospheric warming at the rate of 
0.2rC/decade in the Northern Hemisphere and 0.23°C/decade in 
the Southern Hemisphere over the period 1964-1991. By contrast, 
the new analysis of upper tropospheric temperature changes 
shows less cooling than estimated in the 1990 Scientific 
Assessment. However, time-varying biases known to exist in 
radiosonde temperature instruments have yet to be quantified. 
5. Microwave Sounding Unit (MSU) data provide a more 
complete satellite-based global dataset for tropospheric and 
stratospheric mean temperatures, but the record is still too short 
for a meaningful assessment of trends. MSU data show less 
warming in the mid-troposphere than do the radiosonde data 
since 1979, though a full analysis of inhomogeneities in the MSU 
data that might affect trends has not been done. Because of 
volcanic eruptions, the MSU data show substantial 1-2 year time-
scale stratospheric (100-50 hPa) warmings exceeding TC on a 
global average. However, after combining information from the 
two available analyses, the longer global radiosonde record 
shows a lower stratospheric cooling at the rate of -0.45°C/decade 
over the period 1964-1991. 
6. The recent eruption of Mount Pinatubo injected two to three 
times as much sulphur dioxide (SO2) into the stratosphere as did 
the El Chichon eruption. The tropical stratosphere warmed by 
several degrees in response but is now cooling again. A global 
surface and tropospheric cooling of several tenths of a degree is 
possible over the next year or two due to this eruption, the 
amount depending on the counterbalancing warming influence of 
the current El Niiio event in the tropical Pacific and other natural 
influences. However, if any cooling occurs, it will be short-lived 
compared with time-scales of greenhouse-gas-induced climate 
change. 
7. Precipitation variations of practical significance have been 
documented in a number of regions on many time and space 
scales. Owing to data coverage and inhomogeneity problems, how-
ever, we cannot yet say anything new about global-scale changes. 
8. Evidence continues to support an increase in water vapour in 
the tropical lower troposphere since the mid-1970s, though the 
magnitude is uncertain due to data deficiencies. An increase is 
consistent with the observed increase in lower tropospheric 
temperature. However, we cannot say whether the changes are 
larger than natural variability. 
9. Northern Hemisphere snow cover continues its tendency to be 
less extensive than that observed during the 1970s when reliable 
satellite observations began. Its reduction relates well to 
simultaneous increases of extratropical Northern Hemisphere 
land air temperature. 
10. No systematic change can be identified in global or 
hemispheric sea-ice cover since 1973 when satellite measure-
ments began. 
11. Some influence of solar changes on climate on the time-scale 
of several sunspot cycles is plausible but remains unproven. 
12. It is still not possible to attribute with high confidence all, or 
even a large part of, the observed global warming to the enhanced 
greenhouse effect. On the other hand, it is not possible to refute 

140 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
the claim that greenhouse-gas-induced climate change has 
contributed substantially to the observed vi'arming. The findings 
that increasing concentrations of man-made tropospheric aerosols 
have tended to cool the climate and that decreased lov/er 
stratospheric ozone is also likely to have a cooling effect in the 
troposphere, help to bring the observed warming into better 
accord with model estimates of the warming effect of increasing 
greenhouse gases. 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
141 
CI Introduction 
We present a supplement to Section 7 (Folland et al, 
1990b - hereafter referred to as S7) "Observed Climate 
Variations and Change" of the 1990 IPCC Scientific 
Assessment (IPCC, 1990). It should be read in conjunction 
with S7 to obtain a fuller discussion of observed climate 
variations and changes. The main purpose of the 
supplement is to introduce new findings and to update 
important time-series and maps contained in S7 with 
emphasis on large spatial scales and recent satellite 
evidence. Consistent with this approach, most of the 
references contained in Section C are confined to those 
published since 1989 or to those which are in press. Some 
work on the detection and attribution of climate change is 
also briefly reported, a subject previously contained in 
Section 8 (S8) of the Scientific Assessment "Detection of 
the Greenhouse Effect in the Observations" (Wigley and 
Bamett, 1990). Although mainly discussed in Section A of 
the present report, we also mention recent findings relevant 
to interpretation of the climate record in terms of 
"external" forcing factors like solar variations and 
tropospheric and volcanic aerosols. Discussion of the 
surface cooling effect of recent lower stratospheric ozone 
reductions is confined to Section A, as there is no unam-
biguous observational data available to confirm this. 
C2 Palaeoclimate Variations and Change - Climates 
Mainly Before the Late Nineteenth Century 
Several recent palaeoclimate studies are mentioned here 
for their probable importance in estimating natural low-
frequency climate variability. Note that each series is 
limited to sampling a small area and most of the series are 
biased towards measuring one or two seasons. (When 
interpreting this Section, the reader may wish to refer 
forward to the discussion of the instrumental temperature 
record in Section C3.1). 
A study of one thousand years of tree-ring data (Cook et 
al, 1991) confirms a strong twentieth century warming of 
summer temperature in Tasmania following a pronounced 
cold period in the early 1900s, though the warming is still 
within the range of natural climate variability experienced 
over the past 1000 years. The strong twentieth century 
warming is consistent with New Zealand tree ring 
evidence (Norton et al, 1989) and large glacial retreats 
there since 1860 (Salinger, 1990). However, no allowance 
has been made in these and similar studies for the possible 
fertilization effect of twentieth century increases in carbon 
dioxide (CO2) on tree growth, neglect of which might lead 
to an overestimate of recent warming. 
Oxygen isotope measurements from the northern 
Antarctic Peninsula have been interpreted as evidence of 
warmer temperatures during the nineteenth century 
compared with the twentieth century (Aristarain et al. 
1990). However, the isotope/temperature link is weak both 
physically and statistically (Peel, 1992), and accumulation 
rate changes, which are more directly related to in situ 
temperatures, point to cooler conditions in the nineteenth 
century (Jones et al, 1992). Fragmentary evidence from 
expedition reports also points to cooler conditions during 
the first decade of the twentieth century (Jones, 1990). 
A recent study of documentary evidence in China 
(Wang and Wang, 1991; Wang et al, 1991) reveals that 
the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries were the coldest 
periods there in the last 500 years (Figure C l a and lb). 
Finally, Briffa et al (1992) have expanded the analysis 
presented in an earlier paper (Briffa et al, 1990) where 
they use tree-ring data to reconstruct summer temperatures 
for northern Fennoscandia since AD 500. Their new analysis 
is designed to highlight greater than century time-scale 
variability which was largely removed by the analysis 
procedure they used previously. They find good evidence 
in this region for a "Medieval Climatic Optimum" (S7, p 
202) around 870-1110, another warm period around 1360-
1570, and a "Littie Ice Age" (S7, p202) period around 
1570-1750. Because of the pronounced multidecadal 
temperature fluctuations in their data, Briffa et al (1990) 
suggest that greenhouse-gas-induced summer warming in 
Fennoscandia might not be detectable until after AD 2030. 
A considerable number of instrumental records, mainly 
but not exclusively in Europe, extend back prior to the late 
nineteenth century, such as the De Bilt temperature record 
in the Netherlands, to 1706 (van Engelen and Nellestijn, 
1992) and the Central England temperature record in 
England, to the late seventeenth century with homogenized 
daily values back to 1772 (Parker et al, 1992). Such 
records could be combined with palaeoclimate data to 
I.Or 
1350 1400 1450 1500 1650 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900 1960 2000 
Year 
Figure CI: (a) Variations ("anomalies") of air temperature in 
East China (approximately 25°-35°N, 110°-122°E) since 1380, 
relative to 1880-1979, based on documentary evidence. The 
smoothed curve is a 50-year running average. Decades colder 
than the 1380-1879 average are shaded, (b) As (a) but for North 
China (35°-45°N, 110°-120°E). From Wang and Wang (1991). 

142 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
provide a more detailed history of climate back to the 
eighteenth century (Bradley et ai, 1991). Thus, Lough 
(1991) has combined observed rainfall and river flow data 
with data on coastal coral growth to provide a proxy 
sununer rainfall record for Queensland back to 1735. 
C3 The Modern Instrumental Record 
C3.1 Surface Temperature Variations and Change 
C3.1.1 Hemispheric and Global Land Temperature 
There are three independendy derived, but overlapping 
data sets, those of Hansen and Lebedeff (1988), Jones 
(1988) and Vinnikov et al. (1990). These show noticeable 
differences (Eisner and Tsonis, 1991a), attributed to 
differences in the amounts of raw data (especially in the 
early parts of the record, for which the Jones data set is 
more comprehensive than the other two), from the methods 
used to ensure homogeneity of individual station records, 
and from methods used for spatial averaging. Jones et al. 
(1991) discuss differences between the data sets in detail. 
Nonetheless, the average intercorrelation between the 
global annual temperature anomalies from all three sets 
between 1881 and 1990 is 0.94. 
The Jones hemispheric land air temperature series are 
Figure CI: Land air temperature anomalies, relative to 1951-1980. Annual values from Jones (1988, updated). Smoothed curves: thick 
solid line = Jones (1988, updated) (1861-1991); dashed line = Hansen and Lebedeff (1988, updated) (1870-1991); thin solid line = 
Vinnikov et al. (1990, updated) (1861-1990 NH and 1881-1990 SH). (a) Northern Hemisphere; (b) Southem Hemisphere. 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
143 
extended to 1991 in Figures C2a and 2b (vertical bars 
show annual Jones data) and the smoothed Hansen and 
Lebedeff and Vinnikov et al. series are extended to 1991 
and 1990 (data from the original authors). The Jones data 
differ slightly from the data used in S7 because an 
improved method was used to convert 1951-70 anomalies 
to 1951-80 anomalies. Smoothed curves in this 
supplement, except where otherwise described, use a 21 
point binomial low pass filter as mentioned in paiagraph 1 
on p207 of S7. In the Jones data set, 1990 was the warmest 
year in the Northern Hemisphere record. In the Southem 
Hemisphere, 1991 appears to have been the warmest, 
because of anomalous warmth in Antarctica, but data for 
some areas are incomplete. For both hemispheres, the 
1980s was the warmest decade in the entire record. 
Warming due to urbanization may still affect these 
results but is probably not serious (S7, p 209). However, a 
physically-based analysis of the urbanization problem is 
still lacking; a recently published simplified physical 
model of urbanization warming indicates that the problem 
may be more coinplex than hitherto thought (Oke et al., 
1991). Jones et al. (1990) have compared rural-station 
temperature data sets over three large regions, European 
parts of the Soviet Union, eastern Australia and eastern 
China, with widely used hemispheric data sets. When 
combined with earlier analyses for the contiguous United 
States, the regions are representative of about 20% of the 
land area of the Northern Hemisphere and 10% of the 
Southern Hemisphere and contain some of the most 
heavily populated areas. They indicate that urbanization 
influences have yielded, on average, a warming of less 
than 0.05°C during the twentieth century over the global 
land. The reasons for this result are only partly understood 
but, for the Jones data set, they indicate that the station-by-
station quality control procedures used were fairly 
successful. 
C3.1.2 Hemispheric and Global Sea Surface Temperature 
C3.1.2.1 Ship data 
In S7 two Sea Surface Temperature (SST) analyses were 
used: those of Bottomley et al. (1990), up to 1989 and 
those of Farmer et al. (1989) up to 1986, the latter now 
discussed in Jones et al. (1991). Here we show an updated 
time-series that uses the Jones et al. data and a new U K 
Meteorological Office analysis to 1991. This new analysis 
combines the Bottomley et al (1990) SST data base with 
some Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set 
(COADS) SST values. The COADS (Woodruff et al, 
1987) holds substantially more surface 
marine 
observations than does the data base created by Bottomley 
et al (1990) but both sets contain unique data (Woodruff, 
1990). The COADS were used to fill missing values in the 
fields of monthly Bottomley et al (1990) SST data, mostiy 
in the eastern half of the Pacific. Figure C3a shows the 
percentage of ocean covered by the new data and by the 
Bottomley et al. (1990) data. The new data reflect a 
substantial increase in coverage between the late 1870s 
and around 1910. Note that the new U K Meteorological 
Office SST data coverage exceeds that of the COADS. 
Improved instrumental corrections that use better models 
of heat transfers affecting wooden and canvas buckets 
have been used in the new U K Meteorological Office 
analysis as discussed in Folland (1991) and Folland and 
Parker (1992). The average magnitudes of these 
corrections, which vary geographically, with season and 
through time, are near 0.3°C (canvas buckets) and O.TC 
(wooden buckets). Although these values are small 
compared with the uncertainty in individual observations 
(Trenberth et al, 1992) they are important when calcu-
lating the averages of thousands or more observations. 
Another revision, that removes a little of the 
disagreement between Bottomley et al (1990) and Farmer 
et al. (1989) data that was discussed in S7, is based on 
further evidence that wooden buckets may have been in 
predominant use at the beginning of the record. It is now 
assumed that 100% of buckets were wooden in 1856, the 
percentage linearly decreasing to 0% in 1920 (Folland and 
Parker, 1992). This transition from wooden to canvas 
buckets is nearly the same as that assumed by Farmer et al. 
(1989). However, since these authors assumed zero 
corrections for wooden buckets, appreciable differences 
between the two corrected data sets remain. 
Although we feel justified in presenting a single best 
estimate of hemispheric and global SST changes since 
1861 based on an average of the Jones et al and U K 
Meteorological Office data (Figures C3b-d), we also show 
the smoothed curves for each data set. The new best 
estimate hemispheric and global SST curves generally lie 
between the continuous and dashed curves shown in 
Figures 7.8a and 7.8b of S7 (see note about Figure 7.8b in 
italics at the end of this sub-section). The addition of more 
Pacific data from the C O A D S in the late nineteenth 
century to the Bottomley et al (1990) values has shghtiy 
increased the global average temperature in the U K 
Meteorological Office data set before 1900, and it remains 
warmer then than the Jones et al data, Imgely owing to the 
positive wooden bucket corrections. Despite these 
"improvements", the uncertainty in the levels of nineteenth 
and early twentieth century SST due to data biases is 0.1 °C 
at the least, the typical difference between the U K 
Meteorological Office and Jones et al (1991) corrections 
at that time. This uncertainty increases markedly when the 
effects of data gaps are included. 
Modern SST data may also contain non-trivial biases 
(Folland et al, 1992), but only if these have changed 
significantiy in recent decades would they affect trends. 
The fact that the many regional SST and night marine air 
temperature graphs shown in Bottomley et al (1990) track 

(%) SUE900 JO e a j v 
(O,) A|BUIOUV 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
145 
each other well in recent decades indicates that this is 
unlikely to be a serious problem. 
Taken at face value, the increases of global mean SST 
between the periods 1861-1880, 1881-1900, 1901-1920, 
1921-1940 and 1941-1960, and the single decade 1981-90, 
are now 0.43, 0.38, 0.50, 0.35 and 0.19°C respectively. 
This result highlights the irregularity of the warming 
which is largely concentrated in the periods 1920-1940 and 
1975-1990 with sharp cooling between about 1900 and 
1910. 
Recently, Bates and Diaz (1991) have shown that even 
the present coverage of ship observations in the southern 
oceans south of 40°S is insufficient to adequately define 
the annual cycle of SST. Not surprisingly, therefore, SST 
anomaly time-series show that the Bottomley et al (1990) 
1951-80 climatology contains biases in parts of this area 
where very sparse data were blended with an earlier 
climatology. Though these biases probably do not much 
affect estimates of trends (Section C3.1.2.2), considerable 
uncertainty remains in Southern flemisphere SST and SST 
anomaly estimates. 
Due to a printing error. Figures 7.8b and 7.10b in 87 of 
IPCC 1990 referring to Southern Hemisphere temp-
eratures were transposed. Thus, as printed. Figure 7.10b 
(p213) really shows Southern Hemisphere SST only and 
Figure 7.8b (p210) shows combined Southern Hemisphere 
SST and land air temperature. 
C3.1.2.2 Reliability of the SST data 
The causes and sizes of random errors in SST data have 
been studied by Trenberth et al (1992) and Folland et al. 
(1992). They deduce that over many parts of the global 
ocean the signal of inter-monthly temperature variations is 
inadequately resolved even on large spatial scales. 
However, Folland et al. (1992) show that for seasonal 
averages over ocean basins, with the exception of areas 
south of 40°S, the resolved climatic signal is at least twice 
as great as the noise. For climate change and variability 
studies, there is an urgent need to extend these results to 
the annual, decadal, and century time-scales. "Frozen grid" 
tests show that estimates of global SST anomalies are only 
slightly more sensitive to changes in coverage than are the 
combined SST and land data. The latter (see S7, Figure 
7.10d) show a surprisingly low sensitivity to the large 
changes in data coverage. But, as mentioned in S7, "frozen 
grid" tests do not adequately include the influence of those 
regions for which data has always been absent or very 
sparse, such as much of the Southern Ocean. 
The SST data used in this document and in S7 are based 
on in situ observations from ships and buoys and, for the 
C O A D S , additional observations of 
near-surface 
temperatures from bathythermographs and recent data 
from the USA's Coastal-Marine Automated Network. 
During the past decade a new SST analysis has been 
created by blending data from satellite-borne infrared 
radiometers, for regions without in situ data (about 20% of 
the oceans), with in situ data elsewhere (Reynolds and 
Marsico, 1992). This blended analysis includes optimum 
interpolation (Gandin, 1963), takes explicit account of the 
presence of sea-ice and seems to successfully remove the 
temporally varying biases in satellite SST data relative to 
in situ data (Folland et al., 1992). The identification of the 
satellite SST biases has resulted in a debate about the 
accuracy of the operational algorithms used to convert 
satellite radiance values to SST in the presence of 
atmospheric water vapour, cloudiness and episodes of 
global or regional contamination by volcanic or other 
aerosols (McClain et al, 1985; Strong, 1989; Reynolds et 
al., 1989; Bates and Diaz, 1991). 
A comparison between the U K Meteorological Office in 
situ SST data and the Reynolds and Marsico data reveals a 
high correlation (r=0.94) between global, seasonally 
averaged anomalies during 1982-1990, but with a 
systematic difference of O.TC. The difference originates 
mostly in the Southern Hemisphere. The U K data are 
0.16°C (0.03°C) warmer in the Southern (Northern) 
Hemisphere with a 0.85 (0.95) correlation of the seasonal 
anomalies. These differences originate near ice edges 
where they are much larger, and can be traced mainly to 
the fact that the Reynolds and Marsico analysis fixes SST 
at ice edges at -1.8°C, the average freezing point of sea 
water, while the U K analysis does not do this. The effects 
of this difference in methodology influence the analyses 
for some distance from the ice edges. Despite the differ-
ences, the interannual variability and the trends in the two 
data sets are very similar because the data bases contain 
much data common to both. 
C3.1.2.3 
Coral reef bleaching as an indicator of SST 
extremes 
Increased reports of the bleaching of coral reefs may 
indicate higher SST values in many tropical regions over 
the last decade. The health of the coral reefs widely found 
through the shallow parts of tropical oceans is known to be 
sensitive to a number of factors, one of which is sea 
temperature in the top few tens of metres of the ocean 
(D'Elia et al., 1991). Corals can tolerate a range of 
temperature without damage; outside this range damage is 
often exhibited as "bleaching". Bleaching occurs when 
green algae on which the coral depend are expelled from 
the cells of the coral when the latter are stressed. The 
tolerated temperature range varies with the species of 
coral, different species being adapted to given local 
conditions (D'Elia et al, 1991). Thus bleaching can be a 
manifestation of a sea temperature that is extreine for the 
locality. However, local high temperatures may act with 
other stresses, such as pollution, to produce bleaching 
(Roberts, 1991). Recently many coral reef scientists have 

146 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
become convinced that bleaching due to elevated sea 
temperatures has become more common in the tropical 
oceans in the last decade (Brown, 1990; Glynn, 1991) 
though part of the increase may be due simply to better 
monitoring. 
Several of the most severe events occurred in the 
tropical east Pacific and were related to the very strong 
1982-1983 E l Nino warming event when SST values 
increased several degrees above average values in this 
region. One hydrocoral species suffered a reduction of 
range, and another was probably made extinct (Glynn and 
de Weerdt, 1991). Since that time several other bleaching 
events have occurred, though not all can be related 
convincingly to available SST data. A more detailed 
comparison of coral reef bleaching and historical SST data 
is needed. 
C3.1.3 Land and Sea Combined 
Figures C4a-c show land data from the Jones analysis 
combined with the average of SST data from the new U K 
Meteorological Office analysis and the Jones et al. (1991) 
SST analysis for the Northern Hemisphere, Southern 
Hemisphere and globe respectively. The vertical bars are 
annual values. The method of combining the land and 
ocean data here is slightly different from that used in S7 
(the latter is discussed in Folland, 1990). In Figures C4a-c 
land and ocean values have been combined more 
accurately and allow (approximately) for the relative areas 
of land and sea in every analysed grid box for every 
month. Figures C4a-c also show, as thinner lines, the 
analyses published in S7, for comparison. Values in the 
nineteenth century are very close to those shown in S7, and 
probably indistinguishably different allowing for 
uncertainties. The net effect of the changes is to make the 
long-term warming trends assessed in each hemisphere 
more nearly equal, with the Southern Hemisphere 
relatively marginally warmer in the late nineteenth 
century, especially around 1880, and the Northern 
Hemisphere unchanged. Compared to values shown in S7, 
larger differences in the last few years result from the 
addition of the warm years 1990 and 1991. S7, p212, cited 
increases of, or nominal linear trends in, temperature 
between various periods over the last century and a very 
recent period. A variety of warming rates occur, especially 
in the Northern Hemisphere. Here we note that the overall 
temperature increases over the globe. Northern and 
Southern Hemispheres between the twenty year period 
1881-1900 and the latest decade 1981-90 are 0.47, 0.47 
and 0.48°C respectively. This provides an estimate of the 
overall warming seen in the more reliable part of the 
instrumental record. Comparable values shown in S7 
where the decade 1980-89 was compared with the twenty 
year period 1881-1900 were 0.45, 0.42 and 0 . 4 8 ^ 
respectively. To illustrate the small effect of including the 
least reliable earlier data, the estimated changes between 
1861-80 and 1981-90 are 0.48, 0.42 and 0.56°C respec-
tively. Differences between the two sets of changes should 
be regarded as being due to noise in the data. The 
difficulty of meaningfully calculating linear trends in these 
data is illustrated by Demar6e (1990). He shows that the 
Jones Northern and Southern Hemisphere land air 
temperature records (Figures C2a and C2b) show a 
statistically significant "abrupt" change in their average 
values around 1920, though this may also reflect a rapid 
change in trend evident at that time (Section C4.2.3). This 
step-like character of the land-based temperature record 
was noted earlier by Kelly et ai (1985). Returning to the 
combined data in Figure C4, the global mean warming that 
commenced around 1975 represents an equally sudden 
change in trend from about zero to a rapid warming. 
Figure C4d shows the coverage of the new combined 
data plotted against that used in S7. The increase reflects 
the increase in the U K Meteorological Office SST data 
coverage shown in Figure C3a. Notable is the strengthened 
representation of the very strong El Nino warm event of 
1877-78 which, being sampled over a greater area, has had 
a greater effect on the hemispheric and global series. 
1990 and 1991 are the warmest years in the combined 
land/ocean temperature record, while the 1980s is the 
warmest calendar decade. El Nino events are known to 
cause warming on a global and hemispheric average (S7, 
p227), but there was no clear El Nino event in 1990 in 
contrast to a pronounced event in 1986-7 and a very strong 
event in 1982-3. The reasons for the warmth of 1990 must 
mainly be sought elsewhere. However, 1991 did contain a 
pronounced El Nino event. It is known that atmospheric 
circulation anomalies played a part in 1990; a strong 
westerly atmospheric circulation over the Northern 
Hemisphere carried unusually warm air into Northern 
Eurasia in early 1990. Reduced snow cover (Section 
C3.4.I) is also likely to have contributed to the warmth, 
especially in March 1990, which was by far the warmest 
month in the entire Northern Hemisphere land anomaly 
record (Parker and Jones, 1991). Note that the ranking of 
individual years in the surface record is not exactly the 
same as for tropospheric data (see Section C3.3.1). 
The difference in warming rate in recent decades in the 
two hemispheres is discussed in the context of possible 
aerosol and other effects in Section A and Section C4.2. 
The relative temperature anomalies are quantified in Table 
CI. Data for 1941-50 have not been included because of 
poor data coverage in the Second World War (see also 
Figure C4d). The difference in mean decadal anomaly 
changed markedly between 1946-55 and 1971-80, 
corresponding to a relative warming of the Southern 
Hemisphere compared to the Northern of nearly 0.3°C 
between these decades. This relative warmth of the 
Southem Hemisphere was greatest around 1975-1980 and 




CAPTIONS TO FIGURES A, B, C, D and E 
Figure C5 (A): Worldwide annual surface temperature anomaly 
patterns, 1981-1990, relative to 1951-1980. Sea surface temperature 
data are an updated blend of Bottomley et al. (1990) and COADS. 
Land air temperatures provided by Jones (1988, updated). A minimum 
of 6 three-month seasons (Jan-Mar, etc.) with at least one month's 
data was required in a 5° latitude x longitude box in each half-decade, 
in which there had also to be at least 3 years with data; otherwise the 
box was treated as missing. Seasonal anomalies were averaged within 
each half-decade, then the two half-decadal anomahes were averaged. 
See legend for contour details. 
Figure C5 (B): As Figure C5(A) but for Dec-Feb. A minimum of 3 
seasons with at least one month's data was required in a 5° 
latitude x longitude box in each half-decade; otherwise the box was 
treated as missing. 
Figure C5 (C): As Figure C5(B) but for Mar-May. 
Figure C5 (D): As Figure C5(B) but for June-Aug. 
Figure C5 (E): As Figure C5(B) but for Sept-Nov. 
iv 


J48 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
Table CI: Decadal mean surface temperature anomalies relative to 1951-80 in each hemisphere since 1946-55 
Decade 
Northern Hemisphere 
Southern Hemisphere 
Difference 
(1) 
(2) 
(l)-(2) 
1946-55 
0.04 
-0.12 
0.16 
1951-60 
0.05 
-0.06 
0.11 
1956-65 
0.03 
-0.03 
0.06 
1961-70 
0.01 
-0.03 
0.04 
1966-75 
-0.05 
0.01 
-0.06 
1971-80 
-0.05 
0.06 
-0.11 
1976-85 
0.05 
0.15 
-0.10 
1981-90 
0.19 
0.25 
-0.06 
the mean difference in anomalies in the last five years has 
returned to near zero. (The average anomalies for the three 
non-overlapping decades during 1951-80 are close to, but 
not exactly, zero due to progressive changes in data 
coverage.) 
Considering the most recent and warmest decade, the 
sub-period 1986-1990 was warmer at the surface than 
1981-85, though spatial pattems of temperature anomalies 
were, in the annual average, similar for each 5-year period. 
Positive anomalies in 1981-1990 were noticeably larger 
during December to May than in the rest of the year in 
both hemispheres (Figure C5). The El Niiio-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) had a clear effect on the interannual 
variability of the global temperature, but does not explain 
all the observed patterns nor the fact that 1986-90 was 
warmer globally than 1981-1985, especially as 1986-1990 
included the strong Pacific cold or "La Nina" event of 
1988-1989. A cooling influence from the 1982 eruption of 
El Chichon may have affected the first five year period, 
though it is difficult to detect because of the strength of the 
contemporaneous 1982-83 El Niiio. 
C3.1.4 
Worldwide Regional 
Temperature 
Anomaly 
Patterns 
The spatial pattern of temperature anomalies at the Earth's 
surface for the decade 1981-1990, relative to a 1951-1980 
climatology, is shown in Figure C5a. This is similar to that 
for 1980-1989 shown in Figure 7.13(c) of S7 and uses the 
U K Meteorological Office SST analysis for its ocean 
component. The decadal mean anomaly was assessed to be 
0.22°C. Inclusion of COADS data has improved coverage 
over the Southern Ocean slightly. This ocean shows 
contrasting areas of positive and negative anomalies which 
may partly reflect noise in the Bottomley et al. (1990) 
1951-80 SST climatology there. Some of the other local 
signals may also be affected by noise but it is not possible 
to quantify these problems yet (see Section C3.1.2.2 and 
Trenberth et al. (1992)). Notable are the warmth over the 
middle and high latitude continents in the Northern 
Hemisphere, the cool anomalies over the north-west 
extratropical Atlantic and the predominant warmth of the 
Southern Hemisphere where data exist. Also shown 
(Figures C5b-e) are the anomalies for the constituent three-
month seasons. The boreal winter map is an average from 
Dec 1980-Feb 1981 to Dec 1989-Feb 1990, boreal spring 
for Mar 1981-May 1981 to Mar 1990-May 1990, etc. 
Notable features are: 
(1) 
Dec-Feb - very large areas of positive anomalies 
exceeding T C over the high latitude Northern 
Hemisphere continents, with centres over 2°C, 
separated by notably negative anomalies over the 
northwestern North Atlantic, including the area 
around south Greenland, and also the mid-latitude 
North Pacific. The USA shows negative anomalies 
in the south, with positive anomalies near Canada. 
Positive anomalies over the Antarctic Peninsula are 
generally near 0.5°C. The global mean anomaly was 
0.26°C (the most positive seasonal mean anomaly). 
(2) 
Mar-May - a broadly similar pattern but with a 
smaller area of high latitude Northern Hemisphere 
anomalies exceeding T C and positive anomalies 
over North Africa. Positive anomalies over the 
Antarctic Peninsula are stronger than in December to 
February. USA anomalies are positive away from the 
southern states, notably over the Rockies with values 
mostly exceeding 1°C there. The global mean 
anomaly was 0.24°C. 
(3) 
June-Aug - a broadly similar pattern to spring except 
that both negative and positive anomalies are seen 
over high latitude Asia, giving a small overall 
positive anomaly. Positive anomalies over the 
Antarctic Peninsula are at their strongest, averaging 
around 2°C. Anomalies over the USA are mixed but 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
]4g 
(a) 
Figure C5: (a) Worldwide annual surface temperature anomaly patterns, 1981-1990, relative to 1951-1980. Sea surface temperature 
data are an updated blend of Bottomley et al. (1990) and COADS. Land air temperatures provided by Jones (1988, updated). A 
minimum of 6 three-month seasons (Jan-Mar, etc.) with at least one month's data was required in a 5° latitude x longitude box in each 
half-decade, in which there had also to be at least 3 years with data; otherwise the box was treated as missing. Seasonal anomalies were 
averaged within each half-decade, then the two half-decadal anomalies were averaged. Vertical hatching >0.5°C, stippling >rc. 
horizontal hatching <-0.5°C, cross-hatching <-VC. Also shown in the colour section. (Captions for (b) and (c) continued on next page.) 

150 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
d) 
Figure C5: (b) As Figure C5a but for Dec-Feb. A minimum of 3 seasons with at least one month's data was required in a 5° latitude 
by longitude box in each half-decade; otherwise the box was treated as missing; (c) As Figure C5b but for Mar-May; (d) As Figure 
C5b but for June-Aug; (e) As Figure C5b but for Sept-Nov. Also shown in the colour secdon. 
positive on average away from southern-most states. 
The global mean anomaly was 0.20°C. 
(4) 
Sept-Nov - major differences from summer are the 
negative anomalies over Alaska and most of Canada, 
widely cooler than -O.S'C. High latitude Asian 
anomalies are generally positive with a pattern rather 
like that of spring, but weaker. Antarctic Peninsula 
anomalies are weak. USA anomalies are weak and 
average to near zero. The global mean anomaly was 
0.17°C (the least positive seasonal mean anomaly). 
New land temperature series from the South Pacific and 
eastern Australia show that the 1980s was the warmest 
decade on record (Salinger and CoUen, 1991; Plummer, 
1991). Temperature trends in the South Pacific come from 
sites where there can be little question of an urban 
influence. Many records are from island or remote rural 
sites. Land surface temperatures in eastern Australia and 
the South-West Pacific west of the South Pacific 
Convergence Zone (SPCZ) increased from the 1940s until 
1990 by between 0.5° and 1.0°C. The area east of the 
SPCZ in the central South Pacific showed a temperature 
decline between 1945 and 1970, with a rapid temperature 
increase during the 1980s. 
Temperature changes in recent decades in China have 
been regionally and seasonally specific (Chen et al, 1991). 
Thus the 1980s were up to T C warmer than the 1951-1980 
climatology in Northern China, but up to 0.5° colder in a 
few locations in Southern China. 
Note that in Figure 7.13(c) of S7 (IPCC, 
1990), 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
151 
Antarctic air temperature anomalies were erroneously 
reduced to one tenth of their true value; this has been 
rectified in Figure C5. The main effect of this error was 
virtually to eliminate large positive anomalies (up to 1°C) 
over the Antarctic Peninsula. Anomalies 
were small 
elsewhere over Antarctica. 
C3.1.5 Changes in the Diurnal Range of Temperature 
S7 (p217) provided evidence that maximum temperatures 
in the USA, south-eastern Australia and China remained 
nearly stationary over the past several decades, but an 
increase of minimum temperatures was quite apparent. 
Karl et al. (1991b) have extended these time-series to 
include the USSR and have updated the Chinese and USA 
series (Figure C6). Over the last four decades, the results 
indicate large increases of daily minimum temperatures 
(0. rc/decade) but little change of the daily maximum 
temperatures. Karl et al. (1991b) also found trends in 
seasonal extremes of the maximum and minimum similar 
to the changes of the mean maximum and minimum. 
Preliminary analyses for Canada and Alaska give similar 
results. It is unclear whether this phenomenon is global, 
but it is certainly a characteristic of a substantial part of the 
Northern Hemisphere record. However Mifsud (personal 
communication) finds a notable increase in the diurnal 
range in Malta over the last 60 years and Bucher and 
Dessens (1991), while describing a marked decrease in the 
diurnal range at a mountain-top station in the Pyrenees, 
also note that the mountain-top Sonnblick (Austria) record 
does not show such a change. 
The results of Karl et al. (1991b) for the USA, the 
USSR, and China are appropriately area-weighted and 
aggregated in Table C2, which shows that the annual rate 
of warming is 3 to 10 times greater at night than by day, 
depending on the period of record chosen. Overall, 
summer maximum temperatures appear to have decreased 
in these regions. 
Section 2 (S2: sub-section 2.3; Shine et al, 1990) and 
Section A of this report describe mechanisms for increases 
of cloud cover, cloud albedo, and clear-sky albedo because 
of observed increases in sulphate aerosol. If this were 
occurring, there would likely be a preferential cooling 
effect by day, possibly leading to a reduced diurnal range 
in the Northern Hemisphere. This conclusion is consistent 
with the above results and with the finding of S7 that there 
was no decline in the mean daily temperature range over 
interior Australia and New Zealand. 
Despite the known problems with changes in cloud 
observation practices and codes, it is likely that widely 
observed increases in cloud cover (S7, p230; Henderson-
Sellers, 1990) have contributed to the reduced diurnal 
range (Plantico et al, 1990; Bucher and Dessens, 1991), 
though not everywhere. Decreases of sunshine have been 
found in Germany (Weber, 1990) and the diminution of 
A N N U A L 
U.S.A. - MEAN 
U.S.A. — EXTREME 
U.S.S.R.-MEAN 
U.S.S.R. - EXTREME 
P.R.C. — MEAN 
Figure C6: Trends of annual mean daily maximum and 
minimum temperatures and diurnal range (left) and of seasonal 
extreme temperatures and their differences (right). Solid bars are 
statistically significant at the 95% confidence level using a two 
tailed t-test. Data start in 1951 and finish in 1990 (USA), 1988 
(China) and 1986 (USSR). There are no data available for the 
shaded area of southwest China. 
ultraviolet radiation at low altitudes (Scotto et al, 1988) 
coupled with enhancement at high elevation (Bruhl and 
Crutzen, 1989) suggests some type of increase in a lower 
tropospheric scattering agent. 
Whatever the exact cause of the decrease in the diurnal 
temperature range (urbanization effects cannot be excluded 
and atmospheric circulation changes might also be 
contributing), there is an increasingly urgent need to 
reinterpret the global land record, at least regionally, in 
terms of changes in maximum (daytime) and minimum 
(night-time) temperatures. Care will need to be taken that 
artificial changes in the diurnal range are properly 
accounted for, such as have already been done for the USA 
where progressive automation of the climate observing 
network has taken place accompanied by a change of 
thermometer screen (Quayle et al, 1991). The resulting 
non-climate related mean change in measured diurnal 
range over the USA is assessed to be -0.7°C (note that Karl 

152 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
Table C2: Area-weighted aggregate of temperature trends, °C/100 years (°CI40 years) for the USA, USSR and Peoples' 
Republic of China 
a) Using records for 1951-90 (USA), 1951-86 (USSR), 1951-88 (China) 
Season 
Mean maximum 
(day) 
Mean minimum 
(night) 
Mean max minus min 
(diurnal range) 
Winter 
0.7 (0.3) 
2.4(1.0) 
-1.7 (-0.7) 
Spring 
2.1 (0.8) 
3.2(1.3) 
-1.2 (-0.5) 
Summer 
-0.7 (-0.3) 
0.5 (0.2) 
-1.2 (-0.5) 
Autumn 
0.1 (0.0) 
2.2 (0.9) 
-2.0 (-0.8) 
Annual 
0.6 (0.2) 
2.0 (0.8) 
-1.5 (-0.6) 
b) Using records for 1901-90 (USA), 1936-86 (USSR), 1951-88 (China) 
Season 
Mean maximum 
(day) 
Mean minimum 
(night) 
Mean max minus min 
(diurnal range) 
Winter 
0.6 (0.2) 
1.8 (0.7) 
-1.2 (-0.5) 
Spring 
0.6 (0.2) 
1.5 (0.6) 
-0.8 (-0.3) 
Summer 
-0.4 (-0.2) 
0.4 (0.2) 
-0.8 (-0.3) 
Autumn 
-0.6 (-0.2) 
0.7 (0.3) 
-1.2 (-0.5) 
Annual 
0.1 (0.0) 
1.1 (0.4) 
-0.9 (-0.4) 
et al., 1991b, analysed the corrected USA data). Mean-
while, there is a need for comparisons with results from 
general circulation models forced with increased 
greenhouse gases. Section B4.2 gives an initial discussion. 
C3.2 Precipitation and Evaporation Variations and 
Changes 
For many areas, the variability of precipitation is so large 
that it is virtually impossible to detect important changes 
until well after the occurrence of changes that have 
practical (e.g., agricultural or economic) significance. This 
is highlighted in recent work by Karl et al. (1991a) for the 
USA and Nicholls and Lavery (1992) for Australia. 
C3.2.1 Precipitation Over Land 
As discussed in S7, p220, raingauges have tended to 
underestimate precipitation, particularly snowfall (solid 
precipitation). Legates and Willmott (1990) and Soviet 
researchers (World Water Balance, 1978) have estimated 
that global precipitation over land is on average 
underestimated by 10% to 15%. Progressive improvements 
to instrumentation have tried to remedy this and have 
introduced artificial, systematic, increases in precipitation. 
Recent efforts to automate measurements may again be 
reversing diis trend. Thus long-term variations and trends 
should be interpreted cautiously. 
A selection of regional time-series was given in S7 
(p219). These have been updated, but no new conclusions 
can be drawn. For example, precipitation over the Sahel 
region of North Africa (Figure 7.16b of S7) has remained 
well below the long-term average in 1990 and 1991 
(Rowell et al., 1992), extending the drought epoch there 
into its third decade. Changes in rainfall in the Sahel have 
been much larger than can be accounted for by 
instrumental problems. The Sahel has experienced the 
largest observed regional percentage change in 
precipitation between the two thirty year periods 1931-60 
and 1961-1990: a decline of 30% (Hulme et al., 1992). The 
latter period includes the relatively moist 1960s (S7, 
Figure 7.16b and Demaree and Nicolis, 1990), so the 
"real" change in average since 1931-1960 may be larger. 
The only other major region known to show a notable 
long-term trend in precipitation is the USSR (Figure 7.16a 
of S7). Area-averaged precipitation over the same region 
(37°-70°N, 25°-140°E) has recently been revised to ehm-
inate minor spurious trends and updated to 1990 
(Groisman et al., 1991). Overall, the effects of these 
corrections are small and the conclusion in S7 that there 
has been a notable increase of precipitation over the USSR 
south of 70°N during the last century is unaffected. 
Although a number of regional rainfall fluctuations on 
decadal time-scales have been found, some of practical 
significance, there is, as yet, no firm new evidence of 
global-scale multidecadal rainfall trends. 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
153 
C3.2.2 Precipitation Over the Oceans 
In S7, p220, a discussion was presented concerning the 
likelihood that precipitation had increased over the global 
tropical oceans since 1974, based on an analysis of satellite 
outgoing longwave radiation (OLR) data by Nitta and 
Yamada (1989), with an opposing opinion expressed by 
Arkin and Chelliah (1990). Chelliah and Arkin (1992) 
have now shown that much of the decreasing trend in OLR 
between 1974 and 1991, which appears to indicate an 
increase of tropical oceanic rainfall, can be unambiguously 
related to satellite instrumental factors rather than a real 
OLR increase. Therefore an increase in rainfall over the 
tropical oceans since 1974 remains unproven. 
C3.2.3 Evaporation from the Ocean Surface 
Estimates of trends in evaporation over the ocean are 
unlikely to be reliable until constant biases (Isomer and 
Hasse, 1991) and time-varying biases in wind speed 
measurement are properly accounted for (Cardone et al., 
1990; Ward, 1992; S7, Section 7.5.3, p220), and a proper 
treatment of ocean temperature at the surface interface (the 
ocean "skin") is included. In addition, the uncertainties in 
SST, near-surface air temperature and humidity data must 
all be allowed for, especially as estimates of evaporation 
changes made so far include ship-measured daytime air 
temperature data which may have considerable absolute 
and some time-varying biases as discussed in S7, p211. 
Furthermore, inadequate ventilation of some thermometer 
screens on ships, and the effect of the ship itself, can affect 
calculations of specific humidity. Despite these data 
problems, two studies have recently been made of latent 
heat flux trends, with some allowances for artificial trends 
in wind speed data. Because an increase in evaporation 
associated with warming is potentially a very important 
climatic feedback, we discuss these studies despite their 
drawbacks. 
Following initial calculations that appeared to show an 
increase of the evaporation rate from parts of the tropical 
oceans between 1949 and 1979 (Flohn et al, 1990a, b), a 
revised analysis has been carried out to investigate the 
sensitivity of the resuhs to varying assumptions about the 
reality of increasing near-surface wind speed over the 
oceans (Flohn et al, 1992). Figure C7a shows calculations 
of the evaporation trend in the tropical oceans between 
10°S and 14°N, expressed as a linear rate between 1949 
and 1989. Only the main shipping lanes have been studied. 
If it is assumed that the observed near-surface wind speed 
trends should be reduced to 50% of their measured values 
over the areas sampled, an average increase of about 
18Wm-2 of heat input into the atmosphere is implied over 
the belt as a whole. Calculations for sub-sections of the 
zone (warmest oceans, upwelling regions and Atlantic 
sector) give similar results. 
In a further study, Fu and Diaz (1992) show an apparent 
upward trend of about 1% per year in integrated mean 
mm day ' 
^gj 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
Zonal average | 
Warmest oceans 
Upwelling regions m \ m m \ M ^ 13.4% 
WMymmfmim:m:M 22.0% 
30.0% 
,5% 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0 2 4 6 
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 
Estimate of E: 
•iVs-trend = 0 ^ 
Vs-trend =50% [23 Vs-trend =100% 
(b) 
140 
E 130 
5 
I 120 
5 
110 
78 
b 
H 
— 
80 
82 
84 
Year 
86 
88 
90 
Figure C7: (a) Changes in evaporation rate, E, from the tropical 
oceans (10°S-14°N) between 1949 and 1989, based on COADS 
data after multiplying the wind speed trend, Vs, by zero, 0.5 and 
1.0. Taken from Flohn etal (1992): (i) whole zone; (ii) warmest 
oceans (66°E-160°E); (iii) upwelling regions, and (iv) Atlantic 
sector; (b) Trends in global annual oceanic latent heat flux 
(Wm-2), 62°N-42°S from Fu and Diaz (1992). Curve a (and 
smoothed curve): using unadjusted winds; Curve b: using winds 
reduced following Cardone et al. (1990). 
oceanic latent heat flux during the period 1978-1989. This 
increase (curve a in Figure C7b) is due primarily to an 
overall increase in reported wind speed over the global 
oceans of about 0.5 m s ' . Allowing for an artificial 
component in the increase of wind speed (Cardone et al, 
1990), it is estimated that the observed wind speed trend 
should be reduced to between 65% and 50% of its apparent 
value, giving the reduced trend in latent heat flux shown in 
curve b of Figure C7b. This corresponds to a global 
increase in latent heat flux into the atmosphere between 
1978 and 1988 near 5Wm-2/decade. Similar results are 
obtained by Flohn et al. (1992) over part of the tropical 
North Atlantic. Although there is no indication of bias in 
the surface pressure measurements, possible hidden trends 

154 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
in pressure gradients in Fu and Quan's analyses due to 
variations in data sampling need investigation. Overall, it 
is uncertain whether the apparent enhancement of 
evaporation from the global oceans shown in Figures C7a 
and b is a real climatic signal that has accompanied the 
recent global oceanic warming seen in Figures C3 and C5. 
An increase of tropical precipitation might be expected 
to accompany increases in evaporation. However, the 
results of Chelliah and Arkin (1992) discussed in Section 
C3.2.2 do not confirm this idea. So, although an increase 
in the hydrological cycle in the last 10-20 years is 
plausible, it is not proven. A rigorous analysis of the 
physical consistency of the local values of, and trends in, 
the various data used to calculate evaporation is essential 
for further progress. 
C3.3 Tropospheric and Lower Stratospheric Variations 
and Change 
C3.3.1 Temperature 
C3.3.1.1 Radiosonde data 
There are now two independentiy-derived data sets, that of 
Angell (1988) used in S7 (p220-222) and a new 
compilation due to Oort and Liu (OL) (1992). Both data 
sets may suffer from data-quality problems, because 
adequate studies of possible time-varying biases in 
radiosonde temperature data have not been made (Elliott 
and Gaffen, 1991). The annual data derived from the 
Angell analysis uses a different definition of the calendar 
year from all other analyses in Section C, being based on 
December-November. This 
will 
slightly 
reduce 
correlations between annual values of the Angell and other 
data sets. Unless otherwise stated, the term "lower 
stratosphere" used in the remainder of Section C refers to 
that part of the atmosphere between the 50 and 100 hPa 
levels. 
The spatial representativeness of the Angell radiosonde 
data set has been examined by Trenberth and Olson (1991) 
in a study of how well the widely spread but sparse 63-
station network describes regional and global climatic 
changes. By comparing its interseasonal and interannual 
climatic statistics over 1979-1987 with those from a 
complete global data set provided by die European Centre 
for Medium Range Weather Forecasts, they found that 
correlations between the two data sets were generally quite 
high, but that root-mean-square errors for Angell's 
extratropical zones were of the same order as the 
interannual climatic signals being studied. Angell's data 
also showed systematically enhanced interseasonal and 
interannual variability in the extratropics because of the 
limited spatial sampling. 
The OL data are derived from up to 800 individual site 
records from the global radiosonde network interpolated 
onto a regular latitude-longitude grid. In terms of data 
density, the OL data base is therefore an improvement on 
that of Angell. 
Figures C8a-c present updated annual global series of 
temperature anomalies from a 1964-1989 average for the 
surface and 850-300 hPa layer (a), the 300-100 hPa layer 
(b), and die 100-50 hPa layer (c), using Figure C4 for the 
surface. The data sets are, unfortunately, short but are 
important because they have been used in initial studies of 
the greenhouse-gas detection problem (Section C4). 
Although the radiosonde coverage is adequate from 1958 
in the Northern Hemisphere, it is only complete enough in 
the Southem Hemisphere since 1964. Global values can 
therefore only be estimated since 1964, though Angell 
used incomplete Southem Hemisphere data to extend his 
global series back to 1958. 
Correlations (1964-1989) between the OL and Angell 
annual global series are high, 0.97, 0.91 and 0.90 at 850-
300 hPa, 300-100 hPa and 100-50 hPa respectively. 
However, the absence of some extensive areas may have 
allowed higher correlations than would be obtained 
between either series and a globally-complete series. Note 
that surface values show substantially less interannual 
variability. The correlation between the annual OL 850-
300 hPa series and the surface (ocean and land) series is 
0.94; Angell's series show slightly greater interannual 
variability than that of OL for the globe and (not shown) 
for both hemispheres. Angell's data also tend to show 
greater cooling than those of OL in the 300-100 hPa layer, 
mainly in the Northern Hemisphere but also in the 
Southem Hemisphere lower stratosphere 100-50 hPa layer, 
but less cooling in the 100-50 hPa layer in the Northem 
Hemisphere. OL's trends in annual mean temperature for 
the globe were 0.21, -0.08 and -0.4rc/decade (1964-
1989) for the three layers in ascending height order, with 
similar trends in each hemisphere. Angell's corre-
sponding trends for the period 1964-1991 were 0.24, -0.16 
and -0.52°C/decade. Combining values from the two analyses 
by using the more comprehensive OL data to 1989 and the 
Angell data in 1990 and 1991, our best estimate for trends 
in the three layers between 1964 and 1991 are Northem 
Hemisphere: 0.21, -0.05 and -0.38°C/ decade; Southern 
Hemisphere: 0.23, -0.13 and -0.53°C/ decade and Globe: 
0.22, -0.09 and -0.45''C/decade. The trend in the surface 
data over this period was 0.16°C/decade. 
The warming trend in the mid-tropospheric layer and the 
cooling trend in the lower stratosphere are significant in 
both data sets at better than the 1% level, allowing for 
autocorrelation of the data. The warming trend at the 
syrface is also significant at the 1% level. However, the 
cooling trend in the globally-averaged 50-100 hPa layer 
may be exaggerated because the data begin in 1964 which 
was very warm in the tropical stiatosphere following the 
eraption of Agung in 1963 (Newell, 1970). Inspection of 
Figure C8 suggests that after the influence of Agung has 
been removed, a slow cooling trend followed until 1982 
when a temporary warming occurred due to the eruption 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
155 
• 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1965 
1970 
1975 
1980 1985 1990 
Year 
1 
1965 
1970 
1975 
1980 
Year 
1985 
1990 
A 
/f 
1 ^ 
// 
-
H 
\\ 
\\ 
U 
1 
1 
"\A/ 
1 
1 
1965 
1970 
1975 
1980 
Year 
1985 
1990 
1965 
1970 
1975 
1980 
Year 
1985 
1990 
Figure C8: (a) Annual global temperature anomalies since 1964 for the surface and the 850-300 hPa layer relative to a 1964-1989 
average. Surface temperatures (dotted line) are based on Figure C4. Temperatures aloft are based on the radiosonde data of Oort and 
Liu (1992) to 1989 (solid line) and of Angell (1988) updated to 1991 (dashed line); (b) Annual global temperature anomalies since 
1964 for the 300-100 hPa layer relative to a 1964-1989 average from two analyses. Temperatures are based on the radiosonde data of 
Oort and Liu (1992) to 1989 (solid line) and Angell (1988) updated to 1991 (dashed hne); (c) as (b) but for the 100-50 hPa layer; 
(d) Austral spring (Sept-Nov) temperature anomalies for the 100-50 hPa layer relative to a 1979-1991 average for the south polar cap: 
(i) from Oort and Liu (1992) to 1989 and from Angell thereafter for 60°-90°S (solid line); (ii) from MSU Channel 4 data for 62.5°-90°S 
(dashed line); (e) Smoothed annual zonal mean 30 hPa temperature anomalies relative to a 1964-1989 average for 80°N (dashed) and 
20°N (solid). A low pass binomial filter with 5 terms was used to suppress variations of less than 3 years. Updated from Naujokat 
(1981). 

156 
of El Chichon. After this there was a sharp cooling to 
1985-87. Trenberth and Olson (1989) found a lower 
stratospheric cooling trend in spring over the South Pole 
and McMurdo Sound, extending to January at 100 hPa, 
though there were no tropospheric trends. In fact, 
radiosonde data for 100-50 hPa for the south polar cap 
show some cooling in all seasons except autumn over the 
last decade or more. However, in austral spring, when the 
deepest ozone holes have been reported (SORG, 1991), 
there have been very strong interannual fluctuations of 
radiosonde and satellite Microwave Sounding Unit temp-
erature (see Section C3.3.1.2) since 1985 (Figure C8d). 
Although, as a result, the trend in Figure C8d is not 
significant, the general level of lower stratospheric south 
polar cap temperature in spring was several degrees lower 
in the 1980s than the 1970s. 
Low-pass filtered series of 30 hPa temperature for 
latitude belts of the Northern Hemisphere show weak 
downward trends (Figure C8e, updated from Naujokat, 
1981). At many latitudes there is a suggestion of an 
oscillation almost in phase with the cycle of solar activity 
whose length over this period was quite close to 11 years, 
seen here in the solid curve for 20°N (see also Section 
C4.2.1): this should be taken into account when 30 hPa 
temperature trends are determined (van Loon and 
Labitzke, 1990; Labitzke and van Loon, 1991, 1992). 
Warming at 30 hPa associated with the 1982 eruption of El 
Chichon is especially noticeable at lower latitudes (e.g., 
the solid curve in Figure C8e). Data for late 1991 (not 
shown in Figure C8e) show another pronounced warming 
of up to several °C at 30 hPa. The warming, centred near 
20°N and confined to regions south of 45 °N, was almost 
certainly due to the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in June 1991. 
C3.3.1.2 Satellite microwave sounder data 
SI reported early results concerning recent tropospheric 
temperature trends and interannual variations from a 
valuable new data set derived from satellite measurements 
of the microwave emission of radiation to space from 
atmospheric oxygen (Spencer and Christy, 1990; Figure 
7.17d, p221). The new technique, which uses data from the 
Microwave Sounding Units (MSU) on the TIROS-N series 
of satellites (Spencer et al., 1990), measures temperature 
over layers of the atmosphere. Channel 2 data of the MSU 
is weighted towards temperature over a substantial 
thickness of the troposphere, but is also influenced by the 
stratosphere and the character of the ground surface. By 
using sets of Channel 2 data with different earth viewing-
angles it is possible to create a new data set called Channel 
2R that is mostly (not completely) weighted towards levels 
below 350 hPa, mainly to levels between 500 and 1000 
hPa, tiiough at the cost of a slight loss in reproducibility. In 
addition, Channel 4 measures lower stratospheric (mainly 
30-150 hPa) temperatures. The M S U instrument is inde-
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
pendentiy calibrated, so is not influenced by conventional 
instruments such as radiosondes, though biases, resulting 
from changes of satellites and equatorial crossing-times, 
may remain. The main advantages of the M S U system are 
its global coverage and a lower value of standard error at 
most grid points compared with radiosonde data (Spencer 
and Christy, 1992a,b). 
A particularly important aspect of M S U data in the 
context of this assessment is their ability to detect 
temperature trends with relatively high accuracy in the 
layers they measure, though the MSU record is still very 
short (13 years). Figure C9 shows lightly smoothed 
monthly global Channel 4 lower stratospheric temperature 
anomalies relative to the complete period 1979-91. Over 
this short period very large, temporary but highly coherent 
warming effects of the volcanoes El Chichon (1982) and 
Mt. Pinatubo (1991) dominate the record. This makes the 
detection of a global trend in MSU lower stratospheric data 
difficuh. 
C3.3.1.3 Comparisons of satellite microwave, radiosonde, 
and surface temperature data 
The correlation between 5° latitude x 5° longitude monthly 
time-series of surface-based temperature anomalies and of 
tropospheric temperature anomalies from the M S U is near 
zero over parts of the tropical oceans but is much higher 
over major land masses and oceanic areas of high 
variability (Trenberth et al, 1992). The differences are 
thought to be partly due to data sampling problems in the 
non-MSU data sets, partly to real physical differences 
between surface temperatures and the mid-tropospheric 
temperatures, and possibly partly to uncertainties in the 
MSU data due to surface emissivity variations. There are 
also some divergences between the M S U and the 
radiosonde data. Consequently, the ranking of recent very 
warm years in the lower atmosphere and at the surface 
1.5 
o 
0.5 
>. 
CO 
E o c 0.0 
< 
-0.5 
-1.0 
1979 
1983 
1987 
1991 
Year 
Figure C9: Smoothed monthly global MSU Channel 4 lower 
stratospheric temperature anomalies, for 1979 to 1991 relative to 
a 1979-1991 average. A binomial filter with 5 terms was used. 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
157 
depends on which record is used, what level is being 
referred to and how much uncertainty is attached to each 
value. 
Figure CIO compares annual global temperature 
anomalies for 1979-91 for the mid-troposphere from M S U 
Channel 2R, with values for the 850-300 hPa layer from 
radiosondes using Oort and Liu to 1989 and then Angell to 
1991, and for the surface using the data in Figure C4c. 
Table C3 presents the intercorrelations (r) for M S U 2R 
(suffix m), radiosonde (suffix sd) and surface data (suffix 
sf), their linear trends (x) in °C per decade, and the 
standard deviations, a, of the annual values. Note, 
however, that the linear trends for 1979-1991 are not fully 
representative of those for the longer term. 
At this stage we merely note that the calculated linear 
trends for 1979-1991 are different, though all but one are 
positive. The correlations between the surface and the 
MSU data are lower than those with the radiosonde data. 
The correlations may be reduced by the fact that the MSU 
0.3 
-0.4 I 
I 
I 
I 
[ 
L _ 
1979 
1982 
1985 
1988 
1991 
Year 
Figure CIO: Comparison, for 1979-1991, of annual global 
temperature anomalies from (i) MSU Channel 2R for the lower 
troposphere (dashed line); (ii) radiosonde data for the 850-300 
hPa layer from Oort and Liu (1992) to 1989 then from Angell 
(1988, updated) (solid line); (iii) surface data from Figure C4 
(dotted line). Anomalies are referred to a 1979-1991 average in 
each case. 
data samples regions not sampled or poorly sampled by the 
radiosonde and surface data, especially in the Southern 
Hemisphere, but further investigation is needed to clarify 
this. Much, though not all, of the difference in the trends 
between the M S U and the other data comes from 
disagreements in the annual anomalies for 1979, 1980 and 
1981. It is clear that the data sets have some different 
characteristics. The short period of overlap (1979-1991), 
differences in the variables being measured and doubts 
about the year-to-year consistency of the data sets, prevent 
reliable assessment of the differences in trends. Reliable 
assessment of future trends in MSU data will require the 
compatibility of new M S U instrumentation with that used 
at present. The continued availability of all three data sets 
is very desirable to help reduce the problems noted above. 
C3.3.2 Atmospheric Moisture 
For previous discussions, refer to S7, p222 and S8, p251; 
in the current volume Section B3.2 gives a more detailed 
discussion of the likely role of water vapour during a 
greenhouse gas-induced warming. Water vapour is the 
greenhouse gas in greatest abundance and is responsible 
for the largest single contribution to greenhouse warming 
of any of the constituents of the atmosphere in the current 
climate. 
The sensitivity of the surface temperature to height-
dependent moisture changes was examined by Shine and 
Sinha (1991) who point out the importance of changes in 
water vapour content throughout the depth of the 
troposphere. They show that changes in much of the mid-
troposphere are important as they tend to be large due to 
the relatively great amounts of water vapour there. 
However, despite the small absolute amount of water 
vapour in the upper troposphere and stratosphere, they 
show that changes at this level can also have a significant 
effect on the radiation forcing of climate. Furthermore, an 
increase in moisture in the stratosphere could lead to the 
creation of further polar stratospheric clouds which have 
an important effect on ozone depletion in the presence of 
chlorine derived from chlorofluorocarbons. Stratospheric 
water vapour is also important in the conversion of SO2 to 
sulphuric acid droplets which can cool surface climate 
after a sulphur-rich volcanic eruption. Furthermore, 
Table C3: Annual MSU 2R, radiosonde 850-300hPa and surface temperature anomalies, 1979-1991: intercorrelations, 
trends and standard deviations 
hd,m 
hd,sf 
V sf 
^m 
^sd 
V 
^m 
^sd 
^sf 
NH 
0.96 
0.91 
0.84 
0.12 
0.21 
0.23 
0.18 
0.18 
0.15 
SH 
0.86 
0.71 
0.42 
-0.02 
0.13 
0.14 
0.13 
0.14 
0.08 
Globe 
0.93 
0.90 
0.74 
0.06 
0.17 
0.18 
0.15 
0.16 
0.10 

158 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
oxidation of methane generates stratospheric water vapour; 
so increases in methane, from whatever causes, can lead to 
an increase in stratospheric moisture. 
In an examination of strategies for detecting green-
house gas signals, Bamett et ai (1991) find tropospheric 
moisture to be one of the most effective variables to 
monitor. However, monitoring moisture presents many 
difficulties and, since its variation is physically linked to 
changes of temperature, it does not provide an independent 
measure of greenhouse forcing. The residence time of 
water vapour in the atmosphere is short, about 10 days, so 
it is not well mixed. If the water vapour in the air were all 
condensed, the average depth of the condensate (the 
precipitable water, PW), would be about 2.5cm. Above the 
polar regions the mean PW is about 0.5cm, and above the 
equatorial regions it averages about 5cm. Half the moisture 
in the atmosphere lies between sea level and 850 hPa and 
less than 10% resides above the 500 hPa level. Therefore, 
observations at many places and levels are required to 
adequately study changes in water vapour likely to be 
climatically important. 
Measurement problems make trends of water vapour 
difficult to determine. Most of the existing knowledge 
about tropospheric water vapour comes from routine 
radiosonde observations. Unfortunately, radiosonde data 
have been affected by changes in humidity sensors and 
reporting procedures, and some sensors and retrieval 
algorithms do not provide useful results in the low temp-
eratures and very dry conditions of the upper troposphere 
and lower stratosphere. This makes it difficult to separate 
climatic changes from changes in the measurement 
programme (Elliott and Gaffen, 1991). Nevertheless, with 
careful attention to these problems some deductions can be 
made. 
Recently Elliott et al. (1991) have documented a 
moisture increase in the lower troposphere over the 
equatorial Pacific from 1973-1986; additionally Gaffen et 
al. (1991), using more stations and an analysis of 
individual moisture patterns, have found an increase in 
moisture in the tropics. At 850 hPa, this study found an 
increase of specific humidity of around 10% between 1973 
and 1986, though this value is very uncertain as the scatter 
in the data is comparable to the trend and most of the 
change occurred during the short interval 1977-1980. The 
study also detected a signal of the ENSO phenomenon (S7, 
p226) in the humidity data. 
Thus, there is limited observational evidence suggesting 
an increase in lower tropospheric moisture content in 
tropical regions over the last two decades. These results 
support the apparent increase of evaporation from the 
oceans (Section C3.2.3). A much more comprehensive 
atmospheric moisture monitoring system is needed, such 
as may be provided by the Global Energy and Water Cycle 
Experiment (GEWEX) (WMO, 1991). 
C3.4 Variations and Changes in the Cryosphere 
This section should be read in conjunction with Section 
C2, where recent work on oxygen isotopes in Antarctic 
land-ice is discussed, and with S7, Section 7.8. Section 
9.4.3 of S9 (Warrick and Oerlemans, 1990) and the brief 
review by Haeberli (1990) should be consulted on 
permafrost and other cryospheric features. 
C3.4.1 Snow Cover 
Snow extent is very variable; it is affected by temperature 
through atmospheric circulation variations which also 
influence the quantities of solid and liquid precipitation. 
The Northern Hemisphere snow extent anomaly time-
series shown in Figure 7.19 of S7 (p224) has recently been 
revised. A change in analysis technique had resulted in 
snow extents analysed prior to 1981 being slightiy too 
large relative to later values (Robinson et ai, 1991). A 
revised series from 1973 to 1991 is given in Figure C l l . 
This still shows a modest decrease in snow cover since the 
1970s but with a reduced magnitude: mean values over 3 
years dropped by just over 2 million km^ from the mid-
1970s to the end of the 1980s, about 8% of the total area. 
In Figure 7.19 of S7, a decline of about 3 million km^ was 
indicated. The new snow extent values have good support 
from a parallel plot of extratropical Northem Hemispheric 
land air temperature (Figure C l l ) . The correlation between 
the monthly (September to May only) anomalies of snow 
cover and temperature is -0.41, but between unsmoothed 
annual (average of Sept-May) anomalies it is -0.76 because 
presumably influences other than those of temperature 
partly cancel. Snow extent has been especially low in 
spring since 1987, most notably in spring 1990. However, 
the snow extent record is still much too short to distinguish 
a possible greenhouse signal from natural variability. 
C3.4.2 Mountain Glaciers 
A major result of S7 (see Executive Summary) was the 
conclusive evidence for a worldwide recession of 
mountain glaciers over the last century or more. This is 
among the clearest and best evidence for a change in 
energy balance at the Earth's surface since the end of the 
last century. It provides sufficient support to the various 
independent but far from perfect records of global temp-
erature to show that global warming has indeed occurred 
over the last century (Haeberli, 1990). On a regional scale, 
however, the influence of climate can be much more 
complex, especially on decadal and lesser time-scales 
where precipitation fluctuations may be important or even 
dominant. 
Direct infonnation on mass balance is available from a 
small number of glaciers in the European Alps where these 
observations started during the late nineteenth century. The 
average annual loss of specific mass (mass per unit area) 
amounts to between 0.2 and 0.6 m water equivalent 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
159 
j—•—r 1——n 
] 1 • • -i • i :•• • y i v •• \ 
-| 
1975 
1980 
1985 
1990 
Year 
Figure C l l : Northern Hemisphere snow extent anomalies relative to 1973-1991 (from NOAA, USA) (vertical bars and heavy line) 
and Jones (1988, updated) land air temperature anomalies relative to 1951 -80 north of 30°N (thin line). Smooth lines generated from a 
39-point binomial filter applied to the monthly data. Note the inverted temperature scale. 
(Patzelt and Aellen, 1990). Regularly monitored glaciers, 
however, account for less than 1% of the total number of 
glaciers worldwide. Much more numerous are measure-
ments of glacier length reductions which can be converted 
into mass balance values using a combination of continuity 
analyses and data on initial glacier length. They confirm 
the representativeness of the small number of direct long-
term mass balance measurements (Haeberli, 1990). Aerial 
and ground surveys indicate that most observed mountain 
glaciers are distinctly smaller than a century ago (Haeberli 
and Miiller, 1988; World Glacier Monitoring Service, 
1991; Williams and Ferrigno, 1988-1991). 
Some of the techniques used to estimate the overall 
glacier mass decrease in the Alps since the middle of the 
nineteenth century are controversial. Recently, Haeberli 
(1990) has estimated a 50% decrease in mass. Though this 
is subject to marked uncertainty, a relatively large decrease 
is likely. This drastic change is the consequence of an 
upward shift in equilibrium line altitude by only 100m or 
less. Twentieth-century melt rates of Alpine glaciers are an 
order of magnitude greater than average melt rates at the 
end of the last ice age (20,000 to 10,000 years ago). 
Statistical analysis of spatial and temporal variations in 
mass balance series from glaciers on various continents 
(Reynaud et al., 1984) indicates that the historical 
behaviour in the Alps may be representative of glaciers in 
general, confirming the great sensitivity of glacier volume 
to climate variations. A global-mean reduction in volume 
may be estimated from average ice volume data in S9 
(Table 9.3) and the estimated sea level rise contribution 
from mountain glaciers and sinall ice-caps (Meier, 1984). 
This gives a reduction of 13+9% in volume over the last 
century. Despite this, the retreat of Alpine glaciers has not 
been uniform on decadal time-scales, as mentioned in S7, 
p225, with a marked net advance in the period 1965-1980, 
coinciding with colder average temperatures over most of 
the North Atlantic and over western Europe (see S7, graph 
in Fig 7.12a). 
In contrast to the above, high and middle latitude coastal 
glaciers may grow under warmer and wetter conditions. 
Mayo and March (1990) report that the Wolverine glacier 
in the maritime region of southern Alaska near 60°N had 
generally positive mass balances after 1976 as a result of 
increased winter precipitation which fell as snow, despite 
warmer winters, because temperatures remained well 
below freezing. This change is likely to be associated with 
the rather striking increase in winter half-year cyclonic 
activity in the Gulf of Alaska since 1976 discussed in S7, 
p229. In addition, Fitzharris et al. (1992) note that the 
terminus of the Franz Josef glacier on the west coast of 
New Zealand has advanced in the 1980s, as have other 
alpine glaciers in New Zealand, despite the fact that the 
1980s were locally one of the warmest decades in the 
record. Atmospheric circulation changes partly associated 
with ENSO appear to be involved. 
An overall shrinking trend in the glaciers of the 
Northern Hemisphere has continued into the late 1980s 
(World Glacier Monitoring Service, 1991). Recent data 

160 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
(a) 
I 
80 
J 3 
O Vi 60 
o a 
O ) 40 
Advancing 
Stationary 
Retreating 
1985 
1965 
1970 
1975 
1980 
1985 
1989 
Year 
Figure C12: (a) Percentages of observed glacier fronts 
advancing, stationary and retreating. Data from all available 
countries; number of glaciers ranges from 271 in 1959/60 to 486 
in 1984/5. Values are 5-year moving averages from 1959/60-
1963/64 to 1980/81-1984/85. Data from Haeberli and MuUer 
(1988) and Wood (1988); (b) Percentages of observed glaciers 
having a positive mass balance: (i) all countries (triangles); (ii) 
about 10 European Alpine glaciers (rectangles). Values are 5-year 
moving averages from 1959/60-1963/64 (53 glaciers from all 
countries) to 1984/85-1988/1989 (71 glaciers from all countries). 
Data from Haeberli and Miiller (1988), Wood (1988), World 
Glacier Monitoring Service {1991). U.S. Geological Survey and 
Canadian National Hydrology Research Institute. 
A general review of glacier and other cryospheric trends is 
given in Barry (1991). 
More extensive glacier monitoring and comparative 
analyses of climatic data are needed to add to these results, 
as glacier fluctuations are potentially important indicators 
of regional and global climatic change. 
C3.4.3 Polar Ice Caps 
Morgan et al. (1991) derived time-series of the net rate of 
snow accumulation since 1806 from four cores separated 
by up to 700km in a limited area in East Antarctica within 
300km of the coast. The four cores yielded fairly similar 
results. There has been a significant increase in accu-
mulation rate after a minimum around 1960 and the most 
recent values are the highest observed in the record. 
Morgan et al. (1991) attribute the recent imbalance to 
increased cyclonic activity around Antarctica leading to 
higher snowfall. Increased temperatures usually accom-
pany increased snowfall, resulting in positive cotrelations 
between temperature and accumulation in Antarctica 
(Jones et ai, 1992). However, it is unclear how widespread 
this increase in accumulation has been, so it is too soon to 
revise the estimates of the contribution that Antarctic ice 
accumulation may make to sea level reduction that were 
summarized in S9. 
The Wordie ice shelf, on the western side of the 
Antarctic Peninsula, has shrunk markedly from about 
2000km2 in 1966 to about 700km2 in 1989 (Doake and 
Vaughan, 1991). This is apparently related to a strong 
regional warming trend. However, the larger ice shelves, 
such as the Ross and Filchner-Ronne, which help to 
stabilize the West Antarctic ice sheet, would only be 
threatened by substantially greater warming (Zwally, 
1991). 
For evidence from satellites concerning a recent thick-
ening of the Greenland ice sheet, the reader is refeiTed to 
S9, Section 9.4.4. 
suggest that mountain glaciers are, as a group, shifting 
back to a regime dominated by shrinkage and recession, 
after a period of relative growth and minor re-advance 
during the 1960s and 1970s (Figures C12a and b). 
However, this temporary re-advance has not affected the 
larger glaciers. In further support of this conclusion two 
detailed regional studies are mentioned. In a study of 
trends in the length of 242 glaciers in northwest China 
from the 1950s to 1980s, Shi (1989) shows that 42% were 
retreating, 29% showed littie change and only 29% were 
advancing. The overall glacier retreat is thought to result 
from both a warming and a drying trend in this area. In the 
Southem Hemisphere, Aniya and Naruse (1991) reported 
that in the northem Patagonian icefield, 20 of the 22 major 
outlet glaciers were retreating and only one was advancing. 
C3.4.4 Sea-Ice 
No simple relationships have been established between 
sea-ice extent and temperature, either for the Antarctic 
(Raper et ai, 1984) or for the Northern Heinisphere (Kelly 
etal, 1987). 
A re-analysis of satellite passive microwave data 
obtained by Nimbus 7 (Gloersen and Campbell, 1991) 
shows a statistically significant 2.1+0.9% decline in the 
extent of Arctic sea-ice (including enclosed open water 
areas) between 1978 and 1987 and an accompanying non-
significant 3.5±2.0% reduction in the open-water areas, 
i.e., polynyas and leads, within the ice field. Figure 7.20a 
in S7 also indicates a decline of about Q.2y.\()^krc? (2%) in 
the extent of Arctic sea-ice between 1978 and 1987, but 
there is no decline over the whole period. So the Gloersen 
and Campbell result, while supported, seems not to be 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
161 
2.8-1 
I 
2.0, I 
" 
, 
, 
1 
r 
r 
: 
^ 
, 
, 
• 
• 
, 
^ 
. 
' 
: 
r 
: 
1972 
1977 
1982 
1987 
1992 
Figure C13: (a) Northern Hemisphere, (b) Southern Hemisphere sea-ice extent anomalies relative to 1973-1991. Data from NOAA 
(USA). Smooth lines generated from a 39-point binomial filter applied to the monthly anomalies. Heavy bars represent DJF in the NH 
or JJA in the SH. 
representative of the whole period and it cannot therefore 
be interpreted as a trend. Over the same time interval the 
above authors found no significant trends in Antarctic sea-
ice. Figures CI3a and b update the hemispheric sea-ice 
extent variations shown in Figures 7.20a and b of S7 to the 
end of 1991. As suggested in S7, no systeinatic trend 
toward more or less sea-ice is apparent from the short 
records compiled to date. In 1990 and 1991, sea-ice extent 
remained less than the 18-year mean in the Arctic and near 
the mean in the Antarctic. 
It now seems even less likely that the postulated 
thinning of Arctic sea-ice addressed in S7, based on the 
submarine observations of Wadhams (1990) north of 
Greenland, reflects a basin-wide phenomenon. Three 
issues of concern are (1) the use of data from only 2 
cruises in different seasons (May 1987 and October 1976); 
(2) the year-to-year variability in ice motion in the 
Beaufort Gyre and Transpolar Drift Stream that may affect 
the ice regime north of Greenland; (3) the absence of a 
reliable baseline climatology because the numerous 
submarine cruises have travelled different routes in 
different seasons through sectors with widely differing ice 
conditions (McLaren etal, 1990). 

162 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
C3.5 
Variations and Changes in Atmospheric 
Circulation 
S7, pp225-229, identified in particular recent increases in 
the intensity of the winter atmospheric circulation over the 
extratropical Pacific and Atlantic (Figures 7.22 and 7.23): 
see Trenberth (1990) for a fuller discussion. These findings 
are reflected in an analysis of the climate of the 1980s by 
Halpert and Ropelewski (1991) and in analyses by Flohn et 
al. (1992). However, beyond these resuhs, it is difficult to 
identify new research on atmospheric circulation changes 
that does not depend critically on how the analyses were 
done and on the choice of data. It is recognized, though, 
that studies of atmospheric circulation changes are a key 
topic for future research as such changes are likely to be an 
important component of future regional climatic change. 
C4 Detection and Attribution of Climatic Change 
C4.1 The Greenhouse Effect 
"Fingerprint" detection of the influence of an enhanced 
greenhouse effect, by comparing the patterns of climate 
change predicted by models with historical observations, is 
fully discussed in S8. Progress is very difficult (a) because 
multiple runs of coupled ocean-atmosphere models are 
needed, requiring very large computer resources; (b) these 
models may still not be adequate, particularly because of 
the "flux correction problem" (see Section B2.2); (c) 
adequate data series are very few and short; and (d) the 
methodology to implement the technique has not fully 
matured. In addition, the climate system can respond to 
many forcings and it remains to be proved that the 
greenhouse signal is sufficiently distinguishable from other 
signals to be detected except as a gross increase in tropos-
pheric temperature that is so large that other explanations 
are not likely (see S8). Because of these difficulties, no 
definitive paper on detection has appeared since the 1990 
IPCC Scientific Assessment. The reader is referred to 
Karoly et al (1992) for a recent discussion of some of the 
problems and possible ways forward. 
C4.2 Other Factors 
C4.2.1 Solar Influences 
Possible changes in solar irradiance and their climatic 
effects were discussed in S2, while Section A2.7 of this 
Assessment discusses new physically-based evidence 
about variations in the luminosity of stars like the Sun on 
century time-scales. Reid (1991) has re-examined the case 
for solar forcing of global surface temperature in phase 
with an approximately 80-year ("Gleissberg") modulation 
of the amplitude of the near 11-year cycle in sunspot 
numbers. He first formed a relationship between this 
amplitude and the solar constant using a limited series of 
measurements since the 1960s. He then used a simple 
model to predict the global SST from the variation of solar 
forcing reconstructed in this way back to 1660, and found 
that the simulated global SST and a version of the 
observed global SST were well correlated since 1860. Due 
to a lack of sufficiently long time-series of satellite 
measurements of solar irradiance, Reid's conclusions rely 
considerably on rocket- and balloon-borne measurements 
of total solar irradiance made in the late 1960s; these are of 
uncertain accuracy and representativeness. His conclusions 
also depend on the reliability of the shape of the observed 
global temperature series, especially prior to 1900 (Reid 
used an early version of the Bottomley et al. (1990) SST 
data). Strong auto-correlations in both the solar and 
temperature data also mean that very few degrees of 
freedom are being compared in each data set. 
A new approach by Friis-Christensen and Lassen (1991) 
(FCL) uses the length of the sunspot cycle which is known 
to be statistically related to solar activity. They hypoth-
esize that shorter cycles are directly related to higher solar 
magnetic activity which in turn they assume corresponds 
to a higher total output of solai' radiation, though no firm 
physical basis has been established for this relationship. 
The length of the solar cycle varies between 7 and 17 
years. After smoothing the cycle length data, they find a 
correlation of -0.95 between cycle length and Northern 
Hemisphere land surface air temperature since 1860 when 
averages over corresponding solar cycles of these data sets 
are compared. FCL do not compare their solar results with 
a global surface temperature series because they prefer to 
use temperatures over land which they assume are more 
likely to be accurately determined than those over the sea. 
They also find that shorter cycles (supposedly higher solar 
radiation) correspond with less Icelandic sea-ice since 
1740. 
In the past, many authors have claimed to largely 
explain, in a statistical way, the hemispheric or global 
temperature record in terms of a single forcing factor, but 
different authors have chosen different factors. A full 
discussion of such work and why different authors can 
come to radically different conclusions appears in Wigley 
et al. (1986) and in S2. Recent examples are: (1) After 
allowing for the influence of ENSO and a (different) index 
of solar variability, Wu et al. (1990) claim that the 
variations of global and regional night marine air 
temperature, and to a lesser extent SST, over the last 
century published by Bottomley et al. (1990) can be 
mainly explained by an atmospheric turbidity index. This 
index is claimed to relate mainly to the variations in 
stratospheric dust due to volcanic activity, being based on 
measurements made at 3100m altitude, but it might, 
nevertheless, include some influence of tropospheric 
aerosols as well (Section C4.2.4). (2) Schonwiese and 
Runge (1991) and Schonwiese and Stabler (1991) explain 
regional climate changes on the same time-scale in great 
detail largely in terms of C O T forcing, though volcanic, 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
163 
solar and ENSO influences are also included. These and 
odier exercises in curve fitting can demonstrate statistical 
relationships, but cannot prove physical connections. 
A full discussion of the relation between the historical 
temperature record and different forcing factors requires 
that greenhouse forcing be included (Kelly and Wigley, 
1990; Hansen and Lacis, 1990). Although we do not know 
what the response of the recent past chmate to greenhouse 
forcing has been, we do know the approximate magnitude 
(2Wm"2 at the top of the troposphere) and rate of increase 
of the greenhouse-gas/orcwg over the last century (Figure 
2.2 of S2, p55). Furthermore, empirical studies of 
relationships between smoothed forcing factors and the 
statistically non-stationary historical temperature record 
cannot, alone, resolve the relative contributions of the 
different forcing factors. The main problem lies in the 
similarity of the trends of the forcing factors and the small 
number of degrees of statistical freedom in the data, which 
often show long-term persistence. In addition, rigorous 
statistical tools do not exist to show whether relationships 
between statistically non-stationary data of this kind are 
truly statistically significant, even though the correlations 
found by each author between their chosen forcing factor 
and the temperature record are invariably quite high 
(Zwiers, personal communication). Thus a physical model 
that includes both the hypothesized forcing and the 
enhanced greenhouse forcing must be used to make further 
progress. 
C4.2.2 Bi-decadal Temperature Variations 
A renewed controversy has developed about the existence 
of globally significant temperature variations on typically 
18-22 year time-scales. These variations are often related 
to the solar 22-year magnetic cycle (Newell et al, 1989), 
or sometimes to the 18-19 year lunar orbital cycles (Currie 
and O'Brien, 1990) which can, in principle, have small 
tidal effects on the oceans. Ghil and Vautard (1991) have 
claimed to find a bi-decadal oscillation in global surface 
air temperature using a novel form of analysis (singular 
spectrum analysis), min-oring similar findings by Newell et 
al (1989) in global night marine air temperatures based on 
more conventional techniques. However, Eisner and 
Tsonis (1991b) show that the bi-decadal variation which 
appears in Ghil and Vautard's analysis depends critically 
on the inclusion of less reliable late nineteenth century 
data. In view of the possible influence of this variation on 
our perception of recent trends, further research is 
warranted. 
C2, C3 and C4). Statistical tests exist to suggest whether 
the mean has changed significantly (Demaree and Nicolis, 
1990) or whether a significant change in trend has 
occurred (Solow, 1987). Usually, investigators test one or 
other of these hypotheses, but not both, so the conclusion 
drawn can depend on the hypothesis that is chosen to be 
tested and whether tests are chosen in advance of the 
analysis of the data or subsequently (Karl, 1988). Never-
theless, some of these changes may have a real physical 
cause and be of obvious importance, such as the rather 
sudden change in the mean winter half year pressure 
around 1976 in the extratropical North Pacific shown in 
Figure 7.23 of S7, p 229 and discussed by Trenberth 
(1990). 
Lin and Zhou (1990) ascribe a climatic "jump" to a 
series if the difference between the average values for two 
successive periods is statistically significant according to a 
t-test, and the length of the transition time between the 
periods is "much less" than their duration. However, they 
appear to have pre-selected the dates of the jumps, 
violating an assumption of the t-test (see Karl, 1988). Also, 
an analysis is needed of how often such behaviour would 
occur in truly random series or in stationary series 
exhibiting persistence. Inevitably, some "jumps" so 
defined will occur and will be statistical artefacts. The 
annual Sahel rainfall series illustrates some of the 
problems (see Figure 7.16b of S7). Demaree and Nicohs 
(1990) suggest that a statistically significant sudden 
reduction in average value occurred in 1967-8, whereas the 
studies of Folland et al (1986) and Rowell et al (1992) 
indicate that the change of rainfall between the 1950s and 
1970s was associated with a relatively steady, if rapid, 
change in interhemispheric SST patterns, a hnk identified 
from empirical and modelling studies. It is important for 
physical understanding of the causes of the Sahel rainfall 
changes that these contrasting interpretations be 
reconciled. Many other examples of such "fast" changes 
exist in regional and local climate records (e.g., Karl and 
Riebsame, 1984), though few have been subjected to 
rigorous analysis. 
Statistical tests apphed to rapid climate changes have a 
useful role. However, the underlying hypotheses should 
accord as far as possible with the physical character of the 
causative processes. Sometimes, for example, apparentiy 
abrupt changes between two climatic mean states (e.g., 
Demaree, 1990) may result from simultaneous processes 
operating on different time-scales. Climate models should 
be used to help to uncover these processes. 
C4.2.3 "Abrupt" Climatic Changes 
C4.2.4 Aerosols 
Features of many irregular climatic time-series are 
C4.2.4.1 Man-made aerosols 
apparently sudden, usually not very large, changes in 
A detailed discussion of man-made aerosols, their 
average value; or sudden changes of trend, such as are seen 
precursors, and their forcing effects on climate is in 
in the global and hemispheric temperature series (Figures 
Section A2.6. Here we limit discussion to the possible 

164 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
effects of aerosols on the temperature record. The atmo-
spheric concentration of aerosols, particularly those 
derived from man-made emissions of SO2, has increased 
significantly this century in many parts of the Northern 
Hemisphere, and sulphate concentrations in industrialized 
areas of eastern Europe and eastern North America are 
now 
10-15 times larger than the expected natural 
concentration of sulphate (see Section A). The bulk of the 
increase of SO2 emissions began in the early 1950s. As 
stated in Section A, man-made, S02-derived aerosols are 
important because they may have acted to retard the 
expected warming from the build-up of greenhouse gases 
and to produce a slower rate of warming in the Northern 
Hemisphere (i.e., a relative cooling) compared with the 
Southern Hemisphere. The approximately IWm"^ negative 
forcing confined to the Northern Hemisphere discussed in 
Section A2.6.1.2 would offset about 50% of the enhanced 
greenhouse forcing of about 2Wm"2 over the past 100 
years. 
Figures C4a and b show that from about 1910 until the 
1950s the Northern Hemisphere surface warmed with 
respect to that of the Southern Hemisphere. This dif-
ferential warming, though consistent with some model 
predictions of more warming in the Northern Hemisphere 
compared with the Southern Hemisphere as greenhouse 
gases are added to the atmosphere, is more likely to have 
been of natural rather than man-made origin, in view of the 
small increase of these gases over that period. From the 
1950s until about 1980, however, the surface of the 
Southern Hemisphere warmed relative to that of the 
Northern Hemisphere by nearly 0.3°C (Table CI). The 
timing of the reversal of relative warming might suggest 
that sulphate aerosols have been a contributory cause, but 
renewed warming of the Northern relative to the Southern 
Hemisphere in the last few years (Figure C4) shows how 
uncertain such conclusions can be. There is, however, 
evidence of a reduction in sulphate aerosol emissions from 
Western Europe since 1980 (Smith, 1991) which could 
have contributed to renewed warming in the Northern 
Hemisphere. These results do not prove the hypothesis of a 
significant aerosol cooling effect on the observed climate 
because the likely signal is still only of a magnitude 
similar to the natural variability (Wigley, 1989; Wigley et 
al., 1992). Many other variables, such as cloudiness 
changes and ocean circulation variations involving the 
North Atlantic (S7, Section 7.7), may lead to natural 
differences between hemispheric temperature trends. 
C4.2.4.2 Volcanic aerosols 
The major eruption of the Philippines volcano Mt. 
Pinatubo in June 1991 may be sufficiently great in its 
climatic effects to allow better physical theories of the 
influence of volcanic eruptions on climate to be developed. 
Section A2.6.2 discusses this further. The August 1991 
eruption of the Chilean volcano Cerro Hudson was at least 
10 times smaller than that of Pinatubo in terms of the 
amount of SO2 emitted into the stratosphere, but was still 
about twice as large as that of Mt. St Helens in 1980 
(Doiron et al, 1992). Mt. Pinatubo may have placed nearly 
3 dmes as much material into the stratosphere as did the 
strong El Chichon eruption of 1982 (Bluth et al, 1992). 
However, Stowe et al (1992), using a different technique, 
have estimated that the Pinatubo eruption may have placed 
a little less than twice as much material there. It is 
provisionally estimated that this sulphur-rich eruption, 
which is the type currently thought to have the maximum 
climatic effects, will temporarily reduce global mean 
surface temperature by 0.3°-0.5°C over the next year or so 
(Stowe et al, 1992). The upper end of this estimate is 
indicated by model simulations carried out by Hansen et 
al (1992) of the possible effect of Pinatubo stratospheric 
aerosols on global land temperature, assuming that the 
aerosols contain twice as much sulphur as did those of El 
Chichon. If this cooling happens, the consequences of the 
Pinatubo eruption, with a small extra contribution from 
Cerro Hudson, could dominate the global surface 
temperature record in 1992 or a little beyond. In response 
to heating of the aerosols, globally averaged lower 
stratospheric temperatures measured by M S U Channel 4 
rose by about 1.3°C between June and October 1991, but 
then began to decline (Figure C9). M S U mid-tropospheric 
temperatures fell by over 0.5°C between June 1991 and 
December 1991, though such decreases are common in the 
record (Spencer and Christy, 1990). 
C4.2.5 Changes in Land Surface Characteristics 
Balling (1991) has pointed out that changes in the amount 
of vegetation due to man's activities can change temp-
eratures regionally. Thus, removal of vegetation, perhaps 
leading eventually to desertification, tends to raise near-
surface air temperatures, at least in warmer climates, as 
more of the incoming solar radiation is used to heat the 
ground and less is used to provide energy for the 
transpiration of plants and trees. Such tendencies will be 
offset by any accompanying increase in surface albedo, 
and the net effect may depend on the character of the 
initial vegetation as indicated by studies in Africa 
(Wendler and Eaton, 1983). Balling contends that, if a 
fraction of the observed global warming can be attributed 
to man-made land-use changes, then less can be attributed 
to the enhanced greenhouse effect. Conversely, such 
effects need to be balanced against the local surface 
cooling that is likely in areas where irrigation, new crop 
growth and new lake surfaces have been developed in 
recent decades. 
C4.2.6. Deep Ocean Heat Storage 
A possible cause of the Northern Hemisphere cooling 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
trend between the 1940s and the 1960s relates to a change 
in the oceanic circulation in the North Atlantic which 
temporarily took more heat from the atmosphere into the 
deep ocean (Wigley and Raper, 1987). S7, p222-223 and 
Figure 7.18, noted that there is good evidence for warming 
below about 600m in the North Atlantic between 1957 and 
1981 and cooling above this level, especially near the 
surface. Watts and Morantine (1991) note the evidence for 
warming in the deeper layers of the North Atlantic and 
calculate that the heat storage involved 
would 
approximately cancel the heat input at the surface due to 
the simultaneous increase in greenhouse gases, confirming 
the earlier results of Wigley and Raper (1987). 
Recent measurements through the full depth of the 
ocean in the South-West Pacific at 28°S and 43°S (Bindoff 
and Church, 1992) show a small warming over much of 
the water column between 1967 and 1989 which is 
significantly larger than the seasonal signal or 
measurement uncertainties. However, the record is too 
short and intermittent at present to distinguish a warming 
trend from interdecadal variability. 
C5 Concluding Remarlcs 
The main conclusions of S7 concerning the reality, 
character and magnitude of global and hemispheric 
warming over the last century remain unaffected by recent 
evidence. The most challenging result of recent research is 
probably the increasingly widespread evidence, though not 
yet conclusive in a globally-averaged sense, of a marked 
decrease in the diurnal range of temperature over land 
largely produced by rising minimum temperatures (Section 
C3.1.5). Is this the result, perhaps partly through increases 
in cloudiness, of an important anthropogenic effect related 
to increasing tropospheric aerosols and are increases in 
greenhouse gases making a contribution? Wider inves-
tigations of the response of the diurnal temperature cycle 
in general circulation models to these effects, differ-
entiated into clear-sky and cloudy conditions, would be 
very desirable. 
In view of the long-standing arguments over the 
possible role of solar variability in climate change, which 
have emerged again here, it is desirable that more progress 
be made in modelling solar dynamics so that likely 
variations in solar luminosity on time-scales of the solar 
cycle to millennia can be better judged. 
Detecting climate change and attributing it to natural 
variability, greenhouse forcing or other factors will require 
a much more interactive and coordinated use of data sets 
and models than has hitherto generally been the case. The 
historical data base needs much improvement as it has 
serious problems of heterogeneity (e.g., Parker, 1990), 
inaccessibility and poor coverage (Folland et a/., 1990a; 
Trenberth et al, 1991). Efforts to tackle some of these 
165 
problems are now increasing (e.g., Erich et al, 1991). 
Differences between the satellite M S U data and the 
radiosonde and surface temperature data need detailed 
investigation while data describing atmospheric circu-
lation variations, known to contain serious inhomo-
geneities, needs much more scrutiny. Recent in situ and 
remotely-sensed data need to be optimally blended and 
made consistent with historical records; this may allow a 
nearly full global coverage of several data sets for the last 
decade or more. Heterogeneities in operational analyses of 
the atmosphere reveal the urgent need for their "re-
analysis" over as long a period as possible using a state-of-
the-art four-dimensional data assimilation. This will allow 
the mechanisms of climate change and variability to be 
much better studied and some of the recent global data sets 
to be improved. 
In the future, remote sensing data must be much more 
extensively used in climate change studies. However, to 
achieve the potential of satellite data for studying climate 
change, the development of methods to ensure 
homogeneity of processed remote sensing data with 
historic data will be essential. The satellites, to be truly 
useful, must provide continual coverage and efforts must 
be made to sustain their calibration over very long periods. 
In this context, the proposals for a Global Climate 
Observing System (GCOS) are highly relevant. In the 
meantime, surface data from developing countries and 
from marine archives need to be rescued, quality-
controlled and added to existing analyses. Finally, 
documentation of changing instrumentation, processing 
schemes, and observing practices must be much better 
systematized so that artificially induced trends in all 
climatic data can be more adequately quantified (Karl et 
al, 1992). 
References 
Angell, J.K., 1988: Variations and trends in tropospheric and 
stratospheric global temperatures, 1958-87. J. Clim., 1, 1296-
1313. 
Anlya, M. and R. Naruse, 1991: Recent glacier variations in the 
Patagonia icefields. South America. Abstracts of an 
International Conference on Climatic Impacts on the 
Environment and Society (CIES), Tsukuba, Japan, 27 Jan-1 
Feb 1991. 
Aristarain, A.J., J. Jouzel, and C. Lorius, 1990: A 400-years 
isotope record of the Antarctic Peninsula Climate. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 17, 2369-2372. 
Arkin, P.A., and M. Chelliah, 1990: An assessment of variations 
of outgoing longwave radiation over the tropics, 1974-1987. 
Draft manuscript submitted to Section 7 of IPCC 1990. 
BalUng, R.C, 1991: Impact of desertification on regional and 
global warming. Bull Am. Met. Soc., 72, 232-234. 

166 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
Barnett, T.P., M.E. Schlesinger and X. Jiang, 1991: On 
greenhouse gas signal detection strategies. In: "Greenhouse-
Gas-Induced Climatic Change: A Critical Appraisal of 
Simulations and Observations", M.E. Schlesinger (Ed.). 
Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp537-558. 
Barry, R.G., 1991: Observational evidence of changes in global 
snovi' and ice cover. In: "Greenhouse-Gas-Induced Climatic 
Change: A Critical Appraisal of Simulations and Obser-
vations", M.E. Schlesinger (Ed.). Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
pp329-345. 
Bates, J.J. and H.F. Diaz, 1991: Evaluation of multi-channel sea 
surface temperature product quality for climate monitoring: 
1982-1988. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 20613-20622. 
Bindoff, N.L. and J.A. Church, 1992: Climate change in the 
southwest Pacific Ocean? Nature. (In press). 
Bluth, G.J.S., S.D. Doiron, C.C. Schnetzler, A.J. Krueger and 
L.S. Walter, 1992: Global Tracking of the SO, clouds from the 
June 1991 Mount Pinatubo eruptions. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 
151-154. 
Bottomley, M., C.K. Folland, J. Hsiung, R.E. Newell and D.E. 
Parker, 1990: Global Ocean Surface Temperature Atlas 
(GOSTA). Joint Met. Office/Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Project Project supported by US Dept of Energy, 
US National Science Foundation and US Office of Naval 
Research. Publication funded by UK Depts of Energy and 
Environment. 20+iv pp and 313 Plates. HMSO, London. 
Bradley R.S., T. Braziunas, J. Cole, J. Eddy, M. Hughes, J. 
Jouzel, W. Karlen, K. Kelts, E. Mosley-Thompson, A. Ogilvie, 
J. Overpeck, J. Pilcher, N. Rutter, M. Stuiver and T.M.L. 
Wigley, 1991: Global Change: The last 2000 years. Report of 
Working Group 1. In "Global Changes of the Past". R.S. 
Bradley, (Ed.). UCAR/Office for Interdisciplinary Earth 
Studies, Boulder, Colorado, 11-24. 
Briffa, K.R., T.S. Bartholin, D. Eckstein, P.D. Jones, W. Karlen, 
F.H. Schweingruber and P. Zetterberg, 1990: A 1,400-year 
tree-ring record of summer temperatures in Fennoscandia. 
Nature, 346, 434-439. 
Briffa, K.R., P.D. Jones, T.S. Bartholin, D. Eckstein, F.H. 
Schweingruber, W. Karlen, P. Zetterberg, and M. Eronen, 
1992: Fennoscandian summers from AD 500: temperature 
changes on short and long timescales. Clim. Dyn. (In press). 
Brown, B.E., 1990: Coral bleaching. B.E Brown (Ed.). Coral 
Reefs, 8 Special Issue, 153-232. 
Bruhl, C. and P.J. Crutzen, 1989; On the disproportionate role of 
tropospheric ozone as a filter against UV-B radiation. Geoph. 
Res. Lett., 16, 296-306. 
Biicher, A. and J. Dessens, 1991: Secular trend of surface temp-
erature at an elevated observatory in the Pyrenees. J. Clim., 4, 
859-868. 
Cardone, V.J., I.G. Greenwood and M.A. Cane, 1990: On trends 
in historical marine wind data. /. Clim., 3, 113-127. 
Chelliah, M . and P. Arkin, 1992: Large-scale interannual 
variability of monthly outgoing long wave radiation anomalies 
over the global tropics. J. Clim., 5. (In press). 
Chen, L., Y. Shao, M . Dong, Z. Ren and G. Tian, 1991: 
Preliminary analysis of climatic variation during the last 39 
years in China. Adv. Atmos. Sci., 8, 279-288. 
Cook, E., T. Bird, M. Peterson, M. Barbetti, B. Buckley, R. 
D'Arrigo, R. Francey and P. Tans, 1991: Climate change in 
Tasmania inferred from a 1089-year tree-ring chronology of 
Huon pine. Science, 253, 1266-1268. 
Currie, R.G. and D.P. O'Brien, 1990: Deterministic signals in 
USA precipitation records: Part 1. Int. J. Climatol, 10, 795-
818. 
D'Elia, C.F., R.W. Buddemeier and S.V. Smith (Eds.), 1991: 
Workshop on Coral Bleaching. Coral Reef Ecosystems and 
Global Change: Report of Proceedings. Maryland Sea Grant 
College Publication, 51pp. 
Demaree, G.R., 1990: Did an abrupt global climatic warming 
occur in the 1920s? In: Contributions d Vetude des change-
ments de climat. Publications IRM, Ser. A, 124, Brussels, 32-
37. 
Demaree, G.R. and C. Nicolis, 1990: Onset of Sahelian drought 
viewed as a fluctuation-induced transition. Q. J. Roy. Met. 
Soc, 116, 221-238. 
Doake, C.S.M. and D.G. Vaughan, 1991: Rapid disintegration of 
the Wordie Ice Shelf in response to atmospheric forcing. 
Nature, 350, 328-330. 
Doiron S.D., G.J.S. Bluth, C.C. Schnetzler, A.J. Krueger and 
L.S. Walter, 1992: Transport of Cerro Hudson SOj clouds. 
EOS Transact, 72, No 45, 489 and 498. 
Elliott, W.P. and D.J. Gaffen, 1991: On the utihty of radiosonde 
humidity archives for climate studies. Bull. Am. Met. Soc. 72, 
1507-1520. 
Elliott, W.P., M.E. Smith and J.K. Angell, 1991: Monitoring 
tropospheric water vapor changes using radiosonde data. In: 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced Climatic Change: A Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations, M.E. Schlesinger, 
(Ed.). Elsevier, pp311-328. 
Eisner, J.B. and A.A. Tsonis, 1991a: Comparisons of observed 
Northern Hemisphere surface air temperature records. 
Geophys. Res. Lett, 18, 1229-1232. 
Eisner, J.B., and A.A. Tsonis, 1991b: Do bi-decadal oscillations 
exist in the global temperature record? Nature, 353, 551-553. 
Farmer, G., T.M.L. Wigley, P.D. Jones and M. Salmon, 1989: 
Documenting and explaining recent global-mean temperature 
changes. Climatic Research Unit, Norwich, Final Report to 
NERC, UK, Contract GR3/6565, 141pp. 
Fitzharris, B.B., J.E. Hay and P.D. Jones, 1992: Behaviour of 
New Zealand glaciers and atmospheric circulation changes 
over the last 130 years. Holocene, 1, No. 2. (In press). 
Flohn, H., A. Kapala, H.R. Knoche and H. Machel, 1990a: 
Recent changes of the tropical water and energy budget and of 
mid-latitude circulations. Clim. Dyn., 4, 237-252. 
Flohn, H., A. Kapala, H.R. Knoche and H. Machel, 1990b: 
Recent changes of the tropical water and energy budget and of 
mid-latitude circulations. Chaper VI of Observed Climate 
Variations and Change: Contributions in support of Section 7 
of the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, D.E. Parker, (Ed.), 
IPCCAVMO/UNEP, 11pp. 
Flohn, H., A. Kapala, H.R. Knoche and H. Machel, 1992: Water 
vapour as an amplifier of the greenhouse effect: new aspects. 
Met. Zeit.. (In press). 
Folland, C.K., 1990: The global and hemispheric surface 
temperature curves in the IPCC Report. Chapter VII of 
Observed Climate Variations and Change: Contributions in 
Support of Section 7 of the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
D.E. Parker (Ed.), IPCCAVMO/UNEP, 5pp. 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
167 
Folland, C.K., 1991: Sea temperature bucket models used to 
correct historical sea surface temperature data in the 
Meteorological Office. CRTN 14, 29pp. Available from the 
National Met. Library, London Rd, Bracknell, Berks, RG12 
2SZ, UK. 
Folland, C.K,, S.J, Foreman, P, Delecluse, K,J, Holmen and P, 
Caspar, 1990a: Working Group Report on Climate Obser-
vations. In: Climate-Ocean Interaction. M.E, Schlesinger 
(Ed,), Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp353-360, 
Folland, C,K„ T,R. Karl and K,Ya, Vinnikov, 1990b: Observed 
climate variations and change. In: Climate Change, the IPCC 
Scientific Assessment, J,T, Houghton, G,J, Jenkins and J.J, 
Ephraums (Eds,). WMO/UNEP/IPCC, Cambridge University 
Press, ppl95-238. 
Folland, C.K., T.N. Palmer and D.E. Parker, 1986: Sahel rainfall 
and worldwide sea temperatures 1901-85. Nature, 320, 602-
607. 
Folland, C.K. and D.E. Parker, 1992: A physically-based 
technique for correcting historical sea surface temperature 
data. Being submitted to Q. J. Roy. Met. Soc. 
Folland, C.K., R.W, Reynolds, M, Gordon and D.E, Parker, 
1992: A study of six operational sea surface temperature 
analyses, J. Clim. (In press), 
Frich, P„ B, Br0dsgaard and J, Cappelen, 1991; North Atlantic 
Climatological Dataset (NACD), Present status and future 
plans, Danish Meteorological Institute - Technical Report 91-
8, 27pp, 
Friis-Christensen, E, and K, Lassen, 1991: Length of the solar 
cycle: an indicator of solar activity closely associated with 
climate. Science, 254, 698-700, 
Fu, C, and H.F, Diaz, 1992: An analysis of recent changes in 
oceanic latent heat flux. Submitted to J. Clim. 
Gaffen, D,J„ T,P, Barnett and W,P, Elliott, 1991: Space and time 
scales of global tropospheric moisture, J. Clim., 4, 989-1008, 
Gandin, L,S,, 1963: Objective analysis of meteorological fields. 
Translated from Russian by the Israeli Program for Scientific 
Translations, 1965, 242pp, 
Ghil, M, and R, Vautard, 1991: Interdecadal oscillations and the 
warming trend in global temperature time series. Nature, 350, 
324-327, 
Gloersen, P, and W.J, Campbell, 1991: Recent variations in 
Arctic and Antarctic sea-ice covers. Nature, 352, 33-36, 
Glynn, P,W,, 1991: Coral reef bleaching in the 1980s and 
possible connections with global warming. Trends in Ecology 
and Evolution, 6, 175-179, 
Glynn, P,W, and W.H, de Weerdt, 1991: Ehmination of two reef-
building hydrocorals following the 1982-83 E! Nino warming 
event. Science, 253, 69-71, 
Groisman, P,Ya., V,V, Koknaeva, T,A, Belokrylova and T,R, 
Karl, 1991: Overcoming biases of precipitation measurement: 
a history of the USSR experience. Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 12, 
1725-1733, 
Haeberli, W,, 1990: Glacier and permafrost signals of 20th-
century warming. Annals of Glaciology, 14. 99-101, 
Haeberii, W, and P, Miiller, 1988: Fluctuations of glaciers, 1980-
1985, Vol, V, World Glacier Monitoring Service, Laboratory 
of Hydraulics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, 
Prepared for the International Association of Hydrological 
Sciences, UNEP and UNESCO. 
Halpert, M.S. and CF. Ropelewski, 1991: Climate Assessment: 
A Decadal Review 1981-1990. NOAA/NWS/NMC. 109pp. 
Hansen, J.E. and A.A. Lacis, 1990: Sun and dust versus green-
house gases; an assessment of their relative roles in global 
climate change. Nature, 346, 713-719. 
Hansen, J., A. Lacis, R. Ruedy and M. Sato, 1992: Potential 
climate impact of Mount Pinatubo eruption. Geopys. Res. Lett., 
19,215-218, 
Hansen, J, and S, Lebedeff, 1988: Global surface air tempera-
tures: update through 1987, Geophys. Res. Lett., 15, 323-326, 
Henderson-Sellers, A„ 1990: Review of our current information 
about cloudiness changes this century, Chaper XI of Observed 
Climate Variations and Change: Contributions in support of 
Section 7 of the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, D,E, Parker, 
(Ed,), IPCCAVMO/UNEP, 12pp, 
Hulme, M,, R, Marsh and P,D, Jones, 1992: Global changes in a 
humidity index between 1931-60 and 1961-90, Climate 
Research. (Submitted), 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
J,T, Houghton, G,J. Jenkins and J,J, Ephraums, (Eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365pp, 
Isemer, H-J, and L, Hasse, 1991: The scientific Beaufort 
equivalent scale: effects on wind statistics and climatological 
air-sea tiux estimates in the North Atlantic Ocean, J. Clim., 4, 
819-836, 
Jones, P.D,, 1988: Hemispheric surface air temperature 
variations: recent trends and an update to 1987, J. Clim., 1, 
654-660, 
Jones, P,D,, 1990: Antarctic temperatures over the present 
century - a study of the early expedition record, /, Clim., 3, 
1193-1203, 
Jones, P,D,, P,Ya, Groisman, M, Coughlan, N, Plummer, W,-C, 
Wang and T,R, Kari, 1990: Assessment of urbanization effects 
in time series of surface air temperature over land. Nature, 
347, 169-172, 
Jones, P,D„ R, Marsh, T,M,L, Wigley and D.A. Peel, 1992: 
Decadal timescale links between Antarctic Peninsula ice core 
oxygen-18 and deuterium and temperature. Holocene. 
(Submitted). 
Jones, P.D,, T,M,L, Wigley and G, Farmer, 1991: Marine and 
land temperature data sets: a comparison and a look at recent 
trends. In: Greenhouse-Gas-Induced Climatic Change: a 
Critical Appraisal of Simulations and Observations. M,E, 
Schlesinger (Ed), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 153-172, 
Karl, T.R,, 1988: Multi-year fluctuations of temperature and 
precipitation: the gray area of climate change. Climate Change, 
12, 179-197, 
Karl, T,R, and W,E. Riebsame, 1984: The identification of 10- to 
20-year temperature and precipitation fluctuations in the 
contiguous United States. J. Clim. and Appl. Met., 23, 950-966. 
Karl, T.R., R.R. Helm, Jr. and R,G, Quayle, 1991a: The 
greenhouse effect in Central North America: If not now when? 
Science,2S\, 1058-1061, 
Karl. T,R„ G, Kukla, V,N, Razuvayev, M,J, Changery, R.G. 
Quayle, R.R. Heim. Jr., D.R, Easteriing and C B , Fu, 1991b: 
Global warming: evidence for asymmetric diurnal temperature 
change, Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 2253-2256, 

168 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
Karl, T.R., R.G. Quayle and P.Ya Groisman, 1992: Detecting 
climate variations and change: new challenges for observing 
and data management systems. / Clim. (In press). 
Karoly, D.J., J.A. Cohen, G.A. Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, A.H. 
Oort, R.J. Stouffer and R.T. Wetherald, 1992: An example of 
fingerprint detection of greenhouse climate change. Clim. Dyn. 
(Submitted). 
Kelly, P.M., C M . Goodess and B.S.G. Cherry, 1987: The 
interpretation of the Icelandic sea-ice record. J. Geophys. Res., 
92, 10835-10843. 
Kelly, P.M., P.D. Jones, T.M.L. Wigley, R.S. Bradley, H.F. Diaz 
and C M . Goodess, 1985: The extended Northern Hemisphere 
surface air temperature record: 1851-1984. In Extended 
Summaries, Third Conference on Climate Variations and 
Symposium on Contemporary Climate: 1850-2100, American 
Meteorological Society, pp35-36. 
Kelly, P.M. and T.M.L. Wigley, 1990: The influence of solar 
forcing trends on global mean temperature since 1861. Nature, 
347, 460-462. 
Labitzke, K. and H. van Loon, 1991: Some complications in 
determining trends in the stratosphere. Adv. Space Res., 11, 
(3)21-(3)30. 
Labitzke, K. and H. van Loon, 1992: Association between the 
11-year solar cycle and the atmosphere. Part V: J. Clim., 5. (In 
press). 
Legates, D.R. and C.J. Willmott, 1990: Mean seasonal and 
spatial variability in gauge-corrected, global precipitation. Int. 
J. Climatol, 10, 111-127. 
Lin, X.-C. and X. Zhou, 1990: The stages and jumps of long-
term variation of the atmospheric circulation. Chapter XIV of 
Observed Climate Variations and Change: Contributions in 
Support of Section 7 of the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
D.E. Parker (Ed.), IPCCAVMO/UNEP, 17pp. 
Lough, J.M., 1991: Rainfall variations in Queensland, Australia, 
1891-1986. Int. J. Climatol, 11, 745-768. 
Mayo, L.R. and R.S. March, 1990: Air temperature and pre-
cipitation at Wolverine Glacier, Alaska; glacier growth in a 
warmer, wetter climate. Ann. Glacial, 191-194. 
McClain, E.P., W.G. Pichel and C.C. Walton, 1985: Com-
parative performance of AVHRR-based multi-channel sea 
surface temperature. J. Geophys. Res., 90, 11587-11601. 
McLaren, A.S., R.G. Barry and R.H. Bourke, 1990: Could 
Arctic ice be thinning? Nature, 345, 762. 
Meier, M.F., 1984: Contribution of small glaciers to global sea 
level. Science, 226, 1418-1421. 
Morgan, V.I., I.D. Goodwin, D.M. Etheridge and CW. Wookey, 
1991: Evidence from Antarctic ice cores for recent increases in 
snow accumulation. Nature, 354, 58-60. 
Naujokat, B., 1981: Long-term variations in the stratosphere of 
the Northern Hemisphere during the last two sunspot cycles. J. 
Geophys. Res., 86, 9811-9816. 
Newell, N.E., R.E. Newell, J. Hsiung and Z. Wu, 1989: Global 
marine temperature variation and the solar magnetic cycle. 
Geophys. Res. Lett, 16, 311-314. 
Newell, R.E., 1970: Stratospheric temperature change from the 
Mt. Agung volcanic eruption of 1963. J. Atmos. Sci., 27, 977-
978. 
Nicholls, N. and B. Lavery, 1992; Australian rainfall trends 
during the twentieth century. Int. J. Climatol, 12. (In press). 
Nitta, T. and S. Yamada, 1989: Recent warming of tropical sea 
surface temperature and its relationship to the Northern 
Hemisphere circulation. / Met Soc. Japan, 67, 375-383. 
Norton, D.A., K.R. Briffa and M.J. Salinger, 1989: 
Reconstruction of New Zealand summer temperatures to 1730 
AD using dendroclimatic techniques. Int J. Climatol, 9, 633-
644. 
Oke, T.R., G.T. Johnson, D.G. Steyn and I.D. Watson, 1991: 
Simulation of surface urban heat islands under "ideal" 
conditions at night. Part 2; Diagnostics of causation. Boundary 
Layer Met, 56, 339-358. 
Oort, A.H. and H. Liu, 1992: Upper air temperature trends over 
the globe, 1958-1989. J. Clim. (In press). 
Parker, D.E., 1990: Effects of changing exposure of 
thermometers at land stations. Chapter XVIII of Observed 
Climate Variations and Change: Contributions in Support of 
Section 7 of the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, D.E. Parker 
(Ed.), IPCC/WMO/UNEP, 31pp. 
Parker, D.E. and P.D. Jones, 1991: Global warmth in 1990. 
Weather, 46, 302-311. 
Parker, D.E., T. Legg and C.K. Folland, 1992: A new daily 
Central England Temperature series, 1772-1991. Int. J. 
Climatol (In press). 
Patzelt, G. and M. Aellen, 1990: Gletscher. In: Schnee, Eis und 
Wasser der Alpen in einer warmeren Atmosphare. D. Vischer, 
(Ed.). Versuchsansalt fiir Wasserbau, Hydrologic und 
Glaziologie, 108, 49-69. ETH, Zurich. 
Peel, D.A., 1992: Ice core evidence from the Antarctic Peninsula 
region. In: Climate Since AD1500, R.S. Bradley and P.D. 
Jones (Eds.). Roudedge, pp.549-571. 
Plantico, M.S., T.R. Karl, G. Kukia and J. Gavin, 1990; Is recent 
climate change across the United States related to rising levels 
of anthropogenic greenhouse gases? J. Geophys. Res., 95, 
16,617-16,637. 
Plummer, N., 1991: Annual mean temperature anomalies over 
eastern Australia. Bull Austr. Met. and Ocean. Soc., 4, 42-44. 
Quayle, R.G., D.R. Easterling, T.R. Karl and P.M. Hughes, 
1991; Effects of recent thermometer changes in the cooperative 
station network. Bull Am. Met Soc, 11, 1718-1723. 
Raper, S.C.B., T.M.L. Wigley, P.R. Mayes, P.D. Jones and M.J. 
Salinger, 1984; Variations in surface air temperatures. Part 3; 
The Antarctic, 1957-82. Monthly Weather Review, 112, 1341-
1353. 
Reid, G.C, 1991; Solar total irradiance variations and the global 
sea surface temperature record. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 2835-
2844. 
Reynaud, L., M. Vallon, S. Martin and A. Letreguilly, 1984; 
Spatio-temporal distribution of the glacial mass balance in the 
Alpine, Scandinavian and Tien Shan areas. Geografiska 
Annaler, 66A/3, 239-247. 
Reynolds, R.W., C.K. Folland and D.E. Parker, 1989; Biases in 
satellite-derived sea surface temperature data. Nature, 341, 
728-731. 
Reynolds R.W. and D.C. Marsico, 1992: An improved real-time 
global sea surface temperature analysis. J. Clim. (Submitted). 
Roberts, L., 1991: Greenhouse role in reef stress unproven. 
Science, 253, 258-259. 

C Observed Climate Variability and Change 
169 
Robinson, D.A., F.T. Keimig and K.F. Dewey, 1991: Recent 
variations in Northern Hemisphere snow cover. Proc. 15th 
NOAA Annual Climate Diagnostics Workshop, Asheville, 
N.C., 29 Oct-2 Nov 1990, pp219-224. 
Rowell D.P., C.K. Folland, K. Maskell, J.A. Owen and M.N. 
Ward, 1992: Causes and predictability of Sahel rainfall 
variability. Geophys. Res. Lett. (In press). 
Salinger, M.J., 1990: Southern climates in the 19th and 20th 
centuries. In: Southern Landscapes, G. Kearsley and B. 
Fitzharris (Eds.). Univ. of Otago, Dunedin, pp27-38. 
Salinger, M.J. and B. Collen, 1991: Climate trends in the South 
Pacific. Proceedings of the Conference South Pacific 
Environments: Interactions with weather and climate. 
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, pp 176-177. 
Schonwiese, C.-D. and K. Runge, 1991: Some updated statistical 
assessments of the surface temperature response to increased 
greenhouse gases, bit. J. ClimatoL, 11, 237-250. 
Schonwiese, C.-D. and U. Stabler, 1991: Multi-forced statistical 
assessments of greenhouse-gas-induced surface air temperature 
change 1890-1985. Clim. Dynam., 6, 23-33. 
Scotto, J., G. Cotton, F. Urbach, D. Berger and T. Fears, 1988: 
Biologically-effective ultraviolet radiation: Surface 
measurements in the United States, 1974-1985. Science, 239, 
762-764. 
Shi, Y.F., 1989: The warming and dry trend in Northwest China 
according to the changes of mountain glaciers and the lakes. 
Proc. Water Resources Conf., Dept of Earth Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, Jan 1989. 
Shine, K.P., R.G. Derwent, D.J. Wuebbles and J-J. Morcrette, 
1990: Radiative forcing of climate. In: Climate Change. The 
IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and 
J.J. Ephraums (Eds.). WMO/UNEP/IPCC, Cambridge 
University Press, pp41-68. 
Shine, K.P. and A. Sinha, 1991: Sensitivity of the Earth's climate 
to height-dependent changes in the water vapour mixing ratio. 
Nature, 354, 382-384. 
Smith, F.B., 1991: Regional air pollution, with special emphasis 
on Europe. Q.J. Roy. Met. Soc, 117, 657-683. 
Solow, A.R., 1987: Testing for climate change: an application of 
the two phase regression model. J. Clim. Appl. Met., 26, 1401-
1405. 
SORG, 1991: Stratospheric Ozone 1991. Report of the UK 
Stratospheric Ozone Review Group. HMSO, London, 18pp. 
Spencer, R.W. and J.R. Christy, 1990: Precise monitoring of 
global temperature trends from satellites. Science, 247, 1558-
1562. 
Spencer, R.W. and J.R. Christy, 1992a: Precision and radiosonde 
validation of satellite gridpoint temperature anomalies. Part I: 
MSU Channel 2. J. Clim. (In press). 
Spencer, R.W. and J.R. Christy, 1992b: Precision and radiosonde 
validation of satellite gridpoint temperature anomalies. Part II: 
A tropospheric retrieval and trends 1979-90. 
Clim. (In 
press). 
Spencer, R.W., J.R. Christy and N.C. Grody, 1990: Global 
atmospheric temperature monitoring with satellite microwave 
measurements: method and results 1979-84. J. Clim., 3, 1111-
1128. 
Stowe, L.L., R.M. Carey and P.P. Pellegrino, 1992: Monitoring 
the Mt. Pinatubo aerosol layer with NOAA/11 AVHRR data. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 159-162. 
Strong, A.E., 1989: Greater global warming revealed by satellite-
derived sea surface temperature trends. Nature, 338, 642-645. 
Trenberth, K.E., 1990: Recent observed interdecadal climate 
changes in the Northern Hemisphere. Bull. Amer. Met. Soc, 
71, 988-993. 
Trenberth, K.E., J.R. Christy and J.W. Hurrell, 1992: 
Monitoring global monthly mean surface temperatures. J. 
Clim. (In press). 
Trenberth, K.E. and J.G. Olson, 1989: Temperature trends at the 
South Pole and McMurdo Sound. J. Clim., 2, 1196-1206. 
Trenberth, K.E. and J.G. Olson, 1991: Representativeness of a 
63-station network for depicting climate changes. In 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced Climatic Change: A Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations, M.E. Schlesinger, 
(Ed.). Elsevier, pp249-259. 
Trenberth, K.E., & 16 other authors, 1991: Working Group 1: 
Climate Observations. In: Greenhouse-Gas-Induced Climatic 
Change: A Critical 
Appraisal 
of Simulations 
and 
Observations, M.E. Schlesinger (Ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
pp571-582. 
Van Engelen, A.F.V. and J.W. Nellestijn, 1992: Monthly, 
seasonal and annual means of air temperature in tenths of 
centigrade in De Bilt, Netherlands, 1706-1991. KNMI, De Bilt, 
5pp. 
Van Loon, H. and K. Labitzke, 1990: Association between the 
11-year solar cycle and the atmosphere. Part IV: The 
stratosphere, not grouped by the phase of the QBO. J. Clim., 3, 
827-837. 
Vinnikov, K.Ya., P.Ya. Groisman and K.M. Lugina, 1990: 
Empirical data on contemporary global climate changes 
(temperature and precipitation). J. Clim., 3, 662-677. 
Wadhams, P., 1990: Evidence for thinning of the Arctic sea ice 
cover north of Greenland. Nature, 345, 795-797. 
Wang, S.-W. and R. Wang, 1991: Little Ice Age in China. 
Chinese Sci. Bull, 36, 217-220. 
Wang, R., S.-W. Wang and K. Fraedrich, 1991: An approach to 
reconstruction of temperature on a seasonal basis using 
historical documents from China. Int. J. ClimatoL, 11, 381-
392. 
Ward, M.N., 1992: Provisionally corrected surface wind data, 
worldwide ocean-atmosphere surface fields and Sahel rainfall 
variability. J. Clim. (In press). 
Warrick, R. and J. Oerlemans, 1990: Sea level rise. In: Climate 
Change. The IPCC Scientific A.ssessment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. 
Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (Eds.). WMO/UNEP, IPCC, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp257-281. 
Watts, R.G. and M.C. Morantine, 1991: Is the greenhouse gas 
climate signal hiding in the deep ocean? Climatic Change, 18, 
No. 4, ppiii-vi. 
Weber, G.-R., 1990: Spatial and temporal variation of sunshine 
in the Federal Republic of Germany. Theor Appl. Clim., 41, 
1-9. 
Wendler, G. and F. Eaton, 1983: On the desertification of the 
Sahel zone. Part 1. Ground observations. Climatic Change. 5. 
365-380. 

770 
Observed Climate Variability and Change C 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1989: Possible climate change due to SOj 
derived cloud condensation nuclei. Nature, 339, 365-367. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and T.P. Barnett, 1990: Detection of the 
greenhouse effect in the observations. In Climate Change: The 
IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and 
J.J. Ephraums (Eds.). WMO/UNEP/IPCC, Cambridge 
University Press, pp239-255. 
Wigley, T.M.L., P.D. Jones and P.M. Kelly, 1986: Empirical 
Climate Studies. In: The Greenhouse Effect, Climatic Change 
and Ecosystems, B. Bolin, B.R. Doos, J. Jager and R.A. 
Warrick (Eds.). SCOPE 29, Wiley, Chichester. 
Wigley, T.M.L., P.D. Jones, P.M. Kelly and M. Hulme, 1992: 
Update of global surface temperature changes and an 
interpretation of past variations. Proc. 16th NOAA Annual 
Climate Diagnostics Workshop. (In press). 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1987: Thermal expansion of 
seawater associated with global warming. Nature, 330, 127-
131. 
Williams, R.S., Jr. and J.G. Ferrigno, (Eds.), 1988-1991: Satellite 
image atias of glaciers of the world. U.S. Geological Survey 
Professional Papers 1386-B "Antarctica" (1988); 1386-G 
"Middle East and Africa" (1991); 1386-H "Irian Jaya, 
Indonesia and New Zealand" (1989). Washington, D.C. 
WMO, 1991: Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment 
(GEWEX). Report of the Third Session of the JSC Scientific 
Steering Group for GEWEX. ICSU/WMO WCRP-57, 
WMO/TD No. 424, 63pp. 
Wood, F.B., 1988: Global Alpine glacier trends, 1960's - 1980's. 
Arctic and Alpine Research, 20, 404-413. 
Woodruff, S.D., 1990: Preliminary comparison of COADS(US) 
and MDB(UK) ship reports. Chapter XXVII of Observed 
Climate Variations and Change: Contributions in Support of 
Section 7 of the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, D.E. Parker 
(Ed.), IPCC/WMO/UNEP, 36pp. 
Woodruff S.D., R.J. Slutz, R.L. Jenne and P.M. Steurer, 1987: 
A Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set. Bull. Amer. 
Met. Soc, 6%, 1239-1250. 
World Glacier Monitoring Service, 1991: Glacier Mass 
Balance Bulletin No. 1 (1988-1989). A contribution to the 
Global Environment Monitoring System (GEMS) and the 
International Hydrological Programme, W. Haeberli and E. 
Herren (Eds.). lAHS (ICSU)/UNEP/ UNESCO, 70pp. 
World Water Balance and Water Resources of the Earth, 
1974 (Russian) and 1978 (English). UNESCO, 638pp. 
Wu, Z., R.E. Newell and J. Hsiung, 1990: Possible factors 
controlling global marine temperature variations over the past 
century. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 11799-11810. 
Zwally, H.J., 1991: Global warming: Breakup of Antarctic ice. 
Nature, 350, 274. 

A N N E X 
Climatic consequences of emissions and a 
comparison of IS92a and SA90 
J.F.B. Mitchell; J.M. Gregory 

 

Annex 
173 
Annex 
For the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment (IPCC, 1990), 
IPCC Working Group III developed four scenarios of 
future emissions of greenhouse gases. These were used by 
Working Group I to produce estimates of the resulting rate 
and magnitude of climate change, represented by the 
global average surface temperature. In the current report, 
six revised emissions scenarios (referred to as IS92a-f) 
have been described (see Section A3). The purpose of this 
Annex is to present calculations of the temperature rise 
consequent on these new scenarios and to compare IS92a 
with the IPCC 1990 Scenario A (SA90) using the same 
assumptions as those used in IPCC (1990). 
The calculations are performed using a one-dimensional 
climate model and a series of gas cycle models that relate 
emissions to concentration changes (STUGE, Wigley et 
al, 1991). The climate model is essentially the same as the 
model used by IPCC (1990) and it reproduces their resuhs 
well. For instance, using SA90 with a climate sensitivity of 
2.5°C, IPCC 1990 found a warming of 3.3°C over the 
period 1990-2100 (see IPCC, 1990, Figure A.9). For the 
same scenario, the model gives the same figure to within 
0.1 °C. The gas cycle models simulate well the IPCC 
(1990) concentration projections (which were obtained by 
averaging the results from a number of different models) 
for the full range of emission scenarios considered by 
IPCC (1990). 
The inputs to the model are the projected emissions of 
carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) 
and the halocarbons CFC-11, CFC-12 and HCFC-22. CO2 
emissions are converted to concentrations using a simple 
carbon cycle model, developed by parametrizing results 
from an ocean circulation model including a carbon cycle. 
CH4 concentrations are obtained from a mass balance with 
exponential decay terms representing atmospheric 
destruction and the soil sink. The lifetime for the former 
process is made to depend on CH4 concentration and CO2 
emissions. N2O and halocarbons, however, are treated as 
having constant decay times. Note that we have not 
updated the atmospheric lifetimes of CFC-11 (65 years), 
CFC-12 (130 years) and CH4 to the later estimates given in 
Section A3. 
The time-series of atmospheric concentration of the 
various gases are used to calculate the resulting changes in 
radiative forcing, following Table 2.2 of IPCC (1990). 
Halocarbons, other than the three named above, are not 
handled directly by the model, but are accounted for by 
scaling up, by a factor of 1.43, the combined effects of 
CFC-11 and CFC-12. The direct radiative effect of the 
C H 4 concentration is also inflated, by a factor of 1.3, in 
order to represent the effect of stratospheric water vapour 
produced by oxidation of methane. No account is taken of 
the influence of ozone or sulphate aerosols. 
The time-series of radiative forcing is then applied to an 
upwelling-diffusion energy-balance climate model. 
Essentially, this comprises an oceanic mixed-layer coupled 
to a vertical water column in which heat is transported by 
diffusion and advection. The model is one-dimensional, 
but the presence of land masses is accounted for by 
having separate, zero-heat-capacity boxes for land in each 
hemisphere. The response of the climate system to the 
changes in radiative forcing is principally determined by 
the climate sensitivity, normally quoted as the equilibrium 
global mean temperature change expected for a doubling 
of atmospheric CO2. In the model, this parameter accounts 
for all ways in which the mixed-layer loses heat except for 
the flux into the deep ocean. Climate feedbacks are not 
explicitly modelled but their effects are accounted for by 
the choice of a range of values of the climate sensitivity. 
Three different values were used, namely 1.5°C, 2.5°C (the 
IPCC (1990) "best-estimate") and 4.5°C. For these and the 
other parameters of the model (depth of the mixed-layer, 
ocean thermal diffusivity, rate of upwelling and 
temperature response of polar sinking water) the same 
values were chosen as in IPCC (1990). 
Two points should be noted concerning the emissions 
scenarios as they are entered into the model. Firstly, the 
model fixes the 1990 emissions in each case to accord with 
the values used in IPCC (1990) . These figures do not 
agree with those in IS92; this causes an inevitable 
discrepancy between the intended emissions and the 
figures actually used for 1990-1995 (for the halocarbons) 
or 1990-2000 (for the other gases). Secondly, the current 
version of the model requires scenarios to be specified as 
figures at a certain number of fixed times, and linear 
interpolation is performed between them. Thus the points 
used by the model do not all correspond to those used in 
the scenarios, leading to small differences in some cases 
because of discrepancies in the periods of linear 
interpolation. 
The largest radiative forcing is produced by IS92e and f 
(Figure Ax.l). CFCs are phased out more rapidly in IS92e, 
giving slightly less forcing early in the century, but larger 
increases in CO2 emissions later on result in larger forcing 
in IS92e. Of the middle scenarios (IS92a and b), IS92a has 
slightly greater CO2 emissions, while CFCs are phased out 
faster in IS92b, so the forcing is larger in IS92a 
throughout. In the low scenarios (IS92c and d), CFCs are 
phased out rapidly in IS92d early on, giving smaller 
forcing, but large reductions in CO2 emissions in IS92c 
later on reverse the order of the magnitudes of forcing in 
the latter half of the century. 
Using the "best-estimate" sensitivity, these scenarios 
give a range of warming from 1.5 to 3.5°C by the year 
2100 (Figure Ax.2). Also shown are the warmings with 

174 
Annex 
low, best-estimate and high climate sensitivides for IS92a 
which give warmings of 2 to 4°C over the next hundred 
years (Figure Ax.3). 
It is also instructive to compare IS92a with SA90. The 
concentrations of CO2 and N2O are similar (Figures Ax.4 
and Ax.5) but CH4 concentrations are slightly higher in the 
1990 Scenario. The difference in forcing due to these gases 
is about 0.4Wm-2 (Figure Ax.6). However, the concen-
trations of HCFC grow much more rapidly in the SA90 
case, and the concentrations of CFCs increase whereas in 
IS92a they decrease (Figure Ax.7) giving a difference of 
about 0.7Wm"2 
radiative forcing (Figure Ax.8). Thus the 
forcing is about 15% less in IS92a (Figure Ax.9), giving a 
slightiy smaller warming (Figure Ax. 10). 
References: 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment. 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (Eds.). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365pp. 
Wigley, T.M.L., T. Holt and S.C.B. Raper, 1991: STUGE (An 
Interactive Greenhouse Model): User's Manual. Climatic 
Research Unit, Norwich, UK, 44pp. 
Best estimate temperature changes 
under IS92 and SA90 
Forcing under IS92 scenarios 
Figure Ax.l: Changes (post-1990) in radiative forcing (Wm-2) 
arising from scenarios IS92a-f derived from the model of Wigley 
et al. (1991). IS92a, c and e are shown as solid curves; b, d and f 
are shown as dashed. No allowance has been made for changes in 
ozone or for the effects of increases in sulphate aerosol. 
Figure Ax.3: As for Figure Ax. 1 but for temperature change 
(°C) assuming a "Best-estimate" climate sensitivity of 2.5°C. The 
changes due to SA90 are shown as solid circles. 
Figure Ax.l: Simulated changes in global mean temperature 
after 1990 under IS92a due to doubling CO2 assuming High, 
"Best-estimate" and Low climate sensitivities (4.5, 2.5 and 1.5°C 
respectively). 
Figure Ax.4: CO2 concentrations (ppm) derived from IS92a 
(dashed curve) and SA90 (solid curve). 

Annex 
175 
CH4 and N2O 
concentrations 
under S A M and IS92a 
IS92a, SA90 
-1 
r 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2060 
2070 
Year 
Forcing for CFC-11, CFC-12 & HCFC-22 
H C F C , SA90 
CFC-12, SA90 
H C F C , IS92a 
CFC-12, IS92a 
CFC-11, SA90 
CFC-11, IS92a 
- 1 
1 
r 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
Year 
Figure Ax.5: As for Figure Ax.4 but for methane and nitrous 
oxide. IS92a = dashed curves; SA90 = solid curves. 
Figure Ax.8: Changes (since pre-industrial times) in radiative 
forcing (Wm-2) 
d^g changes in halocarbon concentrations 
shown in Figure Ax.7. IS92a = dotted and dashed curves; SA90 = 
solid curves. 
Forcing for CO2, 
C H 4 and H2O 
Net forcing for SA90 & iS92a 
-1 
r 
2030 
2060 
Year 
SA90 
IS92a 
IS92a, SA90 
-1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
r 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
Year 
Figure Ax.6: Changes (since pre-industrial times) in radiative 
forcing (Wm-^) due to increases in carbon dioxide, methane and 
nitrous oxide. IS92a = dashed curves; SA90 = solid curves. 
Figure Ax.9: Changes (post-1990) in net radiative forcing under 
SA90 and lS92a (all gases). No allowance has been made for 
changes in ozone concentrations or for increases in sulphate 
aerosols. IS92a = dashed curve; SA90 = solid curve. 
Concentrations for CFC-11, CFC-12 & HCFC-22 
4000 
3000 H 
1000 H 
Temperature ctiange under SA90 and IS92a 
H C F C , SA90 
CFC-12, SA90 
H C F C , IS92a 
CFC-11, SA90 
CFC-12, IS92a 
CFC-11, IS92a 
SA90 
IS92a 
Figure Ax.7: Changes in concentrations (ppt) of HCFC-22, 
CFC-11 and CFC-12. lS92a = dotted and dashed lines; SA90 = 
solid curves. 
Figure Ax.lO: As Figure Ax.9 but showing changes of mean 
global temperature after 1990 assuming a "Best-estimate" climate 
sensitivity of 2.5 °C. lS92a = dashed curve; SA90 = solid curve. 

 

Appendix 1 
ORGANIZATION OF IPCC AND WORKING GROUP I 
WMO 
WORKING GROUP I 
SCIENCE 
Sir John Houghton (UK) 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
Prof. B. Bolin (Sweden) 
UNEP 
WORKING GROUP II 
IMPACTS 
Prof. Y. Izrael (Russia) 
WORKING GROUP III 
RESPONSE 
Dr R. Reinstein (USA) 
IPCC: 
Chairman: 
Vice Chairman: 
Rapporteur: 
Secretary: 
Working Group I: 
Chairman: 
Vice Chairmen: 
Professor B. Bolin (Sweden) 
Dr A. A l Gain (Saudi Arabia) 
Dr J.A. Adejokun (Nigeria) 
Dr N . Sundararaman (WMO) 
Sir John Houghton (United Kingdom) 
Dr M . Seek (Senegal) 
Dr A.D. Moura (Brazil) 
Dr M . Sanwal (India) 
Dr H. Grassl (Germany) 
Core Team at the UK Meteorological Office: 
Coordinator: 
Dr B.A. Callander 
Technical Editor: 
Miss S.K. Vamey 
Sub-Editor: 
Mr J.J. Ephraums 
Visiting Scientist: 
Dr R.T. Watson (USA) 

 

Appendix 2 
CONTRIBUTORS TO THE IPCC WGI REPORT 
SECTION A 
Overall Coordinating Author: 
R.T. Watson 
SECTION A l 
Lead Authors: 
R.T. Watson 
L.G. Meira Filho 
E. Sanhueza 
A. Janetos 
Contributors: 
P.J. Fraser 
l.J. Fung 
M.A.K. Khalil 
M . Manning 
A. McCulloch 
A. P Mitra 
B. Moore 
H. Rodhe 
D. Schimel 
U. Siegenthaler 
D. Skole 
R.S. Stolarski 'I' 
NASA Headquarters, USA 
NASA Headquarters, USA 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais, Brazil 
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas, Venezuela 
NASA Headquarters, USA 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA 
Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology, USA 
DSIR Institute of Nuclear Sciences, New Zealand (currently at NOAA, USA) 
ICI Chemicals and Polymers, U K 
National Physical Laboratory, India 
University of New Hampshire, USA 
Stockholm University, Sweden 
Colorado State University, USA 
Physics Institute, University of Bern, Switzerland 
University of New Hampshire, USA 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA 
t - Chairs for Chapters 1 and 2 
representing a number of others 
of WMO/UNEP Science Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1991 (WMO, 1992), therefore 
who contributed to this Section but who are not listed here. 
SECTION A2 
Lead Authors: 
l.S.A. Isaksen 
V. Ramaswamy 
H. Rodhe 
T.M.L. Wigley 
Contributors: 
B.A. Callander 
Institute of Geophysics, University of Oslo, Norway 
N O A A Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
Stockholm University, Sweden 
Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, U K 
Meteorological Office, U K 

180 
R. Charlson 
I. Karol 
J. Lelieveld 
C. B. Leovy 
S.E. Schwartz 
K.P. Shine 
R.T. Watson 
D. J. Wuebbles 
SECTION A3 
Lead Authors: 
J. Leggett 
W.J. Pepper 
R.J. Swart 
Contributors: 
J.A. Edmonds 
L.G. Meira Filho 
I. Mintzer 
M.-X. Wang 
J. Wasson 
SECTION B 
Lead Authors: 
W.L. Gates 
J.F.B. Mitchell 
G. J. Boer 
U. Cubasch 
V.P. Meleshko 
Contributors: 
D. Anderson 
W. Broecker 
D. Cariolle 
H. Cattle 
R.D. Cess 
F. Giorgi 
M.I. Hoffert 
B.G. Hunt 
A. Kitoh 
P. Lemke 
H. Le Treut 
R.S. Lindzen 
S. Manabe 
B. J. McAvaney 
L. Mearns 
G. A. Meehl 
J.M. Murphy 
T.N. Palmer 
A.B. Pittock 
K. Puri 
D.A. Randall 
D. Rind 
P.R. Rowntree 
Appendix 2 
University of Washington, USA 
Main Geophysical Observatory, Russia 
Max-Planck-Institute for Chemistry, Germany 
University of Washington, USA 
Brookhaven National Laboratories, USA 
University of Reading, U K 
NASA Headquarters, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Environmental Protection Agency, USA 
ICE Information and Technology, Inc., USA 
RIVM, The Netherlands 
Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories (DOE), USA 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais, Brazil 
University of Maryland, USA 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Academy of Sciences, China 
ICE Incorporated, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
Canadian Climate Center, Canada 
Max-Planck-Institut fur Meteorologie, Germany 
Main Geophysical Observatory, Russia 
Hooke Institute for Atmospheric Research, U K 
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, USA 
Meteo-France, Centre National de Recherches Meteorologiques, France 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
State University of New York, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
New York University, USA 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
Meteorological Research Institute, Japan 
Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar & Marine Research, Germany 
Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique du CNRS, France 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasts, U K 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
Colorado State University, USA 
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 

Appendix 2 
M.E. Schlesinger 
C A . Senior 
I.H. Sinomonds 
R. Stouffer 
S. Tibaldi 
T. Tokioka 
G. Visconti 
J.E. Walsh 
W.-C. Wang 
D. Webb 
SECTION C 
Lead Authors: 
C. K. Folland 
T.R. Karl 
N. Nicholls 
B. S. Nyenzi 
D. E. Parker 
K.Ya. Vinnikov 
Contributors: 
J.K. Angell 
R.C. Balling 
R.G. Barry 
M . Chelliah 
L. Chen 
J.R. Christy 
G. R Demaree 
H. F. Diaz 
Y. Ding 
W.P. Elliott 
H. Flohn 
E. Friis-Christensen 
C. Fu 
P.Ya Groisman 
W. Haeberli 
J.E. Hansen 
P.D. Jones 
D. J. Karoly 
K. Labitzke 
K. Lassen 
P.J. Michaels 
A.H. Oort 
R.W. Reynolds 
A. Robock 
C F . Ropelewski 
M.J. Salinger 
R.W. Spencer 
A.E. Strong 
K.E. Trenberth 
S. Tudhope 
S.-W. Wang 
M.N. Ward 
T.M.L. Wigley 
University of Illinois, USA 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
University of Melbourne, Australia 
N O A A Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
Universita di Bologna, Italy 
Meteorological Research Institute, Japan 
Universita degli Studi Dell'Aquila, Italy 
University of Illinois, USA 
State University of New York, USA 
Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, U K 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
N O A A National Climate Data Center, USA 
Bureau of Meteorology, Australia 
Directorate of Meteorology, Tanzania 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
State Hydrological Institute, Russia (currently at GFDL, USA) 
NOAA Air Resources Laboratory, USA 
Arizona State University, USA 
University of Colorado, USA 
NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA 
State Meteorological Administration, China 
University of Alabama, USA 
Royal Meteorological Institute, Belgium 
N O A A Environmental Research Laboratories, USA 
State Meteorological Administration, China 
NOAA Air Resources Laboratory, USA 
Meteorological Institute, Germany 
Danish Meteorological Institute, Denmark 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Academy of Sciences, China 
State Hydrological Institute, Russia 
Versuchsanstalt fiir Wasserbau, Switzerland 
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, U K 
Monash University, Australia 
Free University of Berlin, Germany 
Danish Meteorological Institute, Denmark 
University of Virginia, USA 
NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA 
University of Maryland, USA 
NOAA Climate Analysis Center, USA 
Meteorological Service, New Zealand 
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, USA 
Center for Excellence in Oceanic Research, The Navy Academy, USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
University of Edinburgh, U K 
Beijing University, China 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, U K 

182 
Appendix 2 
H. Wilson 
F.B. Wood 
A N N E X 
Lead Authors: 
J.F.B. Mitchell 
J.M. Gregory 
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, USA 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 
Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction & Research, Meteorological Office, U K 

Appendix 3 
REVIEWERS OF THE IPCC WGI REPORT 
The persons named below all contributed to the peer review of the IPCC Working Group I 1992 Supplement and its 
supporting scientific evidence. Whilst every attempt was made by the Lead Authors to incorporate their comments, in 
some cases these formed a minority opinion which could not be reconciled with the larger consensus. Therefore, there 
may be persons below who still have points of disagreement with areas of the Report. 
ARGENTINA 
M.C. Massei 
Area de Evaluacion Ambiental y Social 
AUSTRALIA 
R. Allan 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
W. Bouma 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
W.F. Budd 
University of Tasmania 
P. Cheng 
Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment & Territories 
J. Church 
CSIRO (Division of Oceanography) 
R. Colman 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
M.J. Coughlan 
Bureau of Meteorology (currently at NOAA Office of Global Programs, USA) 
M.Dix 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
I. Enting 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
J. Evans 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
P.M. Fleming 
CSIRO (Division of Water Resources) 
R.J. Francey 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
P.J. Fraser 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
J. Fraser 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
J.S. Frederiksen 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
I.E. Galbally 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
D.J. Gauntlett 
Bureau of Meteorology 
A. Gordon 
The Flinders University of South Australia 
A. Henderson-Sellers 
MacQuarie University 
A.C. Hirst 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
B.G. Hunt 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
M . Jones 
MacQuarie University (currently at the Building Research EstabUshment, UK) 
D. Karoly 
Monash University 
J. Katzfey 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
D. Lee 
Bureau of Meteorology 
J. Leech 
Royal Australian Navy Hydrographic Office 
G. Lennon 
National Tidal Facility 
M.J. Manton 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 

184 
Appendix 3 
B. McAvaney 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
A.D. McEwan 
CSIRO (Division of Oceanography) 
J. McGregor 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
C. Mitchell 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
G. Morvell 
Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment & Territories 
A. Moore 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
N. Nicholls 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
G.I. Pearman 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
A.B. Pittock 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
C.M.R. Piatt 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
S.B. Power 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
P.G. Price 
Bureau of Meteorology 
L. Rikus 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
B. Ryan 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
N. Smith 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
B. Stewart 
Bureau of Meteorology 
N. Streten 
Bureau of Meteorology 
J. Taylor 
Australian National University 
W.J.McG. Tegart 
Australian Science and Technology Council 
G.B. Tucker 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
M . Voice 
Bureau of Meteorology 
J. Wame 
Bureau of Meteorology 
I. Watterson 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
P.H. Whetton 
CSIRO (Division of Atmospheric Research) 
M . Williams 
Monash University 
N. Young 
Australian Antarctic Division 
J.W. Zillman 
Bureau of Meteorology 
BELGIUM 
A. Berger 
Institut d'Astionomie et de Geophysique 
G.R. Demaree 
Royal Meteorological Institute 
BRAZIL 
L.G. Meira Filho 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais 
BURKINA FASO 
G. Thiombiano 
Institute Burkinabe de I'Energie 
CAMEROON 
T.O. Fouda 
Directorate of Meteorology 
CANADA 
G.J. Boer 
Canadian Climate Centre (currendy at ECMWF, UK) 
R.A. Clarke 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
K.L. Denman 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
J.P. Hall 
Forestry Canada 
L.D. Harvey 
University of Toronto 
H. Hengeveld 
Canadian Climate Centre 
A.P. Jaques 
Enviroimient Canada 
P. LeBlond 
University of British Columbia 
N. Mcllveen 
Energy, Mines and Resources Canada 
G.T. Needier 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
R. Stoddart 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
J.M.R. Stone 
Canadian Climate Centre 
F. Zwiers 
Canadian Climate Centre 

Appendix 3 
185 
CHAD 
M . Guetti 
CHILE 
J.M. Ovalle 
Directorate of Meteorology 
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores 
CHINA 
L. Chen 
Y. Ding 
C. Fu 
J. Luo 
M.-X. Wang 
S.-W. Wang 
G. Wu 
Y. Xu 
D. Ye 
Z. Yuan 
Q.C. Zeng 
X. Zhang 
CONGO 
E. A. Nyanga 
CUBA 
T. Gutierrez Perez 
DENMARK 
P. Erich 
E. Friis-Christensen 
K. Lassen 
L. Laursen 
L.P. Prahm 
ETHIOPIA 
L. Gonfa 
T. Haile 
FINLAND 
E. Holopainen 
FRANCE 
G. Lambert 
State Meteorological Administration, China 
State Meteorological Administration, China 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
State Meteorological Administration, China 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Beijing University 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Direction Generale de I'Environnement 
Institute of Meteorology 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
National Meteorological Services Agency 
National Meteorological Services Agency 
University of Helsinki 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivites, CNRS 
GERMANY 
M.O. Andreae 
L. Bengtsson 
P. Crutzen 
U. Cubasch 
H. Flohn 
M . Heimann 
K. Labitzke 
E. Maier-Reimer 
B. Santer 
C. -D. Schonwiese 
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology 
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology 
Max-Planck Institute for Chemistry 
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology 
Meteorological Institute 
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology 
Freie Universitat Berlin 
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology 
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology 
Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universitat 

186 
Appendix 
GHANA 
J.K. Danso 
Environmental Protection Council 
GUINEA 
A.K. Bangoura 
GUYANA 
W. Chin 
S. Khan 
Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment 
Agency for Health Sciences, Education, Environment and Food Policy 
Meteorological Service 
INDIA 
A.P. Miti-a 
G. B. Pant 
M . Sanwal 
S.K. Sinha 
INDONESIA 
A. Sugandhy 
IRAN 
M . Tohoder 
ITALY 
M . Conte 
A. Sutera 
S. Tibaldi 
JAPAN 
A. Kitoh 
T. Nitta 
T. Tokioka 
T. Tsuyuki 
T. Yasunari 
KENYA 
J.K. Njihia 
L.J. Ogallo 
LIBYA 
M.E. Alem 
S.A. Younis 
MALAYSIA 
A.L. Chong 
MALDIVES 
H. Riza 
MALTA 
J.M. Mifsud 
MEXICO 
A.C. Conde 
National Physical Laboratory 
Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology 
Ministry of Environment and Forests 
Indian Agricultural Research Centre 
Ministry of Population and Environment 
Department of the Environment 
Itahan Meteorological Service 
University of Camerino 
University of Bologna 
Meteorological Research Institute 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
University of Tsukuba 
Kenya Meteorological Department 
University of Nairobi 
Meteorological Department 
Meteorological Department 
Meteorological Service 
Department of Meteorology 
Meteorological Office 
Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico 
MONGOLIA 
Mijiddorj 
Hydrometeorological Research Institute 

Appendix 3 
187 
NETHERLANDS 
A. Baede 
C. Schuurman 
NEW ZEALAND 
B. J. Forde 
J.E. Hay 
M.R. Manning 
J. Salinger 
R.S. Whitney 
D. Wratt 
NIGERIA 
E. G. Oladipo 
NORWAY 
B. Aune 
K. Pedersen 
A. Rosland 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
University of Auckland 
Currently at NOAA/Department of Commerce in the USA 
New Zealand Meteorological Service 
Coal Research Association 
New Zealand Meteorological Service 
Ahmadu Bello University 
Meteorological Office 
University of Oslo 
State Pollution Control Authority 
PAKISTAN 
M . Hanif 
Council for Scientific & Industrial Research 
PAPUA NEW GUINEA 
C. Kalwin 
PERU 
E. Culqui Diaz 
PHILIPPINES 
E.A. Gonzales 
POLAND 
B. Jakubiak 
E. Radwanski 
M . Sadowski 
RUSSIA 
G.S. Golitsyn 
I.L. Karol 
K. Kondratyev 
V.P. Meleshko 
K.Ya. Vinnikov 
SAUDI ARABIA 
A. Al-Dabbagh 
M.A.A. Bin Afeef 
A . M . Henaidi 
D. A. Olsen 
W.W. Sanford 
A. Wood 
Currently at the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme, Western Samoa 
National Meteorological Service 
Department of Environment and Natural Resources 
Institute of Meteorology and Water Management 
Technical University Warsaw 
Institute of Meteorology and Water Management 
Academy of Sciences, Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
Main Geophysical Observatory 
Academy of Sciences, Institute for Lake Research 
Main Geophysical Observatory 
Main Geophysical Observatory (currently at GFDL, USA) 
King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals 
King Abdul-Aziz University 
Meteorology & Environmental Protection Administration 
Meteorology & Environmental Protection Administration 
Meteorology & Environmental Protection Administration 
Meteorology & Environmental Protection Administration 
SENEGAL 
M . Seek 
Ministry of Equipment, Transport and Sea 

188 
Appendix 3 
SIERRA L E O N E 
D.S. Lansama 
Meteorological Office 
S O L O M O N ISLANDS 
M . Ariki 
Solomon Islands Meteorological Service 
ST. L U C I A 
N.C. Singh 
Caribbean Environmental Health Institute 
SUDAN 
F. Elkhidir 
Meteorological Department 
S W E D E N 
J. Heintzenberg 
Stockholm University 
H. Rodhe 
Stockholm University 
S W I T Z E R L A N D 
W. Haeberii 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
U. Siegenthaler 
University of Bern 
T A N Z A N I A 
B.S. Nyenzi 
Directorate of Meteorology 
T H A I L A N D 
S. Wangwongwatana 
Office of National Environmental Board 
T O N G A 
V. Fuavao 
Currendy at the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme, Westem 
TRINIDAD A N D T O B A G O 
L. Heileman 
Carribean Meteorological Service 
TUNISIA 
C. Ben M'hamed 
National Institute of Meteorology 
M . Ketata 
National Institute of Meteorology 
Y. Labane 
National Institute of Meteorology 
K. Tounsi 
National Institute of Meteorology 
U G A N D A 
A.W. Majugu 
Ministry of Water, Minerals & Environmental Protection 
UNITED K I N G D O M 
A.J. Apling 
Department of the Environment 
D. Burdekin 
Forestry Commission 
D.J. Carson 
Hadley Centre for Climate Research and Prediction, Meteorological Office 
R.G. Derwent 
Department of the Environment 
D.J. Fisk 
Department of the Environment 
P.H. Freer-Smith 
Forestry Commission Research Division 
J. Grove 
University of Cambridge 
B.J. Hoskins 
University of Reading 
J.T. Houghton 
Hadley Centre for Climate Research and Prediction, Meteorological Office 
M . Hulme 
University of East Anglia, Climatic Research Unit 
P.G. Jarvis 
University of Edinburgh 
G.J. Jenkins 
Met. Research Flight, Meteorological Office 
P.D. Jones 
University of East Anglia, Climatic Research Unit 

Appendix 3 
R. Maryon 
P.J. Mason 
J.F.B. Mitchell 
D. E.Parker 
J.M. Penman 
P.R. Rowntree 
K. Shine 
A. Slingo 
F.B. Smith 
E. A. Street-Perrott 
R.A. Warrick 
D.A. Warrilow 
D.J. Webb 
T.M.L. Wigley 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
D. L. Albritton 
J. Angell 
P. Arkin 
J. Ausubel 
R. Balling 
T.P. Bamett 
S. Ban-
E. Barron 
R.G. Barry 
L. Beck 
P. Beedlow 
C. Bemabo 
D. Blake 
J.W. Bozzelli 
A. J. Broccoli 
S. Brown 
0. Brown 
W.S. Broecker 
K. Bryan 
M . Chahine 
E. Christian 
J. Christy 
R. Cicerone 
P. Connell 
R.C. Dahlman 
R.E. Dickinson 
J. Dignon 
B. G. Drake 
J. Edmonds 
W.P. Elliott 
H.W. Ellsaesser 
C. Elvidge 
W.R. Emanuel 
J. Fein 
M . Femau 
J.W. Firor 
M . M . Fogel 
1. Fung 
Meteorological Office 
Meteorological Office 
Hadley Centre for Chmate Research and Prediction, Meteorological Office 
Hadley Centre for Climate Research and Prediction, Meteorological Office 
Department of the Environment 
Hadley Centre for Chmate Research and Prediction, Meteorological Office 
University of Reading 
Hadley Centre for Climate Research and Prediction, Meteorological Office 
Meteorological Office 
University of Oxford 
Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia 
Department of the Environment 
Institute of Oceanographic Sciences 
Cliniatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia 
N O A A Aeronomy Laboratory 
N O A A Air Resources Laboratory 
N O A A National Meteorological Center 
Rockefeller University 
Arizona State University 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
Pennsylvania State University 
University of Colorado 
USEPA Air and Energy Research Laboratory 
Environmental Research Laboratory at Corvallis 
Science and Policy Association 
University of California at Irvine 
New Jersey Institute of Technology 
NOAA/US Department of Commerce 
University of Illinois 
University of Miami 
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory 
NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
US Geological Survey 
University of Alabama 
University of California at Irvine 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
US Department of Energy 
University of Arizona 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Smithsonian Environmental Research Center 
Battelle Pacific N.W. Laboratory 
N O A A Air Resources Laboratory 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
National Science Foundation 
Argonne National Laboratory 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
University of Arizona 
NASA Goddard Space FUght Center 

190 
Appendix 3 
H.L. Gholz 
University of Florida 
L Goklany 
US Department of the Interior 
A. Gruber 
NOAA/NESDIS 
H. Graenspecht 
US Department of Energy 
R.P. Hangebrauck 
USEPA Air and Energy Research Laboratory 
K. Hogan 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
R.A. Houghton 
Woods Hole Research Center 
A. Janetos 
NASA Headquarters 
S. Kane 
NOAA Economics Group 
T. Karl 
NOAA National Climate Data Center 
J. Kelmelis 
Department of the Interior/USGS 
M.A.K. Khalil 
Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology 
S.J.S. Khalsa 
University of Colorado 
D.A. Kirchgessner 
USEPA Air and Energy Research Laboratory 
M . Ko 
Atmospheric and Environmental Research, Inc. 
G. Kukla 
Columbia University 
C.B. Leovy 
University of Washington 
J.S. Levine 
NASA Langley Research Center 
R.S. Lindzen 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
J. Logan 
Harvard University 
A. Lugo 
Institute of Tropical Forestry 
M.C. MacCracken 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
W. MacPost 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
J. Mahlman 
NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
S. Manabe 
NOAA Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
G. Marland 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
G.A. Meehl 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
P.J. Michaels 
University of Virginia 
P. Milke 
Colorado State University 
C. Milly 
US Geological Survey 
S.C. Morris 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
L. Mulkey 
— 
Environmental Research Laboratory at Athens 
P.J. Mutschlecner 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
R. Newell 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
L. Newman 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
G. Ohring 
NOAA/NESDIS 
R. Oremland 
US Geological Survey 
C L . Parkinson 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
T.H. Peng 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
J. Pershing 
US Department of State 
L. Pettinger 
US Geological Survey 
R. Pielke 
Colorado State University 
J.S. Pinto 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
R. Poore 
US Geological Survey 
W.M. Post 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
M.J. Prather 
NASA Goddard Institute of Space Studies (now at University of California, Irvine) 
R.G. Prinn 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
C. Purvis 
USEPA Air and Energy Research Laboratory 
P. Quay 
University of Washington 
R. Quayle 
National Climatic Data Center 
S. Ragone 
US Geological Survey 
V. Ramanathan 
University of California at San Diego 
D.G. Randall 
Colorado State University 
A.R. Ravishankara 
N O A A Aeronomy Laboratory 

Appendix 3 
191 
G. Reid 
N O A A Environmental Research Laboratory 
W. Rliodes 
USEPA Air and Energy Research Laboratory 
M.R. Riches 
US Department of Energy 
P. Ringold 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
C. Riordan 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
R.L. Ritschard 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory 
E.S. Sarachik 
University of Washington 
J.L. Sarmiento 
Princeton University 
R.A. Schiffer 
NASA Headquarters 
D. Schimel 
Colorado State University 
M.E. Schlesinger 
University of Illinois 
S.E. Schwartz 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
P. Sellars 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
J. Shannon 
Argonne National Laboratory 
J. Shukla 
University of Maryland 
L. Smith 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
S. Solomon 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory 
J.R. Spradley 
N O A A Headquarters 
D.W. Stahle 
University of Arkansas 
G.L. Stephens 
Colorado State University 
R. Stolarski 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
R. Stouffer 
N O A A Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
L.L. Stowe 
NOAA/NESDIS 
D.G. Streets 
Argonne National Laboratory 
A.E. Strong 
NOAA/NESDIS 
E. Sundquist 
US Geological Survey 
N.-D. Sze 
Atmospheric and Environmental Research, Inc. 
L. Talley 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography 
P. Tans 
N O A A Climate Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory 
J. Theon 
NASA Headquarters 
M.H. Thiemens 
University of California at San Diego 
S. Thorneloe 
USEPA Air and Energy Research Laboratory 
D. Tingey 
Environmental Research Laboratory at Corvallis 
D. Tirpak 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
K.E. Trenberth 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
H. Virgi 
National Science Foundation 
J. Vitko, Jr. 
Sandia National Laboratory 
D.W.R. Wallace 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
W.-C. Wang 
State University of New York at Albany 
W.L. Wamick 
US Department of Energy 
W. Washington 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
H. Watson 
US Department of the Interior 
R.T. Watson 
NASA Headquarters 
J. Wiener 
US Department of Justice 
E.R. Williams 
US Department of Energy 
D. Winstanley 
US Department of Energy 
S.C. Wofsy 
Harvard University 
F.B. Wood 
US Congress Office of Technology Assessment 
S. Woodruff 
NOAA Environmental Research Laboratories 
R.C. Worrest 
US Environmental Protection Agency 
D.J. Wuebbles 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
V A N U A T U 
H. Tazsilas 
Currently at the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme, Western Samoa 

192 
Appendix 
VENEZUELA 
N. Pereira 
Ministry of Energy and Mines 
E. Sanhueza 
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas 
VIETNAM 
N. Trong Hieu 
Hydrometeorological Service 
WESTERN SAMOA 
P. Holthus 
South Pacific Regional Environment Programme 
ZIMBABWE 
A. Makarau 
Department of Meteorological Services 
UNITED NATIONS SPECIALIZED AGENCIES 
W.G. Sombroek 
Food and Agriculture Organization 
J. Van de Vaate 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
P.P. Schwengels 
OECD (Environment Directorate) 
P. Usher 
United Nations Environment Programme (GEMS) 
R. Newson 
World Meteorological Organization (WCRP) 
NON-GOVERNMENTAL 
A. McCulloch 
D.M. Hughes 
I. Hughes 
P.W. Sage 
D.H. Pearlman 
M . McFarland 
R.A. Beck 
M . Oppenheimer 
J. Leggett 
C D . Holmes 
D. Lashof 
A. Markham 
K. Gregory 
M . Jefferson 
ORGANIZATIONS 
Alternative Fluorocarbon Environmental Acceptability Study/ICI C&P Ltd, U K 
Australian Coal Association 
British Coal Corporation 
British Coal Corporation 
The Chmate Council, USA 
Du Pont Chemicals, USA 
Edison Electric Institute, USA 
Environmental Defense Fund, USA 
Greenpeace International 
National Coal Association, USA 
Natural Resources Defence Council, USA 
World Wide Fund for Nature International 
World Coal Institute/British Coal Corporation 
World Energy Council 

Appendix ^• 
ACRONYMS 
AFEAS 
Alternative Fluorocarbon Environmental Acceptability Study 
A G C M 
Atmosphere General Circulation Model 
ALE/GAGE 
Atmospheric Lifetime Experiment/Global Atmospheric Gases Experiment 
AMIP 
Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project 
ASF 
Atmospheric Stabilization Framework 
A V H R R 
Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer 
BMRC 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
CAS 
Commission for Atmospheric Sciences 
CCC 
Canadian Climate Centre 
CCN 
Cloud Condensation Nuclei 
CEC 
Commission of the European Communities 
C H E M R A W N 
Chemical Research Applied to World Needs 
CIES 
Climatic Impacts on the Environment and Society (Conference in Tsukuba, Japan, 1991) 
CLW 
Cloud Liquid Water 
C N R M 
Centre National de Recherches Meteorologiques, France 
CNRS 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France 
COADS 
Comprehensive Ocean Air Data Set (USA) 
CONCAWE 
Conservation of Clean Air and Water, Europe (an oil companies organization) 
CRU 
Climatic Research Unit, University of East Anglia, U K 
CSIRO 
Commonwealth Scientific & Industrial Research Organisation, Australia 
CW 
Cloud Water 
DJF 
December-January-February 
DSIR 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Zealand 
E C H A M 
European Centre/Hamburg Model (ECMWF/MPI) 
ECMWF 
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, U K 
EDF 
Environmental Defense Fund, USA 
EIS 
Energy and Industry Sub-Group (of IPCC WG3) 
ENSO 
El Niiio-Southem Oscilladon 
EOF 
Empirical Orthogonal Function 
EOS 
Earth Observing System 
EPA 
Environmental Protection Agency, USA 

194 
Appendix 4 
ERBE 
Earth Radiation Budget Experiment 
ERL 
Environmental Research Laboratory (NOAA), USA 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN) 
EC 
Fixed Cloud 
F R A M 
Fine Resolution Antarctic Model 
GARP 
Global Atmospheric Research Programme 
G C M 
General Circulation Model 
GCOS 
Global Climate Observing System 
GDP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GEF 
Global Environment Facility 
GEMS 
Global Environmental Monitoring System 
GEWEX 
Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment 
GFDL 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
GISS 
Goddard Institute of Space Sciences (NASA), USA 
GNP 
Gross National Product 
GOSTA 
Global Ocean Surface Temperature Atlas 
GPP 
Gross Primary Production 
GSFC 
Goddard Space Flight Center (NASA), USA 
GWP 
Global Warming Potc\ntial 
IAEA 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
lAHS 
International Association of Hydrological Sciences 
ICRCCM 
Intercomparison of Radiation Codes in Climate Models 
ICSU 
International Council of Scientific Unions 
IE A 
International Energy Agency 
IGBP 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
INPE 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais, Brazil 
IOC 
International Ozone Commission 
lOS 
Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, U K 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
ISCCP 
International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project 
IS92 
IPCC Scenarios 1992 
IVIC 
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas, Venezuela 
JJA 
June-July-August 
JMA 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
JSC 
Joint Scientific Committee (of WMO and ICS U) 
KNMI 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute 
L L N L 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
L M D 
Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique du CNRS 
LRTAP 
Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution 
LWC 
Liquid Water Content 
M C A 
Moist Convective Adjustment 
MDB 
Marine Data Bank (UKMO) 
MEPA 
Meteorological & Environmental Protection Administration, Saudi Arabia 
NESDIS 
National Environmental Satellite Data & Information Service (NOAA), USA 
MGO 
Main Geophysical Observatory, Russia 
MIT 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
MONEG 
Monsoon Numerical Experimentation Group 

Appendix 4 
195 
MPI 
Max-Planck Institute, Germany 
MRI 
Meteorological Research Institute, Japan 
M S U 
Microwave Sounding Unit 
NACD 
North Atlantic Climatological Dataset 
NASA 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, USA 
NATO 
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
NCAR 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
NERC 
Natural Environment Research Council, U K 
N G L 
Natural Gas Liquids 
NH 
Northern Hemisphere 
NMC 
National Meteorological Center, USA 
NOAA 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, USA 
NRDC 
Natural Resources Defense Council, USA 
NSF 
National Science Foundation, USA 
NWP 
Numerical Weather Prediction 
1 -D 
One Dimensional (also 2-D and 3-D) 
ODP 
Ozone Depletion Potential 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
O G C M 
Ocean General Circulation Model 
OLR 
Outgoing Longwave Radiation 
PC 
Penetrative Convection 
PCMDI 
Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison (at LLNL, USA) 
PMIP 
Palaeoclimatic Model Intercomparison Project 
PW 
Precipitable Water 
R C M 
Radiative Convective Model 
RCW 
Rapidly Changing World 
RH 
Relative Humidity 
RSWG 
Response Strategies Working Group (IPCC WG3) 
SA90 
IPCC Scenario A 1990 
SAGE 
Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment 
SCW 
Slowly Changing World 
SCOPE 
Scientific Committee On Problems of the Environment 
SH 
Southern Hemisphere 
SMA 
State Meteorological Administration, China 
SORG 
Stratospheric Ozone Review Group, U K 
SPCZ 
South Pacific Convergence Zone 
SST 
Sea Surface Temperature 
SUNY 
State University of New York, USA 
TIROS 
Television and Infrared Observation Satellite 
TOGA 
Tropical Ocean and Global Atmosphere 
TOMS 
Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer 
TOA 
Top of the Atmosphere 
TPER 
Total Primary Energy Requirement 
UARS 
Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite 
UCAR 
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research 
U K M O 
Meteorological Office, U K 
U N 
United Nations 

196 
Appendix A
UNEP 
United Nations Environment Programme 
UNESCO 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
UV 
Ultraviolet 
VOC 
Volatile Organic Compounds 
WCI 
World Coal Institute 
WCRP 
Worid Climate Research Programme 
WEC 
World Energy Council 
WGI 
Working Group 1 (of IPCC) 
WGNE 
Working Group on Numerical Experimentation 
W M O 
World Meteorological Organization 
WOCE 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment 
WRI 
World Resources Institute 
WWF 
World Wide Fund for Nature 
\ 

T 
Appendix 5 
I 
UNITS 
SI (Systeme Internationale) Units: 
Physical Quantity 
Name of Unit 
Symbol 
length 
metre 
m 
mass 
kilogram 
kg 
time 
second 
s 
thermodynamic temperature 
kelvin 
K 
amount of substance 
mole 
mol 
Fraction 
Prefix 
Symbol 
Multiple 
Prefix 
Symbol 
10-' 
deci 
d 
10 
deca 
da 
10-2 
centi 
c 
102 
hecto 
h 
10-3 
mini 
m 
103 
kilo 
k 
10-6 
micro 
106 
mega 
M 
10-9 
nano 
n 
109 
10l2 
giga 
G 
10-12 
pi CO 
P 
109 
10l2 
tera 
T 
10-15 
femto 
f 
10l5 
peta 
P 
10-18 
atto 
a 

795 
Appendix 5 
Special Names and Symbols for Certain Si-Derived Units: 
Physical Quantity 
Name of SI Unit 
Symbol for SI Unit 
Definition of Unit 
force 
newton 
N 
kg m s"^ 
pressure 
pascal 
Pa 
kg m"'s"2(=Nm"2) 
energy 
joule 
J 
kg 
s"^ 
power 
watt 
W 
kgmV3(=Js-l) 
frequency 
hertz 
Hz 
s" ^ (cycle per second) 
\ 
Decimal Fractions and Multiples of SI Units Having Special Names: 
Physical Quantity 
Name of Unit 
Symbol for Unit 
Definition of Unit 
length 
angstrom 
A 
10-10 m= 10-8cm 
length 
micrometre 
\im 
10-6m = nm 
area 
hectare 
ha 
104m2 
force 
dyne 
dyn 
10-5 N 
pressure 
bar 
bar 
105 N m-2 
pressure 
millibar 
mb 
IhPa 
weight 
tonne 
t 
103 kg 
Non- SI Units: 
°C 
degrees Celsius (0°C = 273K approximately) 
Temperature differences are also given in °C (=K) rather than the 
more correct form of "Celsius degrees". 
ppmv 
parts per miUion (lO^)by volume 
ppbv 
parts per billion (10^) by volume 
pptv 
parts per trillion (10' ^ ) by volume 
bp 
(years) before present 
kpb 
thousands of years before present 
mbp 
millions of years before present 
The units of mass adopted in this report are generally those which have come 
into common usage, and have deliberately not been harmonized, e.g., 
kt 
kilotonnes 
GtC 
gigatonnes of carbon (1 GtC = 3.7 Gt carbon dioxide) 
MtN 
megatonnes of nitrogen 
TgC 
teragrams of carbon 
TgN 
teragrams of nitrogen 
TgS 
teragrams of sulphur 

Appendix 6 
CHEMICAL SYMBOLS 
o 
atomic oxygen 
C2H6 
ethane 
02 
molecular oxygen 
C3H8 
propane 
03 
ozone 
C2H4 
ethylene 
N 
atomic nitrogen 
C2H2 
acetylene 
N2 
molecular nitrogen 
CHjBr 
methyl bromide 
N2O 
nitrous oxide 
CH3CI 
methyl chloride 
NO 
nitric oxide 
CH3CCI3 
methyl chloroform 
NO2 
nitrogen dioxide 
CH2CI2 
dichloromethane 
NO3 
nitrate radical 
CHCI3 
chloroform, trichloromethane 
NOy 
total active nitrogen 
Br 
bromine 
NO^ 
nitrogen oxide 
BrO 
bromine monoxide 
HNO3 
nitric acid 
F 
fluorine 
NH3 
ammonia 
PAN: 
CH3CO3NO2 
peroxyacetylnitrate 
H 
hydrogen 
PCO2 
partial pressure CO2 
H2O 
water 
CFC 
chlorofluorocarbon 
H2O2 
hydrogen peroxide 
HC 
hydrocarbon 
OH 
hydroxyl 
HCFC 
hydrochlorofluorocarbon 
HO2 
hydroperoxyl 
HFC 
hydrofluorocarbon 
C 
carbon 
NMHC 
non-methane hydrocarbons 
CO 
carbon monoxide 
VOC 
volatile organic compound 
CO2 
carbon dioxide 
DMS 
dimethylsulphide 
CS2 
carbon disulphide 
COS 
carbonyl sulphide 
CFC-11 
CFCI3, CCI3F 
CC14 
carbon tetrachloride 
(trichlorofluoromethane) 
S 
sulphur 
CFC-12 
CF2CI2, CCI2F2 
S02 
sulphur dioxide 
(dichlorodifluoromethane) 
sulphur oxide 
CFC-13 
CF3CI, CCIF3 
SF, 
sulphur hexafluoride 
(chlorotrifluoromethane) 
H2SO4 
sulphuric acid 
CFC-14 
CF4 
H2S 
hydrogen sulphide 
(tetrafluoromethane) 
HCl 
hydrochloric acid 
CFC-113 
C2F3CI3, CCI2FCCIF2 
HOCl 
hypochlorous acid 
(trichlorotrifluoroethane) 
CI 
chlorine 
CFC-114 
C2F4CI2, CCIF2CCIF2 
CI2 
molecular chlorine 
(dichlorotetrafluoroethane) 
CIO 
chlorine monoxide 
CFC-115 
C2F5CI, CCIF2CF3 
CI02 
chlorine dioxide 
(chloropentafluoroethane) 
CION02 
chlorine nitrate 
CFC-116 
CF3CF3,C2F6 
CH4 
methane 
(hexafluoroethane) 

2U0 
Appendix 
HCFC-22 
HCFC-123 
HCFC-124 
HFC-125 
HCFC-132b 
HFC-134a 
HCFC-141b 
HCFC-142b 
HFC-143a 
HFC-152a 
HALON 1211 
HALON 1301 
HALON 2402 
CHF2CI 
(chlorodifluoromethane) 
C2HF3CI2 (CHCI2CF3) 
CHFCICF3 
CHF2CF3 
C2H2F2CI2 
C2H2F4 (CH2FCF3) 
CH3CFCI2 
CH3CF2CI 
* 
CH3CF3 
C H 3 C H F 2 
CF2BrCl (CBrClF2) 
(bromodichloromethane) 
CF3Br (CBrF3) 
(bromotrifluoromethane) 
C2F4Br2 
(dibromotetrafluoroethane) 

 

