Climate Change 2007:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was set up jointly by the World Meteorological Organization
and the United Nations Environment Programme to provide an authoritative international statement of scientific
understanding of climate change. The IPCC’s periodic assessments of the causes, impacts and possible response strate-
gies to climate change are the most comprehensive and up-to-date reports available on the subject, and form the
standard reference for all concerned with climate change in academia, government and industry worldwide. Through
three working groups, many hundreds of international experts assess climate change in this Fourth Assessment Report.
The Report consists of three main volumes under the umbrella title Climate Change 2007, all available from
Cambridge University Press:
Climate Change 2007 – The Physical Science Basis
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC
(ISBN 978 0521 88009-1 Hardback; 978 0521 70596-7 Paperback)
Climate Change 2007 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC
(978 0521 88010-7 Hardback; 978 0521 70597-4 Paperback)
Climate Change 2007 – Mitigation of Climate Change
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC
(978 0521 88011-4 Hardback; 978 0521 70598-1 Paperback)
Climate Change 2007 – Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability provides the most comprehensive and up-to-date
scientific assessment of the impacts of climate change, the vulnerability of natural and human environments, and the
potential for response through adaptation. The report:
•
evaluates evidence that recent observed changes in climate have already affected a variety of physical and
biological systems and concludes that these effects can be attributed to global warming;
•
makes a detailed assessment of the impacts of future climate change and sea-level rise on ecosystems, water
resources, agriculture and food security, human health, coastal and low-lying regions and industry and settle-
ments;
•
provides a complete new assessment of the impacts of climate change on major regions of the world (Africa,
Asia, Australia/New Zealand, Europe, Latin America, North America, polar regions and small islands);
•
considers responses through adaptation;
•
explores the synergies and trade-offs between adaptation and mitigation;
•
evaluates the key vulnerabilities to climate change, and assesses aggregate damage levels and the role of
multiple stresses.
This latest assessment by the IPCC will form the standard scientific reference for all those concerned with the
consequences of climate change, including students and researchers in ecology, biology, hydrology, environmental
science, economics, social science, natural resource management, public health, food security and natural hazards, and
policymakers and managers in governments, industry and other organisations responsible for resources likely to be
affected by climate change.

From reviews of the Third Assessment Report – Climate Change 2001:
‘This volume makes another significant step forward in the understanding of the likely impacts of climate change on a
global scale.’ 
International Journal of Climatology
‘The detail is truly amazing . . . invaluable works of reference . . . no reference or science library should be without a
set [of the IPCC volumes]. . . unreservedly recommended to all readers.’ 
Journal of Meteorology
‘This well-edited set of three volumes will surely be the standard reference for nearly all arguments related with global
warming and climate change in the next years. It should not be missing in the libraries of atmospheric and climate
research institutes and those administrative and political institutions which have to deal with global change and
sustainable development.’ 
Meteorologische Zeitschrift
‘The IPCC has conducted what is arguably the largest, most comprehensive and transparent study ever undertaken by
mankind . . . The result is a work of substance and authority, which only the foolish would deride.’ 
Wind Engineering
‘ . . . the weight of evidence presented, the authority that IPCC commands and the breadth of view can hardly fail to
impress and earn respect. Each of the volumes is essentially a remarkable work of reference, containing a plethora of
information and copious bibliographies. There can be few natural scientists who will not want to have at least one of
these volumes to hand on their bookshelves, at least until further research renders the details outdated by the time of
the next survey.’ 
The Holocene
‘The subject is explored in great depth and should prove valuable to policy makers, researchers, analysts, and
students.’ 
American Meteorological Society
From reviews of the Second Assessment Report – Climate Change 1995: 
‘ … essential reading for anyone interested in global environmental change, either past, present or future. … These
volumes have a deservedly high reputation’ 
Geological Magazine
‘… a tremendous achievement of coordinating the contributons of well over a thousand individuals to produce an
authoritative, state-of-the-art review which will be of great value to decision-makers and the scientific community at
large … an indispensable reference.’ 
International Journal of Climatology
‘... a wealth of clear, well-organized information that is all in one place ... there is much to applaud.’ 
Environment International

Climate Change 2007:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability
Edited by
Martin Parry
Osvaldo Canziani
Jean Palutikof
Co-Chair, 
Co-Chair, 
Head, Technical Support Unit
IPCC Working Group II
IPCC Working Group II
IPCC Working Group II
Paul van der Linden
Clair Hanson
Deputy Head, Technical Support Unit       Deputy Head, Technical Support Unit
IPCC Working Group II                          IPCC Working Group II
Contribution of Working Group II 
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paolo, Delhi
Cambridge University Press
32 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10013-2473, USA
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521880107
© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2007
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, no
reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
First published 2007
Printed in Canada by Freisens
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 0521 88010-7 hardback
ISBN 978 0521 70597-4 paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet web sites
referred to in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on such web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Please use the following reference to the whole report:
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E.
Hanson, Eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 976pp.
Editorial Board: M.L. Parry and O.F Canziani (Co-Chairs), E. de Alba Alcaraz, A. Allali, L. Kajfež-Bogataj, G. Love, J. Stone, 
J.P. van Ypersele, J.P. Palutikof (Head of Technical Support Unit)
Cover photo: 
© Bjorn Svensson/Science Photo Library

Contents
Foreword
vii
Preface
ix
Introduction to the Working Group II Fourth Assessment Report
1
Summary for Policymakers
7
Technical Summary
23
1
Assessment of observed changes and responses in natural and managed systems
79
2
New assessment methods and the characterisation of future conditions
133
3
Freshwater resources and their management
173
4
Ecosystems, their properties, goods and services
211
5
Food, fibre and forest products
273
6
Coastal systems and low-lying areas
315
7
Industry, settlement and society
357
8
Human health
391
9
Africa
433
10
Asia
469
11
Australia and New Zealand
507
12
Europe
541
13
Latin America
581
14
North America
617
15
Polar regions (Arctic and Antarctic)
653
16
Small islands
687
17
Assessment of adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity  
717
18
Inter-relationships between adaptation and mitigation
745
19
Assessing key vulnerabilities and the risk from climate change
779
20
Perspectives on climate change and sustainability
811
Cross-chapter case studies
843
Appendix I
Glossary
869
Appendix II
Contributors to the IPCC WGII Fourth Assessment Report
885
Appendix III
Reviewers of the IPCC WGII Fourth Assessment Report
899
Appendix IV
Acronyms
933
Appendix V
Permissions to publish
937
Index
939
CD-ROM
Inside back cover:
This volume:
Summary for Policymakers, Technical Summary, Chapters, Appendices, Index
Together with:
Supporting material, Chapter supplementary material, Regional and subject 
database of references, Figures in Powerpoint from SPM and TS

.

Foreword
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was
established by the World Meteorological Organization and the
United Nations Environment Programme in 1988 with the
mandate to provide the world community with the most up-to-
date and comprehensive scientific, technical and socio-economic
information about climate change. The IPCC multivolume
assessments have since then played a major role in motivating
governments to adopt and implement policies in responding to
climate change, including the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the Kyoto Protocol. The
“Climate Change 2007” IPCC Fourth Assessment Report could
not be timelier for the world’s policy makers to help them
respond to the challenge of climate change.
“Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability”,
is the second volume of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report.
After confirming in the first volume on “The Physical Science
Basis” that climate change is occurring now, mostly as a result of
human activities, this volume illustrates the impacts of global
warming already under way and the potential for adaptation to
reduce the vulnerability to, and risks of climate change.
Drawing on over 29,000 data series, the current report provides a
much broader set of evidence of observed impacts coming from
the large number of field studies developed over recent years.
The analysis of current and projected impacts is then carried out
sector by sector in dedicated chapters. The report pays great
attention to regional impacts and adaptation strategies, identi-
fying the most vulnerable areas. A final section provides an
overview of the inter-relationship between adaptation and
mitigation in the context of sustainable development.
The “Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability” report was made
possible by the commitment and voluntary labour of a large
number of leading scientists. We would like to express our
gratitude to all Coordinating Lead Authors, Lead Authors,
Contributing Authors, Review Editors and Reviewers. We would
also like to thank the staff of the Working Group II Technical
Support Unit and the IPCC Secretariat for their dedication in
organising the production of another successful IPCC report.
Furthermore, we would like to express our thanks to Dr Rajendra
K. Pachauri, Chairman of the IPCC, for his patient and constant
guidance to the process, and to Drs Osvaldo Canziani and Martin
Parry, Co-Chairs of Working Group II, for their skillful leader-
ship.
We also wish to acknowledge and thank those governments and
institutions that contributed to the IPCC Trust Fund and
supported the participation of their resident scientists in the IPCC
process. We would like to mention in particular the Government
of the United Kingdom, which funded the Technical Support
Unit; the European Commission and the Belgian Government,
which hosted the plenary session for the approval of the report;
and the Governments of Australia, Austria, Mexico and South
Africa, which hosted the drafting  sessions to prepare the report.
M. Jarraud
Secretary General
World Meteorological Organisation
A. Steiner
Executive Director
United Nations Environment Director
vii

.
1

ix
Preface
This volumes comprises the Working Group II contribution to
the IPCC Fourth Assessment (AR4) and contains a Summary
for Policymakers, a Technical Summary, the chapters of the
Assessment and various annexes. The scope, content and
procedures followed are described in the Introduction which
follows.
Acknowledgements
This Report is the product of the work of many scientists who
acted as Authors, Reviewers or Editors (details are given in the
Introduction, Section E). We would like to express our sincere
thanks to them for their contribution, and to their institutions
for supporting their participation.   
We thank the members of the Working Group II Bureau
(Edmundo de Alba Alcarez, Abdelkader Allali, Lucka Kajfež-
Bogataj, Geoff Love, John Stone and Jean-Pascal van
Ypersele), for carrying out their duties with diligence and
commitment.
Costs of the Technical Support Unit (TSU) and of Dr Parry
were covered by the UK Department for the Environment,
Food and Rural Affairs (Defra). The TSU was based in the Met
Office Hadley Centre in the UK. We thank David Warrilow
(Defra), Dave Griggs and John Mitchell (Met Office) for their
support through these agencies.
Four meetings of Authors were held during the preparation of
the Report, and the governments of Austria, Australia, Mexico
and South Africa, through their Focal Points, kindly agreed to
act as hosts. The Approval Session of the Working Group II
contribution to the Fourth Assessment was held in Brussels at
the generous invitations of the Government of Belgium,
through Martine Vanderstraeten, and the European Community,
through Lars Mueller. We thank all these governments, institu-
tions and individuals for their hospitality and hard work on
behalf of the Working Group II process.
We thank the IPCC Secretary, Renate Christ, and the Secretariat
staff Jian Liu, Rudie Bourgeois, Annie Courtin, Joelle
Fernandez and Carola Saibante for their efficient and courteous
attention to Working Group II needs; and Marc Peeters, WMO
Conference Officer, for his work on the organisation of the
Brussels Approval Meeting.
Thanks go to ProClim (Forum for Climate and Global Change)
and Marilyn Anderson for producing the index to this Report.
Last, but by no means least, we acknowledge the exceptional
commitment of the members of the Technical Support Unit
throughout the preparation of the Report: Jean Palutikof, Paul
van der Linden, Clair Hanson, Norah Pritchard, Chris Sear,
Carla Encinas and Kim Mack.
Rajendra Pachauri
Chair IPCC
Martin Parry
Co-Chair IPCC Working Group II
Osvaldo Canziani
Co-Chair IPCC Working Group II

.

Introduction to the Working Group II 
Fourth Assessment Report

Introduction
2
A.   The Intergovernmental Panel on    
Climate Change
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was
established by the World Meteorological Organization and the
United Nations Environment Programme in 1988, in response
to the widespread recognition that human-influenced emissions
of greenhouse gases have the potential to alter the climate
system. Its role is to provide an assessment of the understanding
of all aspects of climate change.  
At its first session, the IPCC was organised into three Working
Groups. The current remits of the three Working Groups are for
Working Group I to examine the scientific aspects of the climate
system and climate change; Working Group II to address
vulnerabilities to, impacts of and adaptations to climate change;
and Working Group III to explore the options for mitigation of
climate change. The three previous assessment reports were
produced in 1990, 1996 and 2001.
B. The Working Group II Fourth Assessment
The decision to produce a Fourth Assessment Report was taken
by the 19th Session of the IPCC at Geneva in April 2002. The
report was to be more focussed and shorter than before. The
Working Group II contribution was to be finalised in mid-
2007.
The IPCC Fourth Assessment is intended to be a balanced
assessment of current knowledge. Its emphasis is on new
knowledge acquired since the IPCC Third Assessment (2001). This
required a survey of all published literature, including non-English
language and ‘grey’ literature such as government and NGO reports.
Two meetings were held in 2003 to scope the Fourth Assessment,
from which emerged the outline for the Working Group II
Assessment submitted to IPCC Plenary 21 in November 2003 for
approval and subsequent acceptance.  
The Report has twenty chapters which together provide a
comprehensive assessment of the climate change literature. These
are shown in Table I.1. The opening chapter is on observed
changes, and addresses the question of whether observed changes
in the natural and managed environment are associated with
anthropogenic climate change. Chapter 2 deals with the methods
available for impacts analysis, and with the scenarios of future
climate change which underpin these analyses. These are followed
by the core chapters, which assess the literature on present day
and future climate change impacts on systems, sectors and
regions, vulnerabilities to these impacts, and strategies for
adaptation. Chapters 17 and 18 consider possible responses
through adaptation and the synergies with mitigation. The two
final chapters look at key vulnerabilities, and the inter-
relationships between climate change and sustainability. 
Chapters 9 to 16 of the Working Group II Fourth Assessment
consider regional climate change impacts. The definitions of these
regions are shown in Table I.2.
Section A.
ASSESSMENT OF OBSERVED CHANGES
1. Assessment of observed changes and responses in natural and managed systems
Section B.
ASSESSMENT OF FUTURE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION: SYSTEMS AND SECTORS
2. New assessment methods and the characterisation of future conditions
3. Freshwater resources and their management
4. Ecosystems, their properties, goods and services
5. Food, fibre and forest products
6. Coastal systems and low-lying areas
7. Industry, settlement and society
8. Human health
Section C.
ASSESSMENT OF FUTURE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION: REGIONS
9. Africa
10. Asia
11. Australia and New Zealand
12. Europe
13. Latin America
14. North America
15. Polar regions (Arctic and Antarctic)
16. Small islands
Section D.
ASSESSMENT OF RESPONSES TO IMPACTS
17. Assessment of adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity
18. Inter-relationships between adaptation and mitigation
19. Assessing key vulnerabilities and the risk from climate change
20. Perspectives on climate change and sustainability
Table I.1.  The chapters of the Working Group II contribution to the IPCC Fourth Assessment.

Introduction
3
Table I.2. Countries by region (see Chapters 9 to 16) for the Working Group II Fourth Assessment.
Africa
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo, Republic of
Congo, Democratic Rep. of
Côte d’Ivoire
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea 
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho 
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Reunion
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
The Gambia
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Asia
Afghanistan
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
East Timor
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic of 
Iraq
Israel
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Korea, Dem. People’s Rep.
Korea, Republic of
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic 
Laos
Lebanon
Malaysia 
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Oman 
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Qatar
Russia – East of the Urals
Saudi Arabia 
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Syria
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates 
Uzbekistan
Vietnam 
Yemen 
Australia and New Zealand 
Australia
New Zealand
Europe 
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic 
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia 
Moldova, Republic of 
Monaco
Montenegro
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia – West of the Urals
San Marino 
Serbia
Slovak Republic 
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
The Netherlands 
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Vatican City, State of 
Polar Regions
Antarctic
North of 60°N (including Greenland and Iceland)
Latin America
Argentina
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica 
Ecuador
El Salvador 
French Guiana 
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay
Venezuela 
North America 
Canada
United States of America 
Small islands: non-autonomous small islands are also included in the assessment but are not listed here
Antigua and Barbuda 
Barbados
Cape Verde
Comoros
Cook Islands 
Cuba
Cyprus
Dominica
Dominican Republic 
Fed. States of Micronesia
Fiji
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
Kiribati
Maldives
Malta
Marshall Islands 
Mauritius
Nauru
Palau
Saint Kitts and Nevis 
Saint Lucia 
Saint Vincent & Grenadines
Samoa
São Tomé & Príncipe 
Seychelles
Solomon Islands
The Bahamas 
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago 
Tuvalu
Vanuatu

Introduction
4
C.  Cross-chapter case studies
Early in the writing of the Working Group II contribution to the
Fourth Assessment, there emerged themes of environmental
importance and widespread interest which are dealt with from
different perspectives by several chapters. These themes have
been gathered together into ‘cross-chapter case studies’, which
appear in their entirety at the end of the volume and are included
in the CD-ROM which accompanies this volume. A ‘roadmap’
in Table I.3 shows where the cross-chapter case study material
appears in the individual chapters. 
The four cross-chapter case studies are:
1. The impact of the European 2003 heatwave
2. Impacts of climate change on coral reefs
3. Megadeltas: their vulnerabilities to climate change
4. Indigenous knowledge for adaptation to climate change
D. Regional and subject database 
of references
This Assessment is based on the review of a very large amount of
literature for all parts of the world and for many subjects.  For
those interested in accessing this literature for a given region or
subject, a regional and subject database of references is provided
on the CD-ROM which accompanies this volume. The database
contains in full all the references in this volume and can be viewed
by region and subject.  
E.  Procedures followed in this Assessment 
by the authors, reviewers and 
participating governments
In total, the Working Group II Fourth Assessment involved 48
Coordinating Lead Authors (CLAs), 125 Lead Authors (LAs),
and 45 Review Editors (REs), drawn from 70 countries. In
addition, there were 183 Contributing Authors and 910 Expert
Reviewers.
Each chapter in the Working Group II Fourth Assessment had a
writing team of two to four CLAs and six to nine LAs. Led by
the CLAs, it was the responsibility of this writing team to
produce the drafts and finished version of the chapter. Where
necessary, they could recruit Contributing Authors to assist in
their task. Three drafts of each chapter were written prior to the
production of the final version. Drafts were reviewed in two
separate lines of review, by experts and by governments. It was
the role of the REs (two to three per chapter) to ensure that the
review comments were properly addressed by the authors. 
The authors and REs were selected by the Working Group II
Bureau from the lists of experts nominated by governments.
Due regard was paid to the need to balance the writing team
with proper representation from developing and developed
countries, and Economies in Transition. In the review by
experts, chapters were sent out to experts, including all those
nominated by governments but not yet included in the
assessment, together with scientists and researchers identified
by the Working Group II Co-Chairs and Vice-Chairs from their
knowledge of the literature and the global research community.
F.  Communication of uncertainty in the 
Working Group II Fourth Assessment
A set of terms to describe uncertainties in current knowledge is
common to all parts of the IPCC Fourth Assessment, based on
the Guidance Notes for Lead Authors of the IPCC Fourth
Assessment Report on Addressing Uncertainties1, produced by
the IPCC in July 2005.
Description of confidence
On the basis of a comprehensive reading of the literature and
their expert judgement, authors have assigned a confidence level
to the major statements in the Report on the basis of their
assessment of current knowledge, as follows:
Terminology
Degree of confidence in being correct
Very high confidence
At least 9 out of 10 chance of being correct
High confidence
About 8 out of 10 chance
Medium confidence
About 5 out of 10 chance
Low confidence
About 2 out of 10 chance
Very low confidence
Less than a 1 out of 10 chance
Description of likelihood
Likelihood refers to a probabilistic assessment of some well-
defined outcome having occurred or occurring in the future, and
may be based on quantitative analysis or an elicitation of expert
views. In the Report, when authors evaluate the likelihood of
certain outcomes, the associated meanings are: 
Terminology 
Likelihood of the occurrence/ outcome 
Virtually certain
>99% probability of occurrence
Very likely
90 to 99% probability
Likely
66 to 90% probability
About as likely as not
33 to 66% probability
Unlikely
10 to 33% probability
Very unlikely
1 to 10% probability
Exceptionally unlikely
<1% probability
1 http://www.ipcc.ch/activity/uncertaintyguidancenote.pdf

Introduction
5
Table I.3. Cross-chapter Case Studies: location in text. 
The impact of the European 2003 heatwave
Topic:
Chapter:
Location in chapter:
Scene-setting and overview
The European heatwave of 2003
Chapter 12
12.6.1
Impacts on sectors
Ecological impacts of the European heatwave 2003
Chapter 4
Box 4.1
European heatwave impact on the agricultural sector
Chapter 5
Box 5.1
Industry, settlement and society: impacts of the 2003 heatwave in Europe
Chapter 7
Box 7.1
The European heatwave 2003: health impacts and adaptation
Chapter 8
Box 8.1
Impacts of climate change on coral reefs
Present-day changes in coral reefs
Observed changes in coral reefs
Chapter 1
Section 1.3.4.1
Environmental thresholds and observed coral bleaching
Chapter 6
Box 6.1
Future impacts on coral reefs
Are coral reefs endangered by climate change?
Chapter 4
Box 4.4
Impacts on coral reefs
Chapter 6
Section 6.4.1.5
Climate change and the Great Barrier Reef
Chapter 11
Box 11.3
Impact of coral mortality on reef fisheries
Chapter 5
Box 5.4
Multiple stresses on coral reefs
Non-climate-change threats to coral reefs of small islands
Chapter 16
Box 16.2
Megadeltas: their vulnerabilities to climate change
Introduction
Deltas and megadeltas: hotspots for vulnerability
Chapter 6
Box 6.3
Megadeltas in Asia
Megadeltas in Asia
Chapter 10
Section 10.6.1, Table 10.10
Climate change and the fisheries of the lower Mekong – an example of multiple stresses on a
megadelta fisheries system due to human activity
Chapter 5
Box 5.3
Megadeltas in the Arctic
Arctic megadeltas
Chapter 15
Section 15.6.2
Case study of Hurricane Katrina
Hurricane Katrina and coastal ecosystem services in the Mississippi delta
Chapter 6
Box 6.4
Vulnerabilities to extreme weather events in megadeltas in a context of multiple stresses: the
case of Hurricane Katrina
Chapter 7
Box 7.4
Indigenous knowledge for adaptation to climate change
Overview
Role of local and indigenous knowledge in adaptation and sustainability research  
Chapter 20
Box 20.1
Case studies
Adaptation capacity of the South American highlands´ pre-Colombian communities
Chapter 13
Box 13.2
African indigenous knowledge systems
Chapter 9
Section 9.6.2
Traditional knowledge for adaptation among Arctic peoples
Chapter 15
Section 15.6.1
Adaptation to health impacts of climate change among indigenous populations
Chapter 8
Box 8.6

Introduction
6
G. Definitions of key terms
Climate change in IPCC usage refers to any change in climate
over time, whether due to natural variability or as a result of
human activity. This usage differs from that in the Framework
Convention on Climate Change, where climate change refers to
a change of climate that is attributed directly or indirectly to
human activity that alters the composition of the global
atmosphere and that is in addition to natural climate variability
observed over comparable time periods. 
Adaptation is the adjustment in natural or human systems in
response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects,
which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities.  
Vulnerability is the degree to which a system is susceptible to,
and unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change,
including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a
function of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate
change and variation to which a system is exposed, the
sensitivity and adaptive capacity of that system.
