We cannot deny that women have come a long way, their influence seen, heard and felt everywhere. Be it in the social, political, or economic spheres, women are stepping out of their comfort zone, making waves, and even breaking barriers.
Sureerat Taechutrakul hails from Prachuap Khiri Khan (PKK) province and has worked with local conservation groups instrumental in keeping PKK coal-free. Truly a huge feat as the province was the chosen site for three coal-fired power plant projects backed by the Thai government. The projects raised questions on public participation, especially on the coal plants’ environmental impacts. After a long battle and strong resistance from communities, the plans were scraped.
“People hold the power to elect those in office. I believe that a transparent public system of governance is very important. Both the public and the media must be able to check and scrutinise politicians running for government positions who will represent their constituents and decide on local issues. When our communities started opposing the projects, at that time, we had a free and independent press. If we cannot question or examine the actions of the government, we have to take it upon ourselves to communicate directly to the public and report on what is happening on the ground.”
4. Nanticha “Lynn” Ocharoenchai, Founder of Climate Strike Thailand
Lynn is a self-confessed science geek who loves nature and is infinitely passionate about the environment. Growing up, her dream was to become an environmental journalist. Inspired by Greta Thunberg, she put her storytelling skills to good use and organised Climate Strike Thailand.
“We do climate strikes not because we know better or have the answers to the world’s environmental problems. We strike because we need to reach more people and make them care about the climate crisis. We will continue to raise our voices and keep the pressure on until those in government are compelled to act for our sake.”
5. Pornchita Fapratanprai, Youth Activist from Kaboedin Village
Pornchita Fapratanprai is a youth activist from the indigenous Pwo Karen community from Kaboedin. The area is known for its rich agriculture, its soil abundant in mineral deposits, including coal. Together with her peers and community members, they banded together to voice their opposition to a coal mining project that threatens the destruction and contamination of their water resources. Like other youths, she uses social media to make their plight known to the outside world and tell the stories of her community and what they stand to lose.
“If we don’t do anything about the mining project, we would be forced to move out. And if we don’t move, we would suffer from air and noise pollution that comes with transporting coal. Our survival and way of life are threatened, this is why we must take matters in our hands and continue to resist.”
6. Gig Koranis Tanangsnakool, Marine Plastic Researcher and Eco Entrepreneur
A researcher for more than five years, Koranis turns to social media for the social good- to promote her advocacy of protecting Thailand’s iconic marine life. Through her Facebook page ReReef , she calls on people’s attention to the many ills and environmental consequences of single-use plastic.
We talked to some of Thailand’s inspiring women who are driven and dedicated to their chosen advocacies despite the many challenges they face in these modern times.
“There are two kinds of people: those who have zero awareness on single-use plastic and need more information; and those who are already aware of the problem but are not compelled to do something about it. Part of the drawback was the lack of information on the solutions and alternatives to single-use plastic. So our page tries to bridge the information gap, we do the research for people’s benefit. What does the consumer want? Where can they find eco-alternatives? Are the products reasonable and useful? Hopefully, it will lead them to make better lifestyle choices for the sake of the environment.”
These are just six inspiring stories of Thai women who embody courage and show a deep passion for their community and the environment. There are many others like them who continue to make their mark, pave the way, and shine their light for others and the rest of womankind.
Supang Chatunchinda is a Digital Campaigner at Greenpeace Thailand.
1. Supaporn Malailoy, Environmental and Human Rights Defender
Supaporn Malailoy is the manager of the ENLAWTHAI Foundation (EnLAW) which exists so that Thais enjoy the right to live in a healthy and safe environment. She takes her role very seriously, to ensure that EnLAW contributes to environmental policies that are relevant, inclusive and represents community interests.
“Sometimes people tend to equate human rights with physical well-being, or how a person is able to live with just the basic needs. Oftentimes, people don’t see it from an environmental lens, which is why we feel less involved when it comes to the management of our natural resources. Take for example our worsening air pollution in the country, with PM2.5 causing serious health conditions. We fail to see that we have a right to clean air and to demand that the government takes concrete steps to address it. There’s also the case of the lower Klity communities who are forced to use contaminated water due to industries that pollute their water sources. People think it’s an isolated problem, but actually every one of us has the right to be concerned, not just for our own well-being, but on how business development is destroying the environment and impacting people. In the end, we must all exercise our basic human rights and ask the state to protect and uphold citizen’s rights to a clean and safe environment.”
2. Panita Pook Kongsook, Greenpeace Thailand Volunteer
Panita “Pook” Kongsook is one of the longest-serving volunteers in Greenpeace Thailand. Concerned about the state of the local environment, she was drawn to the idea of peaceful activism as a means to voice her strong opinions and to take action.
“Two decades ago, the concept of non-violent direct action was relatively new, until Greenpeace came along. I was one of the early volunteer recruits and in the beginning, volunteers like myself felt both fear and excitement at the prospect of taking action for the environment. A lot has happened throughout the years and I’m amazed at how the volunteer base has grown, with a lot of diverse activists. I’ve met so many people who’ve inspired me and many others to support the movement— to use their voice, even put themselves at risk to protect what they love. Now more than ever, we need to be bolder and to take a stand to confront abusive businesses and laggard governments, for the sake of future generations. We have to leave a lasting legacy.”
3. Surirat Taechutrakul, Anti-Coal Activist