Today, we’re celebrating a huge moment in the global movement for a plastic-free future: more than one million people around the world have called on big corporations to do their part to end single-use plastics.
All over the world, towns, cities, and villages are standing up for a plastic-free future by implementing local bans and laws restricting the use of throwaway plastic. Be part of this movement by working with your neighbours to get your local government to do the same.
Everyone loves a cleanup event, so why not take it to the next level? Get your community together to clean up a local beach, park, or riverbank — but don’t stop there. Go through the single-use plastics collected and identify which companies produced them. Let’s hold corporations responsible for their plastic waste!
You don’t have to go it alone. We have a lot of work to do, and we’ll get a lot further, and have more fun, if we do it together. Get some friends and neighbours together for a plastic-free future!
Excited to get started? Check out the full Million Acts of Blue toolkit to find out more about how you can work in your own community to end single-use plastics.
Jen Fela is the Global Engagement Specialist for the plastics project based in Greenpeace USA
Now we’re taking the next big step. We’re setting an ambitious new goal: A Million Acts of Blue .
An Act of Blue is any action that helps to stop single-use plastic from being created in the first place.
It’s inspired by love for our amazing blue planet and the urgent need to protect our oceans, waterways, landscapes and communities. It aims to hold corporations accountable for the plastic pollution crisis they helped to create.
We’ve created a comprehensive guide to creating change in your community with several kinds of actions you can take. These range from learning and sharing your passion for this issue to passing legislation in your city. Get started today to create a plastic-free future!
The first step towards action is knowledge. Are you a member of a community group that is eager to learn more about how they can protect our oceans and communities? Maybe your child’s teacher is looking for ways to teach kids about environmental protection? Our toolkit has powerpoints and tips for giving a presentation — you can even host a movie night!
If you want to make a change in your community, start with local media! Local newspapers, blogs and magazines are a great way to get the word out. In the toolkit, we walk you through how to write a letter to the editor of your local newspaper and how to get it published.
Nowhere is the dominance of single-use plastics and wasteful packaging more obvious than at your local supermarket . Make waves in your community by working to get a local supermarket to reduce their use of single-use plastics.
Fed up with all the plastic straws and utensils at fast food places and cafes? Join the growing movement urging establishments to get rid of throwaway plastic products.