Policymaker Summary of Working Group I 
(Scientific Assessment of Climate Change) 
Executive Summary 
1. 
We are certain of the following: 
• 
there is a natural greenhouse effect which already 
keeps the Earth wanner than it would otherwise be; 
emissions resulting from human activities are 
substantially increasing the atmospheric concentrations 
of the greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, methane, 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and nitrous oxide. These 
increases will enhance the greenhouse effect, resulting 
on average in an additional warming of the Earth's 
surface. The main greenhouse gas, water vapour, will 
increase in response to global warming and further 
enhance it. 
2. 
We calculate with confidence that: 
• 
some gases are potentially more effective than others 
at changing climate, and their relative effectiveness can 
be estimated. Carbon dioxide has been responsible for 
over half the enhanced greenhouse effect in the past, 
and is likely to remain so in the future; 
• 
atmospheric concentrations of the long-lived gases 
(carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and the CFCs) adjust 
only slowly to changes in emissions. Continued 
emissions of these gases at present rates would commit 
us to increased concentrations for centuries ahead. The 
longer emissions continue to increase at present day 
rates, the greater reductions would have to be for 
concentrations to stabilize at a given level; 
• 
the long-lived gases would require immediate 
reductions in emissions from human activities of over 
60% to stabilize their concentrations at today's levels; 
methane would require a 15-20% reduction. 
3. 
Based on current model results, we 
predict: 
under the I P C C Business-as-Usual (Scenario A ) 
emissions of greenhouse gases, a rate of increase of 
global-mean temperature during the next century of 
about 0.3°C per decade (with an uncertainty range of 
0.2°C to 0.5°C per decade); this is greater than that 
seen over the past 10,000 years. This will result in a 
likely increase in global-mean temperature of about 
1°C above the present value by 2025 and 3°C before 
the end of the next century. The rise will not be steady 
because of the influence of other factors; 
under the other IPCC emission scenarios which assume 
progressively increasing levels of controls, rates of 
increase in global-mean temperature of about 0.2°C per 
decade (Scenario B), just above 0.1 °C per decade 
(Scenario C) and about 0.1 °C per decade (Scenario D); 
that land surfaces warm more rapidly than the ocean, 
and high northem latitudes warm more than the global-
mean in winter; 
regional climate changes different from the global-
mean, although our confidence in the prediction of the 
detail of regional changes is low. For example, 
temperature increases in Southem Europe and central 
North America are predicted to be higher than the 
global-mean, accompanied on average by reduced 
summer precipitation and soil moisture. There are less 
consistent predictions for the tropics and the southem 
hemisphere; 
under the IPCC Business-as-Usual emissions scenario, 
an average rate of global mean sea-level rise of about 
6 cm per decade over the next century (with an 
uncertainty range of 3—10 cm per decade), mainly 
due to thermal expansion of the oceans and the melting 
of some land ice. The predicted rise is about 20 cm in 
global-mean sea level by 2030, and 65 cm by the end 
of the next century. There will be significant regional 
variations. 
3.1 
There are many uncertainties in our predictions 
particularly with regard to the timing, magnitude and 
regional pattems of climate change, due to our incomplete 
understanding of: 
• 
sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, which affect 
predictions of future concentrations; 
clouds, which strongly influence the magnitude of 
climate chang; 
oceans, which influence the timing and patterns of 
climate chang; 
• 
polar ice sheets which affect predictions of sea-level 
riee. 
3.2 
These processes are already partially understood, 
and we are confident that the uncertainties can be reduced 
by further research. However, the complexity of the system 
means that we cannot rule out suфrises. 
4. 
Our judgement is that: 
Global mean surface air temperature has increased by 
0.3°C to 0.6°C over the last 100 years, with the five 
global average warmest years being in the 1980s. Over 
63 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
the same period global sea level has increased by 10-
20 cm. These increases have not been smooth with 
time, nor uniform over the globe. 
The size of this warming is broadly consistent with 
predictions of climate models, but it is also of the same 
magnitude as natural climate variability. Thus the 
observed increase could be largely due to this natural 
variability; alternatively this variability and other 
human factors could have offset a still larger human-
induced greenhouse warming. The unequivocal 
detection of the enhanced greenhouse effect from 
observations is not likely for a decade or more. 
There is no firm evidence that climate has become 
more variable over the last few decades. However, 
with an increase in the mean temperature, episodes of 
high temperatures will most likely become more 
frequent in the future, and cold episodes less frequent. 
Ecosystems affect climate, and will be affected by a 
changing climate and by increasing carbon dioxide 
concentrations. Rapid changes in climate will change 
the composition of ecosystems; some species will 
benefit while others will be unable to migrate or adapt 
fast enough and may become extinct. Enhanced levels 
of carbon dioxide may increase productivity and 
efficiency of water use of vegetation. The effect of 
warming on biological processes, although poorly 
understood, 
may 
increase 
the 
atmospheric 
concentrations of natural greenhouse gases. 
5. 
To improve our predictive capability, we 
need: 
to understand better the various climate-related 
processes, particularly those associated with clouds, 
oceans and the carbon cycle; 
to improve the systematic observation of climate-
related variables on a global basis, and further 
investigate changes which took place in the past; 
• 
to develop improved models of the Earth's climate 
system; 
• 
to increase support for national and international 
climate research activities, especially in developing 
countries; 
to facilitate intemational exchange of climate data. 
64 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
1. 
Introduction: what is the issue? 
1.0.1 
There is concem that human activities may be 
inadvertently changing the climate of the globe through the 
enhanced greenhouse effect, by past and continuing 
emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases which will 
cause the temperature of the Earth's surface to increase— 
popularly termed the "global warming". If this occurs, 
consequent 
changes may have a significant impact on 
society. 
1.0.2 
The риф05е of the Working Group I report, as 
determined by the first meeting of IPCC, is to provide a 
scientific assessment of: 
1 ) 
the factors which may affect climate change during the 
next century especially those which are due to human 
activity; 
2) 
the responses of the 
atmosphere-ocean-land-ice 
system; 
3) 
current capabilities of modelling global and regional 
climate changes and their predictability; 
4) 
the past climate record and presently observed climate 
anomalies. 
1.0.3 
On the basis of this assessment, the report presents 
current knowledge regarding predictions of climate change 
(including sea-level rise and the effects on ecosystems) over 
the next century, the timing of changes together with an 
assessment of the uncertainties associated with these 
predictions. 
1.0.4 
This Policymaker Summary aims to bring out those 
elements of the main report which have the greatest relevance 
to policy formulation, in answering the following questions: 
What factors determine global climate? 
What are the greenhouse gases, and how and why are 
they increasing? 
Which gases are the most important? 
How much do we expect the climate to change? 
How much confidence do we have in our predictions? 
Will the climate of the future be very different? 
Have human activities already begun to change global 
climate? 
How much will sea-level rise? 
What will be the effects on ecosystems? 
What should be done to reduce uncertainties, and how 
long will this take? 
1.0.5 
This report is intended to respond to the practical 
needs of the policymaker. It is neither an academic review, 
nor a plan for a new research programme. Uncertainties 
attach to almost every aspect of the issue, yet policymaker 
are looking for clear guidance from scientists; hence authors 
have been asked to provide their best estimates wherever 
possible, together with an assessment of the uncertainties. 
1.0.6 
This report is a summary of our understanding in 
1990. Although continuing research will deepen this under­
standing and require the report to be updated at frequent 
intervals, basic conclusions conceming the reality of the 
enhanced greenhouse effect and its potential to alter global 
climate are unlikely to change significantly. Nevertheless, 
the complexity of the system may give rise to suфrises. 
2. 
What factors determine global 
climate ? 
2.0.1 
There are many factors, both natural and of human 
origin, that determine the climate of the earth. We look first 
at those which are natural, and then see how human activities 
might contribute. 
2.1 
What natural factors are important? 
2.1.1 
The driving energy for weather and climate comes 
from the sun. The Earth intercepts solar radiation (including 
that in the short-wave, visible, part of the spectrum); about 
a third of it is reflected, the rest is absorbed by the different 
components (atmosphere, ocean, ice, land and biota) of the 
climate system. The energy absorbed from solar radiation is 
balanced (in the long term) by outgoing radiation from the 
Earth and atmosphere; this terrestrial radiation takes the 
form of long-wave invisible infra-red energy, and its 
magnitude is determined by the temperature of the Earth-
atmosphere system. 
2.1.2 
There are several natural factors which can change 
the balance between the energy absorbed by the Earth and 
that emitted by it in the form of longwave infra-red radiation; 
these factors cause the radiative forcing on climate. The 
most obvious of these is a change in the output of energy 
from the Sun. There is direct evidence of such variability 
over the 11 -year solar cycle, and longer period changes 
may also occur. Slow variations in the Earth's orbit affect 
the seasonal and latitudinal distribution of solar radiation; 
these were probably responsible for initiating the ice ages. 
2.1.3 
One of the most important factors is the 
greenhouse effect; a simplified explanation of which is as 
follows. Short-wave solar radiation can pass through the 
clear atmosphere relatively unimpeded. But long-wave 
terrestrial radiation emitted by the warm surface of the Earth 
is partially absorbed and then re-emitted by a number of 
trace gases in the cooler atmosphere above. Since, on 
average, the outgoing long-wave radiation balances the 
incoming solar radiation, both the atmosphere and the 
65 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 

surface will be warmer than they would be without the 
greenhouse gases. 
2.1.4 
The main natural greenhouse gases are not the 
major constituents, nitrogen and oxygen, but water vapour 
(the biggest contributor), carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous 
oxide, and ozone in the troposphere (the lowest 10—15 km 
of the atmosphere) and stratosphere. 
2.1.5 
Aerosols (small particles) in the atmosphere can 
also affect climate because they can reflect and absorb 
radiation. The most important natural perturbations result 
from 
explosive volcanic 
eruptions 
which 
affect 
concentrations in the lower stratosphere. Lastly, the climate 
has its own natural variability on all timescales and changes 
occur without any extemal influence. 
2.2 
How do we know that the natural 
greenhouse effect is real? 
2.2.1 
The greenhouse effect is real; it is a well 
understood effect, based on established scientific principles. 
We know that the greenhouse effect works in practice, for 
several reasons. 
2.2.2 
Firstly, the mean temperature of the Earth's surface 
is already warmer by about 33°C (assuming the same 
reflectivity of the earth) than it would be if the natural 
greenhouse gases were not present. Satellite observations of 
the radiation emitted from th eEarth's surface and through the 
atmosphere demonstrate the effect of the greenhouse gases. 
2.2.3 
Secondly, we know the composition of the 
atmospheres of Venus, Earth and Mars are very different, 
and their surface temperatures are in general agreement 
with greenhouse theory. 
2.2.4 
Thirdly, measurements from ice cores going back 
160.000 years show that the Earth's temperature closely 
paralleled the amount of carbon dioxide and methane in the 
atmosphere. Although we do not know the details of cause 
and effect, calculations indicate that changes in these 
greenhouse gases were part, but not all, of the reason for the 
large (5-7°C) global temperature swings between ice ages 
and interglacial periods. 
2.3 
How might human activities change 
global climate ? 
2.3.1 
Naturally occurring greenhouse gases keep the 
Earth warm enough to be habitable. B y increasing their 
concentrations, and by adding new greenhouse gases like 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), humankind is capable of 
raising the global-average annual-mean surface-air 
temperature (which, for simplicity, is referred to as the 
"global temperature"), although we are uncertain about the 
rate at which this will occur. Strictly, this is an enhanced 
greenhouse effect—above that occurring due to natural 
greenhouse gas concentrations; the word "enhanced" is 
usually omitted, but it should not be forgotten. Other 
changes in climate are expected to result, for example 
changes in precipitation, and a global warming will cause 
sea levels to rise; these are discussed in more detail later. 
66 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 

2.3.2 
There are other human activities which have the 
potential to affect climate. A change in the albedo 
(reflectivity) of the land, brought about by desertification or 
deforestation affects the amount of solar energy absorbed at 
the Earth's surface. Human-made aerosols, from sulphur 
emitted largely in fossil fuel combustion, can modify clouds 
and this may act to lower temperatures. Lastly, changes in 
ozone in the stratosphere due to CFCs may also influence 
climate. 
3. 
What are the greenhouse gases 
and why are they increasing? 
3.0.1 
W e are certain that the concentrations of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere have changed naturally 
on ice-age time-scales, and have been increasing since pre-
industrial times due to human activities. The table below 
summarizes the present and pre-industrial abundances, 
current rates of change and present atmospheric lifetimes of 
greenhouse gases influenced by human activities. Carbon 
dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide all have significant 
natural and human sources, while the chlorofluorocarbons 
are only produced industrially. 
3.0.2 
Two important greenhouse gases, water vapour 
and ozone, are not included in the tableoverleaf Water 
vapour has the largest greenhouse 
effect, but its 
concentration in the troposphere is determined internally 
within the climate system, and, on a global scale, is not 
affected by human sources and sinks. Water vapour will 
increase in response to global warming and further enhance 
it: this process is included in climate models. The 
concentration of ozone is changing both in the stratosphere 
and the troposphere due to human activities, but it is 
difficult to quantify the changes from present observations. 
3.0.3 
For a thousand years prior to the industrial 
revolution, abundances of the greenhouse gases were 
relatively constant. However, as the world's population 
increased, as the world became more industrialized and as 
agriculture developed, the abundances of the greenhouse 
gases increased markedly. The figures overleaf illustrate this 
for carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide and CFC-11. 
3.0.4 
Since the industrial revolution the combustion of 
fossil fuels and deforestation have led to an increase of 
26% in carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. 
We know the magnitude of the present day fossil-fuel 
source, but the input from deforestation cannot be estimated 
accurately. In addition, although about half of the emitted 
carbon dioxide stays in the atmosphere, we do not know 
well how much of the remainder is absorbed by the oceans 
and how much by terrestrial biota. Emissions of 
chlorofluorocarbons, used as aerosol propellants, solvents, 
refrigerants and foam blowing agents, are also well known; 
they were not present in the atmosphere before their 
invention in the 1930s. 
3.0.5 
The sources of methane and nitrous oxide are less 
well known. Methane concentrations have more than 
doubled because of rice production, cattle rearing, biomass 
buming, coal mining and ventilation of natural gas; also, 
fossil fuel combustion may have also contributed through 
chemical reactions in the atmosphere which reduce the rate 
of removal of methane. Nitrous oxide has increased by 
about 8% since pre-industrial times, presumably due to 
human activities; we are unable to specify the sources, but 
it is likely that agriculture plays a part. 
3.0.6 
The effect of ozone on climate is strongest in the 
upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. 
M o d e l 
calculations indicate that ozone in the upper troposphere 
should have increased due to human-made emissions of 
nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide. While 
at ground level ozone has increased in the northern 
hemisphere in response to these emissions, observations 
are insufficient to confirm the expected increase in the upper 
troposphere. The lack of adequate observations prevents us 
from accurately quantifying the climatic effect of changes 
in tropospheric ozone. 
3.0.7 
In the lower stratosphere at high southern latitudes 
ozone has decreased considerably due to the effects of CFCs, 
67 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 

68 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
and there are indications of a global-scale decrease which, 
while not understood, may also be due to CFCs. 
These 
observed decreases should act to cool the earth's surface, 
thus providing a small offset to the predicted warming 
produced by the other greenhouse gases. Further reductions 
in lower stratospheric ozone are possible during the next few 
decades as the atmospheric abundances of CFCs continue to 
increase. 
3.1 
Concentrations, lifetimes and 
stabilization of the gases 
3.1.1 
In 
order 
to 
calculate 
the 
atmospheric 
concentrations of carbon dioxide which will result from 
human-made emissions, we use computer models which 
incoфorate details of the emissions and which include 
representations of the transfer of carbon dioxide between the 
atmosphere, oceans and terrestrial biosphere. For the other 
greenhouse gases, models which incoфorate the effects of 
chemical reactions in the atmosphere are employed. 
3.1.2 
The atmospheric lifetimes of the gases are 
determined by their sources and sinks in the oceans, 
atmosphere and biosphere. Carbon dioxide, chloro­
fluorocarbons and nitrous oxide are removed only slowly 
from the atmosphere and hence, following a change in 
emissions, their atmospheric concentrations take decades to 
centuries to adjust fully. Even if all human-made emissions 
of carbon dioxide were halted in the year 1990, about half 
of the increase in carbon dioxide concentration caused by 
human activities would still be evident by the year 2100. 
3.1.3 
In contrast, some of the C F C substitutes and 
methane have relatively short atmospheric lifetimes so that 
their atmospheric concentrations respond fully to emission 
changes within a few decades. 
3.1.4 
T o illustrate 
the emission-concentration 
relationship clearly, the effect of hypothetical changes in 
carbon dioxide fossil fuel emissions is shown below: 
Stabilization of atmospheric concentrations. 
Reductions in the human-made emissions of greenhouse gases 
required to stahlize concentrations at present day levels: 

Note that the stabilization of each of these gases would
have different effects on climate, as explained in the next 
section. 
(a) continuing global emissions at 1990 levels; (b) halving 
of emissions in 1990; (c) reductions in emissions of 2% per 
year (pa) from 1990 and (d) a 2% pa increase from 1990-
2010 followed by a 2% pa decrease from 2010. 
3.1.5 
Continuation of present day emissions is 
committing us to increased future concentrations, and the 
longer emissions continue to increase, the greater would 
reductions have to be to stabilize at a given level. If there 
are critical concentration levels that should not be exceeded, 
then the earlier emission reductions are made the more 
effective they are. 
3.1.6 
The tenm ^'atmospheric stahilizalion" is often used 
to describe the limiting of the concentration of the 
greenhouse gases at a certain level. The amount by which 
human-made emissions of a greenhouse gas must be reduced 
in order to stabilize at present day concentrations, for 
example, is shown in the table above. For most gases the 
reductions would have to be substantial. 

69

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
3.2 
How will greenhouse gas abundances 
change in the future? 
3.2.1 
We need to know Future greenhouse 
gas 
concentrations in order to estimate future chmate change. As 
already mentioned, these concentrations depend upon the 
magnitude of human-made emissions and on how changes 
in climate and other environmental conditions may influence 
the biospheric processes that control the exchange of natural 
greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide and methane, 
between the atmosphere, oceans and terrestrial biosphere— 
the greenhouse gas "feedbacks". 
3.2.2 
Four scenarios of future human-made emissions 
were developed by Working Group III. The first of these 
assumes that few or no steps are taken to limit greenhouse 
gas emissions, and this is therefore termed Business-as-
Usual (BaU). (It should be noted that an aggregation of 
national forecasts of emissions of carbon dioxide and 
methane to the year 2025 undertaken by Working Group III 
resulted in global emissions 10-20% higher than in the BaU 
scenario.) 
The other three scenarios assume that 
progressively increasing levels of controls reduce the growth 
of emissions; these are referred to as scenarios B, C . and D. 
They are briefly described in the Annex. 
Future 
concentrations of some of the greenhouse gases which 
would arise from these emissions are shown opposite. 

3,3
Greenhouse gas feedbacks

3.3.1
Some of the possible feedbacks which could 
significantly modify future greenhouse gas concentrations
in a warmer world are di.scussed in the following paragraphs.

3.3.2
The net emissions of carbon dioxide from 
terrestrial ecosystems will be elevated if higher temperatures
increase respiration at a faster rate than photosynthesis, or
if plant populations, particularly large forests, cannot adjust

3.3.3
А net flux of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere 
may be particularly evident in warmer conditions in tundra 
and boreal regions where there are large stores of carbon. 
The opposite is true if higher abundances of carbon dioxide 
in the atmosphere enhance the productivity of natural 
ecosystems, or if there is an increase in soil moisture which 
can be expected to stimulate plant growth in dry ecosystems 
and to increase the storage of carbon in tundra peat. The 
extent to which ecosystems can sequester increasing 
atmospheric carbon dioxide remains to be quantified. 
3.3.4 
If the oceans become warmer, their net uptake of 
carbon dioxide may decrease because of changes in (i) the 
chemistry of carbon dioxide in seawater (ii) biological activity 
in surface waters and (in) the rate of exchange of carbon 
dioxide between the surface layers and the deep ocean. This 
last depends upon the rate of formation of deep water in the 
ocean which, in the North Atlantic for example, might decrease 
if the salinity decreases as a result of a change in climate. 

3.3.5
Methane emissions from natural wetlands and rice 
paddies are particularly sensitive to temperature and soil 
moisture. Emissions are significantly larger at higher 
temperatures and with increased soil moisture; conversely, 
a decrease in soil moisture would result in smaller emissions. 
Higher temperatures could increase the emissions of 
methane at high northern latitudes from decomposable 
organic matter trapped in permafrost and methane hydrates. 
3.3.6 
A s illustrated earlier, ice core records show that 
methane and carbon dioxide concentrations changed in a 
similar sense to temperature between ice ages and 
interglacials. 
70 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 

3.3.7
Although many of these feedback processes are 
poorly understood, it seems likely that, overall, they will act 
to increase, rather than decrease, greenhouse gas 
concentrations in a warmer world. 
4. 
Which gases are the most 
important? 
4.0.1 
W e are certain that increased greenhouse gas 
concentrations increase radiative forcing. We can calculate 
the forcing with much more confidence than the climate 
change that results because the former avoids the need to 
evaluate a number of poorly understood atmospheric 
responses. We then have a base from which to calculate the 
relative effect on climate of an increase in concentration of 
each gas in the present-day atmosphere, both in absolute 
terms and relative to carbon dioxide. These relative effects 
span a wide range; methane is about 21 times more effective, 
molecule-for-molecule, than carbon dioxide, and CFC-11 
about 12.000 times more effective. On a kilogram-per-
kilogram basis, the equivalent values are 58 for methane and 
about 4,000 for CFC-11, both relative to carbon dioxide. 
Values for other greenhouse gases are to be found in the full 
report. 
4.0.2 
The total radiative forcing at any time is the sum 
of those from the individual greenhouse gases. We show m 
the figure below how this quantity has changed in the past 
(based on observations of greenhouse gases) and how it 
might change in the future (based on the four I P C C 
emissions scenarios). For simplicity, we can express total 
forcing in terms of the amount of carbon dioxide which 
would give that forcing; this is termed the equivalent carbon 
dioxide concentration. Greenhouse gases have increased 
since pre-industrial times (the mid-18th century) by an 
amount that is radiatively equivalent to about a 50% increase 

71 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
in carbon dioxide, althougii carbon dioxide itself has risen 
by only 26%; other gases have made up the rest. 
4.0.3 
The contributions of the various gases to the total 
increase in climate forcing during the 1980s is shown above 
as a pie diagram; carbon dioxide is responsible for about half 
the decadal increase. (Ozone, the effects of which may be 
significant, is not mcluded) 
4.1 
How can we evaluate the effect of 
different greenhouse gases? 
4.1.1 
To evaluate possible policy options, it is useful to 
know the relative radiative effect (and, hence, potential 
climate effect) of equal emissions of each of the greenhouse 
gases. The concept of relative Global Wanning Potentials 
(GWP) has been developed to take into account the differing 
times that gases remain in the atmosphere. 
4.1.2 
This index defines the time-integrated wanning 
effect due to an instantaneous release of unit mass ( 1 kg) of 
a given greenhouse gas in today's atmosphere, relative to 
that of carbon dioxide. The relative importances will change 
in the future as atmospheric composition changes because, 
although radiative forcing increases in direct proportion to 
the concentration of C F C s . changes in the other greenhouse 
gases (particulariy carbon dioxide) have an effect on forcmg 
which is much less than proportional. 
4.1.3 
The G W P s in the following table are shown for 
three time horizons, reflecting the need to consider the 
cumulative effects on climate over various time scales. The 
longer time horizon is appropriate for the cumulative effect; 
the shorter timescale will indicate the response to emission 
changes in the short term. There are a number of practical 
difficulties in devising and calculating the values of the 
G W P s , and the values given here should be considered as 
preliminary. In addition to these direct effects, there are 
indirect effects of human-made emissions arising from 
chemical reactions between the various constituents. The 
indirect effects on stratospheric water vapour, carbon dioxide 
and tropospheric ozone have been included in these estimates. 
4.1.4 
The table indicates, for example, that the 
effectiveness of methane in influencing climate will be 
greater in the first few decades after release, whereas 
emission of the longer-lived nitrous oxide will affect climate 
for a much longer time. The lifetimes of the proposed C F C 
replacements range from 1 to 40 years; the longer lived 
replacements are still potentially effective as agents of 
climate change. One example of this, H C F C - 2 2 (with a 
15-year lifetime), has a similar effect (when released in the 
same amount) as CFC-11 on'a 20-year timescale; but less 
over a 500-year timescale. 
4.1.5 
The table shows carbon dioxide to be the least 
effective greenhouse gas per kilogramme emitted, but its 
contribution to global warming, which depends on the 
product of the G W P and the amount emitted, is largest. In 
the example in the box below, the effects over 100 years of 
emissions of greenhouse gases in 1990 are shown relative to 
carbon dioxide. This is illustrative; to compare the effect of 
different emission projections we have to sum the effect of 
emissions made in future years. 
4.1.6 
There are other technical criteria which may help 
policymakers to decide, in the event of emissions reductions 
being deemed necessary, which gases should be considered. 
Does the gas contribute in a major way to cunent, and 
future, climate forcing? Does it have a long lifetime, so 
earlier reductions in emissions would be more effective 
than those made later? A n d are its sources and sinks well 
enough known to decide which could be controlled in 
practice? The table opposite illustrates these factors. 

72

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 

5.
How much do we expect climate 
to change? 
5.0.1 
It i.s relatively easy to determine the direct effect of 
the increased radiative forcing due to increases in 
greenhouse gases. However, as climate begins to warm, 
various processes act to amplify (through positive 
feedbacks) or reduce (through negative feedbacks) the 
warming. The main feedbacks which have been identified 
are due to changes m water vapour, sea-ice, clouds and the 
oceans. 
5.0.2 
The best tools we have which take the above 
feedbacks into account (but do not include greenhouse gas 
feedbacks) are three-dimensional mathematical models of 
the climate system (atmosphere-ocean-ice-land), known as 
General Circulation Models (GCMs). They synthesize our 
knowledge of the physical and dynamical processes in the 
overall system and allow for the complex interactions 
between the various components. However, m their current 
state of development, the descriptions of many of the 
processes involved are comparatively crude. Because of 
this, considerable uncertainty is attached to these predictions 
of climate change, which is reflected in the range of values 
given; further details are given in a later section. 
5.0.3 
The estimates of climate change presented here 
are based on 
i) 
the "best estimate" of equilibrium climate sensitivity 
(i.e the equilibrium temperature change due to a 
doubling of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere) 
obtained from model simulations, feedback analyses 
and observational considerations (see later box: "What 
tools do we use?") 
ii) 
a "box diffusion upwelling" ocean-atmosphere climate 
model which translates the greenhouse forcing into 
the evolution of the temperature response for the 
prescribed climate sensitivity. (This simple model 
has been calibrated against more complex atmosphere-
ocean coupled G C M s for situations where the more 
complex models have been mn). 
5.1 
How quickly will global climate 
change? 
a. 
If emissions follow a Business-as-
Usual pattern 
5.1.1 
Under the IPCC Business-as-Usual (Scenario A ) 
emissions of greenhouse gases, the average rate of increase 
of global-mean temperature during the next century is 
estimated to be about 0.3°C per decade (with an uncertainty 
range of 0.2°C to 0.5°C). This will result in a likely increase 
in global-mean temperature of about 1 °C above the present 
value (about 2°C above that in the pre-industrial period) by 
2025 and 3°C above today's (about 4 ° C above pre-
industrial) before the end of the next century. 
5.1.2 
The projected temperature rise out to the year 
2100. with high, low and best-estimate climate responses, is 
shown in the diagram below. Because of other factors which 
influence climate, we would not expect the rise to be a 
steady one. 
5.1.3 
The temperature rises shown above are realized 
temperatures; at any time we would also be committed to a 
further temperature rise toward the equilibrium temperature 
(see box: "Equilibrium and Realized Climate Change"). For 
the B a U "best estimate" case in the year 2030, for example, 
a further 0.9°C rise would be expected, about 0.2°C of 
which would be realized by 2050 (in addition to changes due 
to further greenhouse gas increases); the rest would become 
apparent in decades or centuries. 
5.1.4 
Even if we were able to stabilize emissions of each 
of the greenhouse gases at present day levels from now on, 
the temperature is predicted to rise by about 0.2°C per 
decade for the first few decades. 
5.1.5 
The global warming will also lead to increased 
73 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 

global average precipitation and evaporation of a few
percent by 2030. Areas of sea-ice and snow are expected to 
diminish. 
b. 
If emissions are subject to controls 
5.1.6 
Under the other IPCC emission scenarios which 
assume progressively increasing levels of controls, average 
rates of increase in global-mean temperature over the next 
century are estimated to be about 0.2°C per decade (Scenario 
B). just above О . Г С per decade (Scenario C) and about 
O.I°C per decade (Scenario D). The results are illustrated 
below with the Business-as-Usual case for comparison. 
Only the best-estimate of the temperature rise is shown in 
each case. 
5.1.7 
The indicated range of uncertainty in global 
temperature rise given above reflects a subjective assessment 
of uncertainties in the calculation of climate response, but 
does not include those due to the transformation of 
emissions to concentrations, nor the effects of greenhouse 
gas feedbacks. 
5.2 
What will be the patterns of climate 
change by 2030? 
5.2.1 
Knowledge of the global-mean warming and 
change in precipitation is of limited use in determining the 
impacts of climate change, for instance on agriculture. For 
this we need to know changes, regionally and seasonally. 
5.2.2 
Models predict that surface air will warm faster 
over land than over oceans, and a minimum of warming will 
occur around Antarctica and in the northern North Atlantic 
region. 
5.2.3 
There are some continental-scale changes which 
are consistently predicted by the highest resolution models 
and for which we understand the physical reasons. The 
warming is predicted to be 50-100% greater than the global-
mean in high northem latitudes in winter, and substantially 
smaller than the global-mean in regions of sea ice in 
summer. Precipitation is predicted to increase on average in 
middle and high latitude continents in winter (by some 5— 
10% over 35-55°N). 


Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
What tools do we use to predict future climate, and how do we use them? 
The most highly developed tool which we have to predict future climate is known as a general circulation model or 
G C M . Such models are based on the laws of physics and use descriptions in simplified physical terms (called 
parameterisations) of the smaller-scale processes such as those due to clouds and deep mixing in the ocean. In a climate 
model an atmospheric component, essentially the same as a weather prediction model, is coupled to a model of the 
ocean, which can be equally complex. 
Climate forecasts are derived in a different way from weather forecasts. 
A weather prediction model gives a 
description of the atmosphere's state up to 10 days or so ahead, starting from a detailed description of an initial state 
of the atmosphere at a given time. Such forecasts describe the movement and development of large weather systems, 
though they cannot represent very small scale phenomena; for example, individual shower clouds. 
To make a climate forecast, the climate model is first run for a few (simulated) decades. The statistics of the model's 
output is a description of the model's simulated climate which, if the model is a good one, will bear a close 
resemblance to the climate of the real atmosphere and ocean. The above exercise is then repeated with increasing 
concentrations of the greenhouse gases in the model. The differences between the statistics of the two simulations 
(for example in mean temperature and interannual variability) provide an estimate of the accompanying climate change. 
The long-term change in surface air temperature following a doubling of carbon dioxide (referred to as the climate 
sensitivity) is generally used as a benchmark to compare models. The range of results from model studies is 1.9 to 
5.2°C. Most results are close to 4.0°C but recent studies using a more detailed but not necessarily more accurate 
representation of cloud processes give results in the lower half of this range. Hence the models results do not justify 
altering the previously accepted range of 1.5 to 4.5°C. 
Although scientists are reluctant to give a single best estimate in this range, it is necessary for the presentation of climate 
predictions for a choice of best estimate to be made. Taking into account the model results, together with observational 
evidence over the last century which is suggestive of the climate sensitivity being in the lower half of the range, (see 
section: "Has man already begun to change global climate?") a value of climate sensitivity of 2.5°C has been chosen 
as the best estimate. 
In this Assessment, we have also used much simpler models, which simulate the behaviour of G C M s , to make 
predictions of the evolution with time of global temperature from a number of emission scenarios. These so-called 
box-diffusion models contain highly simplified physics but give similar results to G C M s when globally averaged. 
A completely different, and potentially useful, way of predicting pattems of future climate is to search for periods in 
the past when the global mean temperatures were similar to those we expect in future, and then use the past spatial 
pattems as analogueues of those which will arise in the future. For a good analogueue, it is also necessary for the forcing 
factors (for example, greenhouse gases, orbital variations) and other conditions (for example, ice cover, topography, 
etc.) to be similar: direct comparisons with climate situations for which these conditions do not apply cannot be easily 
inteфreted. Analogueues of future greenhouse-gas-changed climates have not been found. 
We cannot therefore advocate the use of palaeo-climates as predictions of regional climate change due to future 
increases in greenhouse gases. However, palaeo-climatological information can provide useful insights into climate 
processes, and can assist in the validation of climate models. 
5.2.4 
Five regions, each a few million square kilometres 
in area and representative of different climatological 
regimes, were selected by IPCC for particular study (see 
map below). In the box below are given the changes in 
temperature, precipitation and soil moisture, which are 
predicted to occur by 2030 on the Business-as-Usual 
scenario, as an average over each of the t"ive regions. There 
may be considerable variations within the regions. In 
general, confidence in these regional estimates is low, 
especially for the changes in precipitation and soil moisture, 
but they are examples of our best estimates. We cannot yet 
give reliable regional predictions at the smaller scales 
demanded for impacts assessments. 
5.3 
How will climate extremes and 
extreme events change? 
5.3.1 
Changes in the variability of weather and the 
frequency of extremes will generally have more impact than 
changes in the mean climate at a particular location. With 
the possible exception of an increase in the number of 
intense showers, there is no clear evidence that weather 
75 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
Equilibrium and realized climate change 
When the radiative forcing on the earth-atmosphere system is changed, for example by increasing greenhouse gas 
concentrations, the atmosphere will try to respond (by warming) immediately. But the atmosphere is closely coupled 
to the oceans, so in order for the air to be warmed by the greenhouse effect, the oceans also have to be warmed; because 
of their thermal capacity this takes decades or centuries. This exchange of heat between atmosphere and ocean will 
act to slow down the temperature rise forced by the greenhouse effect. 
In a hypothetical example where the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, following a period of 
constancy, rises suddenly to a new level and remains there, the radiative forcing would also rise rapidly to a new level. 
This increased radiative forcing would cause the atmosphere and oceans to warm, and eventually come to a new, stable, 
temperature. A commitment to this equilibrium temperature rise is incurred as soon as the greenhouse gas concentration 
changes. But at any time before equilibrium is reached, the actual temperature will have risen by only part of the 
equilibrium temperature change, known as the realized temperature change. 
Models predict that, for the present day case of an increase in radiative forcing which is approximately steady, the 
realized temperature rise at any time is about 50% of the committed temperature rise if the climate sensitivity (the 
response to a doubling of carbon dioxide) is 4.5°C and about 80% if the climate sensitivity is 1.5°C. If the forcing 
were then held constant, temperatures would continue to rise slowly, but it is not certain whether it would take decades 
or centuries for most of the remaining rise to equilibrium to occur. 

variability w i l l change in the future. In the case of 
temperatures, assuming no change in variability, but with a 
modest increase in the mean, the number of days with 
temperatures above a given value at the high end of the 
distribution w i l l increase substantially. On the same 
assumptions, there w i l l be a decrease in days with 
temperatures at the low end of the distribution. So the 
number of very hot days or frosty nights can be substantially 
changed without any change in the variability of the weather. 
The number of days with a minimum threshold amount of 
soil moisture (for viability of a certain crop, for example) 
would be even more sensitive to changes in average 
precipitation and evaporation. 
5.3.2 
If the large scale weather regimes, for instance 
depression tracks or anticyclones, shift their position, this 
would effect the variability and extremes of weather at a 
particular location, and could have a major effect. However, 
we do not know if, or in what way, this will happen. 
5.4 
Will storms increase in a warmer world? 
5.4.1 
Storms can have a major impact on society. Will their 
frequency, intensity or location increase in a warmer worid? 
5.4.2 
Tropical storms, such as typhoons and hurricanes, 
only develop at present over seas that are warmer than about 
76 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
Estimates for changes by 2030 
(IPCC Business-as-Usual scenario: changes from pre-industrial) 
The numbers given below are based on high resolution models, scaled to be consistent with our best estimate of global 
mean wanning of 1.8°C by 2030. For values consistent with other estimates of global temperature rise, the numbers 
below should be reduced by 30% for the low estimate or increased by 50% for the high estimate. Precipitation estimates 
are also scaled in a similar way. 
Confidence in these regional estimates is low 
Central North America (35°—50°N 
85°—105°W) 
The warming varies from 2 to 4°C in winter and 2 to 3°C in summer. Precipitation increases range from 0 to 15% 
in winter whereas there are decreases of 5 to 10% in summer. Soil moisture decreases in summer by 15 to 20%. 
Southern Asia (5°—30°N 
70°—l05°E) 
The warming varies from 1 to 2°C throughout the year. Precipitation changes little in winter and generally increases 
throughout the region by 5 to 15% in summer. Summer soil moisture increases by 5 to 10%. 
Sahel (10°—20°N 
20°W—40°E) 
The warming ranges from 1 to 3°C. Area mean precipitation increases and area mean soil moisture decreases 
marginally in summer. However, throughout the region, there are areas of both increase and decrease in both 
parameters. 
Southern Europe (35°—50°N 
10°W—45°E) 
The warming is about 2°C in winter and varies from 2 to 3°C in summer. There is some indication of increased 
precipitation in winter, but summer precipitation decreases by 5 to 15%, and summer soil moisture by 15 to 25%. 
Australia (12°-^5°S 
J10°—115°E) 
The warming ranges from 1 to 2°C in summer and is about 2°C in winter. Summer precipitation increases by around 
10%, but the models do not produce consistent estimates of the changes in soil moisture. The area averages hide large 
variations at the sub-contmental level. 
Map showing the locanons and extents of the five areas selected hy IPCC 
11 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
26°C. Although the area of sea having temperatures over this 
critical value will increase as the globe warms, the critical 
temperature itself may increase in a warmer world. Although 
the theoretical maximum intensity is expected to increase 
with temperature, climate models give no consistent 
indication whether tropical storms will increase or decrease 
in frequency or intensity as climate changes; neither is there 
any evidence that this has occurred over the past few 
decades. 
5.4.3 
Mid-latitude storms, such as those which track 
across the North Atlantic and North Pacific, are driven by 
the equator-to-pole temperature contrast. As this contrast 
will probably be weakened in a warmer world (at least in the 
northem hemisphere), it might be argued that mid-latitude 
storms will also weaken or change their tracks, and there is 
some indication of a general reduction in day-to-day 
variability in the mid-latitude storm tracks in winter in 
model simulations, though the pattem of changes vary from 
model to model. Present models do not resolve smaller-
scale disturbances, so it will not be possible to assess 
changes in storminess until results from higher resolution 
models become available in the next few years. 
5.5 
Climate change in the longer term 
5.5.1 
The foregoing calculations have focussed on the 
period up to the year 2100; it is clearly more difficult to 
make calculations for years beyond 2100. However, while 
the timing of a predicted increase in global temperatures has 
substantial uncertainties, the prediction that an increase will 
eventually occur is more certain. Furthermore, some model 
calculations that have been extended beyond 100 years 
suggest that, with continued increases in greenhouse climate 
forcing, there could be significant changes in the ocean 
circulation, including a decrease in North Atlantic deep 
water formation. 
5.6 
Other factors which could influence 
future climate 
5.6.1 
Variations in the output of solar energy may also 
affect climate. On a decadal timescale solar variability and 
changes in greenhouse gas concentration could give changes 
of similar magnitudes. However the variation in solar 
intensity changes sign so that over longer timescales the 
increases in greenhouse gases are likely to be more 
important. Aerosols as a result of volcanic eruptions can 
lead to a cooling at the surface which may oppose the 
greenhouse warming for a few years following an eruption. 
Again, over longer periods the greenhouse warming is likely 
to dominate. 
5.6.2 
Human activity is leading to an increase in aerosols 
in the lower atmosphere, mainly from sulphur emissions. 
These have two effects, both of which are difficult to 
quantify but which may be significant particularly at the 
regional level. The first is the direct effect of the aerosols on 
the radiation scattered and absorbed by the atmosphere. The 
second is an indirect effect whereby the aerosols affect the 
microphysics of clouds leading to an increased cloud 
reflectivity. Both these effects might lead to a significant 
regional cooling; a decrease in emissions of sulphur might 
be expected to increase global temperatures. 
5.6.3 
Because of long-period couplings between 
different components of the climate system, for example 
between ocean and atmosphere, the earth's climate would 
still vary without being perturbed by any extemal influences. 
This natural variability could act to add to, or subtract from, 
any human-made warming; on a century timescale this 
would be less than changes expected from greenhouse gas 
increases. 
6. 
How much confidence do we 
have in our predictions? 
6.0.1 
Uncertainties in the above climate predictions anse 
from our imperfect knowledge of: 
future rates of human-made emissions 
how these will change the atmospheric concentrations 
of greenhouse gases 
the 
response 
of 
climate 
to 
these 
changed 
concentrations. 
6.0.2 
Firstly, it is obvious that the extent to which 
climate will change depends on the rate at which greenhouse 
gases (and other gases which affect their concentrations) are 
emitted. This in tum will be determined by various complex 
economic and sociological factors. Scenarios of future 
emissions were generated within I P C C W G III and are 
described in the annex. 
6.0.3 
Secondly, because we do not fully understand the 
sources and sinks of the greenhouse gases, there are 
uncertainties in our calculations of future concentrations 
arising from a given emissions scenario. We have used a 
number of models to calculate concentrations and chosen a 
best estimate for each gas. In the case of carbon dioxide, for 
example, the concentration increase between 1990 and 2070 
due to the Business-as-Usual emissions scenario spanned 
almost a factor of two between the highest and lowest model 
result (conesponding to a range in radiative forcing change 
of about 50%) 
6.0.4 
Furthermore, because natural sources and sinks of 
greenhouse gases are sensitive to a change in climate, they 
may substantially modify future concentrations (see eariier 
section: "Greenhouse gas feedbacks"). It appears that, as 
climate warms, these feedbacks will lead to an overall 
increase, rather than decrease, in natural greenhouse gas 
abundances. For this reason, climate change is likely to be 
greater than the estimates we have given. 
78 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
Confídence in predictions from climate models 
What confidence can we have that climate change due to increasing greenhouse gases will look anything like the model 
predictions? Weather forecasts can be compared with the actual weather the next day and their skill assessed; we cannot 
do that with climate predictions. However, there are several indicators that give us some confidence in the predictions 
from climate models. 
When the latest atmospheric models are run with the present atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and 
observed boundary conditions their simulation of present climate is generally realistic on large scales, capturing the 
major features such as the wet tropical convergence zones and mid-latitude depression belts, as well as the contrasts 
between summer and winter circulations. The models also simulate the observed variability: for example, the large 
day-to-day pressure variations in the middle latitude depression belts and the maxima in interannual variability 
responsible for the very different character of one winter from another both being represented. However, on regional 
scales (2,000 km or less), there are significant errors in all models. 
Overall confidence is increased by atmospheric models' generally satisfactory portrayal of aspects of variability of 
the atmosphere, for instance those associated with variations in sea surface temperature. 
There has been some 
success in simulating the general circulation of the ocean, including the pattems (though not always the intensities) 
of the principal currents, and the distributions of tracers added to the ocean. 
Atmospheric models have been coupled with simple models of the ocean to predict the equilibrium response to 
greenhouse gases, under the assumption that the model errors are the same in a changed climate. The ability of such 
models to simulate important aspects of the climate of the last ice age generates confidence in their usefulness. 
Atmospheric models have also been coupled with multilayer ocean models (to give coupled ocean-atmosphere 
G C M s ) which predict the gradual response to increasing greenhouse gases. 
Although the models so far are of 
relatively coarse resolution, the large scale structures of the ocean and the atmosphere can be simulated with some 
skill. However, the coupling of ocean and atmosphere models reveals a strong sensitivity to small scale errors which 
leads to a drift away from the observed climate. As yet, these errors must be removed by adjustments to the exchange 
of heat between ocean and atmosphere. There are similarities between results from the coupled models using simple 
representations of the ocean and those using more sophisticated descriptions, and our understanding of such differences 
as do occur gives us some confidence in the results. 
6.0.5 
Thirdly, climate models are only as good as our 
understanding of the processes which they describe, and 
this is far from perfect. The ranges in the climate predictions 
given above reflect the uncertainties due to model 
imperfections; the largest of these is cloud feedback (those 
factors affecting the cloud amount and distribution and the 
interaction of clouds with solar and terrestrial radiation), 
which leads to a factor of two uncertainty in the size of the 
warming. Others arise from the transfer of energy between 
the atmosphere and ocean, the atmosphere and land surfaces, 
and between the upper and deep layers of the ocean. The 
treatment of sea-ice and convection in the models is also 
crude. Nevertheless, for rea.sons given in the box below, we 
have substantial confidence that models can predict at least 
the broad-scale features of climate change. 
6.0.6 
Furthermore, we must recognize that our imperfect 
understanding of climate processes (and corresponding 
ability to model them) could make us vulnerable to 
surprises; just as the human-made ozone hole over 
Antarctica was entirely unpredicted. In particular, the ocean 
circulation, changes in which are thought lo have led to 
periods of comparatively rapid climate change at the end of 
the last ice age, is not well observed, understood or 
modelled. 
7. 
Will the climate of the future be 
very different? 
7.0.1 
When considering future climate change, it is 
clearly essential to look at the record of climate variation in 
the past. From it we can leam about the range of natural 
climate variability, to see how it compares with what we 
expect in the future, and also look for evidence of recent 
climate change due to man's activities. 
7.0.2 
Climate varies naturally on all time scales from 
hundreds of millions of years down to the year to year. 
Prominent in the Earth's history have been the 100.000 year 
glacial-interglacial cycles when climate was mostly cooler 
than at present. Global surface temperatures have typically 
varied by 5-7°C through these cycles, with large changes in 
ice volume and sea level, and temperature changes as great 
as 10-15°C in some middle and high latitude regions of the 
northem hemisphere. Since the end of the last ice age. about 
10,000 years ago, global surface temperatures have probably 
fluctuated by little more than 1°C. Some fluctuations have 
lasted several centuries, including the Little Ice Age which 
ended in the nineteenth century and which appears to have 
been global in extent. 
79 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
7.0.3 
The changes predicted to occur by about the 
middle of the next century due to increases in greenhouse 
gas concentrations from the Business-as-Usual emissions 
will make global-mean temperatures higher than they have 
been in the last 150,000 years. 
7.0.4 
The rate of change of global temperatures predicted 
for Business-as-Usual emissions will be greater than those 
which have occurred naturally on earth over the last 10,000 
years, and the rise in sea level will be about three to six times 
faster than that seen over the last 100 years or so. 
8. 
Has man already begun to 
change the global climate? 
8.0.1 
The instrumental record of surface temperature is 
fragmentary until the mid- nineteenth century, after which 
it slowly improves. Because of different methods of 
measurement, historical records have to be harmonized with 
modem observations, introducing some uncertainty. Despite 
these problems we believe that a real warming of the globe 
of 0.3°C—0.6°C has taken place over the last century; any 
bias due to urbanization is likely to be less than 0.05°C. 
8.0.2 
Moreover since 1900 similar temperature increases 
are seen in three independent data sets: one collected over 
land and two over the oceans. The figure below shows 
current estimates of smoothed global mean surface 
temperature over land and ocean since 1860. Confidence in 
the records has been increased by their similarity to recent 
satellite measurements of mid-tropospheric temperatures. 
8.0.3 
Although the overall''temperature rise has been 
broadly similar in both hemispheres, it has not been steady, 
and differences in their rates of warming have sometimes 
persisted for decades. Much of the warming since 1900 has 
been concentrated in two periods, the first between about 
1910 and 1940 and the other since 1975; the five warmest 
years on record have all been in the 1980s. The northem 
hemisphere cooled between the 1940s and the eariy 1970s 
when southern hemisphere temperatures stayed nearly 
constant. The pattem of global warming since 1975 has 
been uneven with some regions, mainly in the northem 
hemisphere, continuing to cool until recently. This regional 
diversity indicates that future regional temperature changes 
are likely to differ considerably from a global average. 
8.0.4 
The conclusion that global temperature has been 
rising is strongly supported by the retreat of most mountain 
glaciers of the worid since the end of the nineteenth century 
and the fact that global sea level has risen over the same 
period by an average of 1 to 2 mm per year. Estimates of 
thermal expansion of the oceans, and of increased melting 
of mountain glaciers and the ice margin in West Greenland 
over the last century, show that the major part of the sea-level 
rise appears to be related to the observed global warming. 
This apparent connection between observed sea-level rise and 
global warming provides grounds for believing that future 
warming will lead to an acceleration in sea-level rise. 
8.0.5 
The size of the warming over the last century is 
broadly consistent with the predictions of climate models, 
but is also of the same magnitude as natural climate 
variability. If the sole cause of the observed warming were 
the human-made greenhouse effect, then the implied climate 
sensitivity would be near the lower end of the range inferred 
from the models. The observed increase could be largely due 
to natural variability; altematively this variability and other 
man-made factors could have offset a still larger man-made 
greenhouse warming. The unequivocal detection of the 
enhanced greenhouse effect from observations is not likely 
for a decade or more, when the commitment to future 
climate change will then be considerably larger than it is 
today. 
8.0.6 
Global mean temperature alone is an inadequate 
indicator of greenhouse-gas-induced climatic change. 

80 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
Identifying the causes of any global mean temperature 
change requires examination of other aspects of the 
changing climate, particularly its spatial and temporal 
characteristics—the man-made climate change '"signal". 
Pattems of climate change from models such as the northem 
hemisphere warming faster than the southern hemisphere, 
and surface air warming faster over land than over oceans, 
are not apparent in observations to date. However, we do not 
yet know what the detailed "signal" looks like because we 
have limited confidence in our predictions of climate change 
pattems. Furthermore, any changes to date could be masked 
by natural variability and other (possibly man-made) factors, 
and we do not have a clear picture of these. 
9. 
How much will sea level rise ? 

9.0.1
Simple models were used to calculate the rise in 
sea level to the year 2100: the results are illustrated below. 
The calculations necessarily ignore any long-term changes, 
unrelated to greenhouse forcing, that may be occurring but 
cannot be detected from the present data on land ice and the 
ocean. The sea-level rise expected from 1990-2100 under 
the IPCC Business-as-Usual emissions scenario is shown 
below. A n average rate of global mean sea-level rise of 
about 6 cm per decade over the next century (with an 
uncertainty range of 3—10 cm per decade). The predicted 
rise is about 20 cm in global mean sea level by 2030, and 
65 cm by the end of the next century. There will be 
significant regional variations. 
9.0.2 
The best estimate in each case is made up mainly 
of positive contributions from thermal expansion of the 
oceans and the melting of glaciers. Although, over the next 
100 years, the effect of the Antarctic and Greenland ice 
sheets is expected to be small, they make a major 
contribution to the uncertainty in predictions. 
9.0.3
Even if greenhouse forcing increased no further, 
there would still be a commitment to a continuing sea-level 

81

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
rise for many decades and even centuries, due to delays in 
climate, ocean and ice mass responses. As an illustration, if 
the increases in greenhouse gas concentrations were to 
suddenly stop in 2030. sea level would go on rising from 
2030 to 2100. by as much again as from 1990-2030, as 
shown in the diagram on p.35. 
9.0.4 
Predicted sea level rises due to the other three 
emissions scenarios arealso shown, with the Business-as-
Usual case for comparison: only best-estimate calculations 
are shown. 
9.0.5 
The West Antarctic Ice Sheet is of special concem. 
A large portion of it, containing an amount of ice equivalent 
to about 5 m of global sea level, is grounded far below sea 
level. There have been suggestions that a sudden outflow of 
ice might result from global warming and raise sea level 
quickly and substantially. Recent studies have shown that 
individual ice streams are changing rapidly on a decade-to-
century timescale: however this is not necessarily related to 
climate change. Within the next century, it is not likely that 
there will be a major outflow of ice from West Antarctica 
due directly to global warming. 
9.0.6 
Any rise in sea level is not expected to be uniform 
over the globe. Thermal expansion, changes in ocean 
circulation, and surface air pressure will vary from region to 
region as the world warms, but in an as yet unknown way. 
Such regional details await further development of more 
realistic coupled ocean-atmosphere models. In addition. 
vertical land movements can be as large or even larger than 
changes in global mean sea level; these movements have to 
be taken into account when predicting local change in sea 
level relative to land. 
9.0.7 
The most severe effects of sea-level rise are likely 
to result from extreme events (for example, storm surges) the 
incidence of which may be affected by climatic change. 
10. 
What will be the effect of climate 
change on ecosystems? 
10.0.1 
Ecosystem processes such as photosynthesis and 
respiration are dependent on climatic factors and carbon 
dioxide concentration in the short term. In the longer term, 
climate and carbon dioxide are among the factors which 
control ecosystem structure, i .e, species composition, either 
directly by increasing mortality in poorly adapted species, 
or indirectly by mediating the competition between species. 
Ecosystems will respond to local changes in temperature 
(including its rate of change), precipitation, soil moisture and 
extreme events. Current models are unable to make reliable 
estimates of changes in these parameters on the required 
local scales. 
10.0.2 
Photosynthesis captures atmospheric carbon 
dioxide, water and solar energy and stores them in organic 
compounds which are then used for subsequent plant 
growth, the growth of animals or the growth of microbes in 
Deforestation and reforestation 
Man has been deforesting the Earth for millennia. Until the early part of the century, this was mainly in temperate 
regions, more recently it has been concentrated in the tropics. Deforestation has several potential impacts on climate: 
through the carbon and nitrogen cycles (where it can lead to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations), 
through the change in reflectivity of terrain when forests are cleared, through'its effect on the hydrological cycle 
(precipitation, evaporation and runoff) and surface roughness and thus atmospheric circulation which can produce 
remote effects on climate. 
It is estimated that each year about 2 Gt of carbon (GtC) is released to the atmosphere due to tropical deforestation. 
The rate of forest clearing is difficult to estimate: probably until the mid-20th century, temperate deforestation and 
the loss of organic matter from soils was a more important contributor to atmospheric carbon dioxide than was the 
buming of fossil fuels. Since then, fossil fuels have become dominant: one estimate is that around 1980, 1.6 GtC was 
being released annually from the clearing of tropical forests, compared with about 5 G t C from the burning of fossil 
fuels. If all the tropical forests were removed, the input is variously estimated at from 150 to 240 GtC; this would 
increase atmospheric carbon dioxide by 35 to 60 ppmv. 
To analyse the effect of reforestation we assume that 10 million hectares of forests are planted each year for a period 
of 40 years, i.e.. 4 million km- would then have been planted by 2030, at which time 1 GtC would be absorbed annually 
until these forests reach maturity. This would happen in 40—100 years for most forests. The above scenario implies 
an accumulated uptake of about 20GtC by the year 2030 and up to 80GtC after 100 years. This accumulation of carbon 
in forests is equivalent to some 5-10% of the emission due to fossil fuel buming in the Business-as-Usual scenario. 
Deforestation can also alter climate directly by increasing reflectivity and decreasing évapotranspiration. Experiments 
with climate models predict that replacing all the forests of the Amazon Basin by grassland would reduce the rainfall 
over the basin by about 20%, and increase mean temperature by several degrees. 
82 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
the soil. A l l of these organisms release carbon dioxide via 
respiration into the atmosphere. Most land plants have a 
system of photosynthesis which will respond positively to 
increased atmospheric carbon dioxide ("the carbon dioxide 
fertilization effect") but the response varies with species. 
The effect may decrease with time when restricted by other 
ecological limitations, for example, nutrient availability. It 
should be emphasized that the carbon content of the 
terrestrial biosphere w i l l increase only i f the forest 
ecosystems in a state of maturity will be able to store more 
carbon in a warmer climate and at higher concentrations of 
carbon dioxide. We do not yet know if this is the case. 
10.0.3 
The response to increased carbon dioxide results in 
greater efficiencies of water, light and nitrogen use. These 
increased efficiencies may be particularly important during 
drought and in arid/semi-arid and infertile areas. 
10.0.4 
Because species respond differently to climatic 
change, some will increase in abundance and/or range while 
others will decrease. Ecosystems will therefore change in 
structure and composition. Some species may be displaced 
to higher latitudes and altitudes, and may be more prone to 
local, and possibly even global, extinction; other species 
may thrive. 
10.0.5 
As stated above, ecosystem structure and species 
distribution are particulariy sensitive to the rate of change of 
climate. We can deduce something about how quickly global 
temperature has changed in the past from paleoclimatol-
ogical records. A s an example, at the end of the last 
glaciation, within about a century, temperature increased by 
up to 5°C in the North Atlantic region, mainly in Westem 
Europe. Although during the increase from the glacial to the 
current interglacial temperature simple tundra ecosystems 
responded positively, a similar rapid temperature increase 
applied to more developed ecosystems could result in their 
instability. 
11. 
What should be done to reduce 
uncertainties, and how long will 
this take? 
11.0.1 
Although we can say that some climate change is 
unavoidable, much uncertainty exists in the prediction of 
global climate properties such as the temperature and 
rainfall. Even greater uncertainty exists in predictions of 
regional climate change, and the subsequent consequences 
for sea level and ecosystems. The key areas of scientific 
uncertainty are: 
° 
clouds: primarily cloud formation, dissipation, and 
radiative properties, which influence the response of 
the atmosphere to greenhouse forcing: 
oceans: the exchange of energy between the ocean 
and the atmosphere, between the upper layers of the 
ocean and the deep ocean, and transport within the 
ocean, all of which control the rate of global climate 
change and the pattems of regional change; 
greenhouse gases: quantification of the uptake and 
release of the greenhouse gases, 
their chemical 
reactions in the atmosphere, and how these may be 
influenced by climate change. 
polar ice sheets- which affect predictions of sea 
level rise 
11.0.2 
Studies of land surface hydrology, and of impact 
on ecosystems, are also important. 
11.0.3 
To reduce the current scientific uncertainties in 
each of these areas will require internationally coordinated 
research, the goal of which is to improve our capability to 
observe, model and understand the global climate system. 
Such a programme of research will reduce the scientific 
uncertainties and assist in the formulation of sound national 
and intemational response strategies. 
11.0.4 
Systematic long-term observations of the system 
are of vital importance for understanding the natural 
variability of the Earth's climate system, detecting 
whether man's activities are changing it, parametrizing 
key 
processes for models, and v e r i f y i n g 
model 
simulations. Increased accuracy and coverage in many 
observations are required. Associated with expanded 
observations is the need to develop appropriate 
comprehensive global information bases for the rapid and 
efficient dissemination and utilization of data. The main 
observational requirements are: 
i) 
the maintenance and improvement of observations 
(such as those from satellites) provided by the Worid 
Weather Watch Programme of W M O ; 
ii) 
the maintenance and enhancement of a programme of 
monitoring, both from satellite-based and surface-
based instruments, of key climate elements for which 
accurate observations on a continuous basis are 
required, such as the distribution of important 
atmospheric constituents, clouds, the Earth's radiation 
budget, precipitation, winds, sea surface temperatures 
and terrestrial ecosystem extent, type and productivity; 
iii) 
the establishment of a global ocean observing system 
to measure changes in such variables as ocean surface 
topography, circulation, transport of heat and 
chemicals, and sea-ice extent and thickness; 
iv) 
the development of major new systems to obtain data 
on the oceans, atmosphere and terrestrial ecosystems 
using both satellite-based instruments and instruments 
based on the surface, on automated instrumented 
vehicles in the ocean, on floating and deep sea buoys, 
and on aircraft and balloons; 
83 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
v) 
the use of paleoclimatological and historical 
instrumental records to document natural variability 
and changes in the climate system, and subsequent 
environmental response. 
11.0.5 
The modelling of climate change requires the 
development of global models which couple together 
atmosphere, land, ocean and ice models and which 
incoфorate more realistic formulations of the relevant 
processes and the interactions between the different 
components. Processes in the biosphere (both on land and 
in the ocean) also need to be included. Higher spatial 
resolution than is currently generally used is required if 
regional pattems are to be predicted. These models will 
require the largest computers which are planned to be 
available during the next decades. 
11.0.6 
Understanding of the climate system will be 
developed from analyses of observations and of the results 
from model simulations. In addition, detailed studies of 
particular processes will be required through targeted 
observational campaigns. Examples of such field campaigns 
include combined observational and small scale modelling 
studies for different regions, of the formation, dissipation, 
radiative, dynamical and microphysical properties of clouds, 
and 
ground-based 
(ocean 
and 
land) and 
aircraft 
measurements of the fluxes of greenhouse gases from 
specific ecosystems. In particular, emphasis must be placed 
on field experiments that will assist in the development and 
improvement of sub-grid-scale parametrizations for models. 
11.0.7 
The required programme of research will require 
unprecedented intemational cooperation, with the World 
Climate Research Programme ( W C R P ) of the W o r l d 
Meteorological Organization and Intemational Council of 
Scientific Unions (ICSU), and the Intemational Geosphere-
Biosphere Programme (IGBP) of I C S U both playing vital 
roles. These are large and complex endeavours that will 
require the involvement of all nations, particularly the 
developing countries. 
Implementation of existing and 
planned projects will require increased financial and human 
resources; the latter requirement has immediate implications 
at all levels of education, and the intemational community 
of scientists needs to be widened to include more members 
from developing countries. 
11.0.8 
The W C R P and IGBP have a number of ongoing 
or planned research programs, that address each of the three 
key areas of scientific uncertainty. Examples include: 
• 
clouds: 
International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project 
(ISCCP); 
G l o b a l Energy and Water C y c l e Experiment 
( G E W E X ) . 
oceans: 
Worid Ocean Circulation Experiment ( W O C E ) ; 
Tropical Oceans and Global Atmosphere ( T O G A ) . 
trace gases: 
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS); 
Intemational Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) 
Past Global Changes (PAGES). 
11.0.9 
As research advances, increased understanding 
and improved observations will lead to progressively more 
reliable climate predictions. However considering the 
complex nature of the problem and the scale of the scientific 
programmes to be undertaken we know that rapid results 
cannot be expected. Indeed further scientific advances may 
expose unforeseen problems and areas of ignorance. 
11.0.10 Timescales for narrowing the uncertainties will be 
dictated by progress over the next 10—15 years in two main 
areas: 
Use of the fastest possible computers, to take into 
account coupling of the atmosphere and the oceans in 
models, and to provide sufficient resolution for 
regional predictions. 
Development of improved representation of small 
scale processes within climate models, as a result of 
the analysis of data from observational programmes to 
be conducted on a continuing basis well into the next 
century. 
84 

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change 
Annex 
EMISSIONS SCENARIOS FROM 
WORKING GROUP III OF THE 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL 
ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
The Steering Group of the Response Strategies Working 
Group requested the U S A and the Netheriands to develop 
emissions scenarios for evaluation by the IPCC Working 
Group I. The scenarios cover the emissions of carbon 
dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). carbon monoxide (CO) and 
nitrogen oxides (NOx) from the present up to the year 2100. 
Growth of the economy and population was taken common 
for all scenarios. Population was assumed to approach 10.5 
billion in the second half of the next century. Economic 
growth was assumed to be 2—3% annually in the coming 
decade in the O E C D countries and 3—5 % in the Eastem 
European and developing countries. The economic growth 
levels were assumed to decrease thereafter. In order to 
reach the required targets, levels of technological 
development and environmental controls were varied. 
In the Business-as-Usual scenario (Scenario A ) the energy 
supply is coal intensive and on the demand side only modest 
efficiency increases are achieved. Carbon monoxide controls 
are modest, deforestation continues until the tropical forests 
are depleted and agricultural emissions of methane and 
nitrous oxide are uncontrolled. For C F C s the Montreal 
Protocol is implemented 
albeit with only partial 
participation. 
Note that the aggregation of national 
projections by I P C C Working Group III gives higher 
emissions (10—20%) of carbon dioxide and methane by 
2025. 
In Scenario В the energy supply mix shifts towards lower 
carbon fuels, notably natural gas. Large efficiency increases 
are achieved. Carbon monoxide controls are stringent, 
deforestation is reversed and the Montreal Protocol 
implemented with full participation. 
In Scenario С a shift towards renewables and nuclear energy 
takes place in the second half of next century. CFCs are now 
phased out and agricultural emissions limited. 
For Scenario D a shift to renewables and nuclear in the first 
half of the next century reduces the emissions of carbon 
dioxide, initially more or less stabilizing emissions in the 
industrialized countries. The scenario shows that stringent 
controls in industrialized countries combined with 
moderated growth of emissions in developing countries 
could stabilize atmospheric concentrations. Carbon dioxide 
emissions are reduced to 50% of 1985 levels by the middle 
of the next century. 

85
